COMMERCIAL POINT, OHIO
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Code contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2025-02, passed March 3, 2025
State Legislation current through December 31, 2024
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ROSTER OF OFFICIALS
(2025)
ELECTED OFFICIAL
Nancy Geiger    Mayor
                
COUNCIL
Sarah King       
Ross Crego       
Audrea Ratliff   
Jay Weaver       
Eric Nungester   
Ralph Holdren    
                
APPOINTED OFFICIALS
Wendy Hastings  Fiscal Officer
Adam Jordan     Police Chief
Jim Kuzelka     Zoning Inspector
Jon Wilson      Plant Superintendent
Bill Mattes     Village Solicitor
Susan Derwacter Village Engineer
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE 2008-14
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE VILLAGE OF COMMERCIAL
POINT, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
   WHEREAS, the ordinances and resolutions of the Village have been codified;
and
   WHEREAS, Council hereby desires to adopt the Codified Ordinances of the
Village of Commercial Point.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE VILLAGE OF COMMERCIAL
POINT, PICKAWAY COUNTY, OHIO:
   Section 1. Council hereby adopts the Codified Ordinances of the Village of
Commercial Point.
   Section 2. This Ordinance is hereby declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health, peace, safety
and general welfare of the citizens of the Village of Commercial Point.
Emergency passage is necessary in order to immediately adopt the Codified
Ordinances of the Village of Commercial Point. This Ordinance shall take effect
immediately upon passage.
 
Vote on Suspension of Readings:
Motion by: Anita McHugh                     2nd: Jim Kuzelka
Roll Call:
Yes  Jim Kuzelka             Yes  Janet Hutchins          Yes  Margie Weaver
Yes  Anita McHugh             Yes  Kimberly Gooden-Kinney       N/A  Don
Benedik
 
Vote on Passage of Ordinance and Declaring an Emergency:
Motion by: Kim Gooden-Kinney                  2nd: Anita McHugh
Roll Call:
Yes  Jim Kuzelka             Yes  Janet Hutchins          Yes  Margie Weaver
Yes  Anita McHugh             Yes  Kimberly Gooden-Kinney       N/A  Don
Benedik
 
Adopted this 1st day of December, 2008.
Allan D. Goldhardt /s/                     Wendy Hastings /s/
Allan D. Goldhardt, Mayor                     Wendy Hastings, Fiscal Officer
 
Approved as to Form:
D. Michael Crites /s/
D. Michael Crites, Law Director
PART TWO: ADMINISTRATION CODE
   TITLE TWO - General Provisions
         
Chap. 202. Rules of Construction; Definitions; General Code Penalty.
         
Chap. 204. Official Standards.
         
Chap. 206. Public Meetings.
         
Chap. 208. Village Records.
         
Chap. 210. Paying Routine Bills.
   TITLE FOUR - Legislation
         
Chap. 220. Council.
         
Chap. 222. Ordinances and Resolutions.
         
Chap. 224. Initiative and Referendum.
         
Chap. 226. Contracts.
         
Chap. 228. Mayor.
   TITLE SIX - Administration
         
Chap. 230. Village Administrator.
         
Chap. 232. Village Fiscal Officer.
         
Chap. 234. Legal Counsel.
         
Chap. 236. Police Department.
         
Chap. 238. Fire Department.
         
Chap. 240. Miscellaneous Village Employees.
         
Chap. 242. Employee Guidelines.
         
Chap. 244. Parking Violations Bureau.
   TITLE EIGHT - Judiciary
         
Chap. 260. Magistrate.
         
Chap. 262. Clerk of Mayor’s Court.
   TITLE TEN - Finances
         
Chap. 280. Federal General Revenue Sharing Trust Fund.
         
Chap. 281. Continuing Professional Training Fund.
TITLE TWO - General Provisions
               
Chap. 202. Rules of Construction; Definitions; General Code Penalty.
               
Chap. 204. Official Standards.
               
Chap. 206. Public Meetings.
               
Chap. 208. Village Records.
               
Chap. 210. Paying Routine Bills.
CHAPTER 202
Rules of Construction; Definitions; General Code Penalty
202.01   Designation; citation; headings.
202.02   General definitions.
202.03   Rules of construction.
202.04   Revivor; effect of re-enactment, amendment or repeal.
202.05   Construction of section references.
202.06   General repealer; conflicts.
202.07   Severability.
202.99   General Code penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Codification in book form - see Ohio R.C. 731.23
   Imprisonment until fine paid - see Ohio R.C. 1905.30, 2947.14
   Ordinances and resolutions - see ADM.
Ch. 222
   Traffic Code penalties - see TRAF.
Ch. 408
   Statute of limitations on prosecutions - see GEN. OFF.
606.06
   General Offenses Code penalties and sentencing - see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 698
§ 202.01 DESIGNATION; CITATION; HEADINGS.
   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the town, as revised,
codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component codes,
titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the “Village
Code,” for which designation “Code of Ordinances,” “Codified Ordinances,” or
“Code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter, and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
§ 202.02 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AND. May be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires it.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
   BOND. Includes an undertaking.
   CHILD. Includes child by adoption.
   COUNCIL. The legislative authority of the municipality.
   COUNTY. Pickaway County.
   FIRE CHIEF. Shall include the Chief of the Fire Department if such Fire
Department has been established in the municipality, and shall include the fire
prevention officer if no Fire Department has been established in the
municipality.
   IMPRISONED. Shall have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1.05.
   INTERNET. The international computer network of both federal and non-federal
interoperable packet switched data networks, including the graphical subnetwork
known as the world wide web.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or
as a servant, agent, or employee.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of incorporeal nature.
   LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY. The Village Council of the Village of Commercial
Point.
   MAY. Is permissive.
   MUNICIPALITY or VILLAGE. When used in this code, shall denote the Village of
Commercial Point irrespective of its population or legal classification.
   OAC. Refers to the Ohio Administrative Code.
   OATH. Includes affirmation; and SWEAR includes affirm.
   OF UNSOUND MIND. The person lacks the relevant mental capacity.
   OHIO R.C., ORC or REVISED CODE. Refers to the Ohio Revised Code.
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, or
tenant in common of the whole or part of such property.
   PERSON. Includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, and association.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real property.
   PLAN OF SEWERAGE, SYSTEM OF SEWERAGE, SEWER, AND SEWERS. Includes sewers,
sewage disposal works and treatment plants, and sewage pumping stations,
together with facilities and appurtenances necessary and proper therefor.
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates, and interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the municipal, county,
state, or federal government, its officers, or an agency thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the
sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail; and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.
   SHALL. Is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE. The State of Ohio.
   STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts, and all other public thoroughfares within the municipality.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such
premises, alone or with others.
   UNDERTAKING. Includes a bond.
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   WRITING. Includes printing.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Include any representation of words, letters,
symbols, or figures; this provision does not affect any law relating to
signatures.
   YEAR. Means twelve consecutive months.
(ORC 1.02, 1.05, 1.44, 1.59, 701.01)
§ 202.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Common and technical use. Words and phrases shall be read in context
and construed according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and
phrases that have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by
legislative definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
(ORC 1.42)
   (b)   Singular and plural; gender; tense. As used in this code, unless the
context otherwise requires:
      (1)   The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular.
      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders.
      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future tense.
(ORC 1.43)
    (c)   Computation of time.
      (1)   The time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day; except that when
the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then the act may be done on
the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal holiday.
      (2)   When a public office, in which an act required by law is to be
performed, is closed to the public for the entire day that constitutes the last
day for doing the act or before its usual closing time on that day, the act may
be performed on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal
holiday.
      (3)   LEGAL HOLIDAY, as used in divisions (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this
section, means the following days:
         A.   The first day of January, known as New Year’s Day;
         B.   The third Monday in January, known as Martin Luther King Day;
         C.   The third Monday in February, known as Washington-Lincoln Day;
         D.   The day designated in the “Act of June 28, 1968,” 82 Stat. 250, 5
U.S.C. 6103, as amended, for the commemoration of Memorial Day;
         E.   The nineteenth day of June, known as Juneteenth Day;
         F.   The fourth day of July, known as Independence Day;
         G.   The first Monday in September, known as Labor Day;
         H.   The second Monday in October, known as Columbus Day;
         I.   The eleventh day of November, known as Veteran’s Day;
         J.   The fourth Thursday in November, known as Thanksgiving Day;
         K.   The twenty-fifth day of December, known as Christmas Day; and
         L.   Any day appointed and recommended by the Governor of this state
or the President of the United States as a holiday.
      (4)   If any day designated in this section as a legal holiday falls on a
Sunday, the next succeeding day is a legal holiday.
(ORC 1.14)
      (5)   When an act is to take effect or become operative from and after a
day named, no part of that day shall be included. If priority of legal rights
depends upon the order of events on the same day, such priority shall be
determined by the times in the day at which they respectively occurred.
(ORC 1.15)
      (6)   If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from
a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding
month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there
are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends
on the last day of that month.
(ORC 1.45)
§ 202.04 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF RE-ENACTMENT, AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (a)   The repeal of a repealing provision of this code does not revive the
provision originally repealed nor impair the effect of any saving clause
therein.
(ORC 1.57)
   (b)   The re-enactment, amendment, or repeal of this code does not, except
as provided in division (c) of this section:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the provision or any prior action
taken thereunder.
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation, or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded, or incurred thereunder.
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture, or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal.
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment; and the
investigation, proceeding, or remedy may be instituted, continued, or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment imposed, as if the provision had not
been repealed or amended.
   (c)   If the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment for any offense is reduced
by a re-enactment or amendment of this code, the penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to this code as
amended.
(ORC 1.58)
§ 202.05 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (a)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, or of divisions or subdivisions of a
section, such reference shall be construed to mean a violation of any provision
of the section, sections, divisions or subdivisions included in the reference.
   (b)   References in this code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of this code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
(ORC 1.23)
   (c)   A reference to any portion of a provision of the code applies to all
re-enactments or amendments thereof.
(ORC 1.55)
   (d)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject matter be
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 202.06 GENERAL REPEALER; CONFLICTS.
   (a)   All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the
municipality, and all parts of the same, enacted prior to the date of the
adoption of this code and inconsistent or in conflict with any of the
provisions of such code, are hereby repealed, save and except any ordinance,
resolution, rule or regulation, or part of the same, expressly excepted from
repeal by the ordinance that adopts this code. No ordinance, resolution, rule
or regulation, or part of the same, of the municipality, that is not
inconsistent or in conflict with any of the provisions of this code and/or that
can be reasonably interpreted to be compatible with the provisions of this
code, shall be deemed to be repealed by the adoption of this code. Such
ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, and all parts of the same,
shall continue to be viable and enforceable by the municipality.
   (b)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of this code,
or between any of the provisions of this code and a provision of any standard
code adopted by the municipality pursuant to Ohio R.C. 731.231, the provision
that establishes the higher or stricter standard shall control. In the event of
a conflict between any of the provisions of this code and any provision of
state law, including rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to state law,
the state law, rule or regulation shall control.
§ 202.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of this code or the application thereof to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions or applications of the section or related sections which can
be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end
the provisions are severable.
(ORC 1.50)
§ 202.99 GENERAL CODE PENALTY.
   (a)   Whenever, in this code or in any ordinance of the municipality, any
act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do
any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is otherwise
provided, whoever violates any such provision shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), a term of imprisonment not exceeding
six months, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day
during or on which a violation continues or occurs.
   (b)   The failure of any officer or employee of the municipality to perform
any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or
employee to the penalty imposed for a violation unless a penalty is
specifically provided for such failure.
Statutory reference:
   Ordinance violations and penalties, see Ohio R.C. 715.67
CHAPTER 204
Official Standards
Editor’s note: The State of Ohio operates on Eastern Daylight Savings Time from
2:00 a.m. of the first Sunday in April until 2:00 a.m. of the last Sunday in
October. Congress, on March 22, 1966, passed the Uniform Time Act requiring
uniform observance throughout the nation of Daylight Savings Time starting in
1967, except that a state legislature could exempt the entire state from
Daylight Savings Time or divide a state into not more than two parts, each with
a different time standard. The Ohio legislature, through inaction, has elected
to observe Eastern Daylight Savings Time throughout the state.
   On August 8, 2005, the Energy Policy Act of 2005 was enacted. This Act
changed the time change dates for Daylight Saving Time in the United States.
Beginning in 2007, the State of Ohio begins Daylight Saving Time at 2:00 a.m.
on the second Sunday in March and reverts to standard time at 2:00 a.m. on the
first Sunday in November. The Secretary of Energy will report the impact of
this change to Congress. Congress retains the right to resume the 2005 Daylight
Saving Time schedule once the Department of Energy study is complete.
There are no sections in Chapter 204. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   State standard of time - see Ohio R.C. 1.04
   State legal holidays - see Ohio R.C. 1.14, 5.20 et seq., 1303.45
   State flag and other insignia - see Ohio R.C. 5.01 et seq.
   State seals - see Ohio R.C. 5.10 et seq.
CHAPTER 206
Public Meetings
206.01   Adoption of rules.
206.02   Definitions.
206.03   Notice of regular and organizational meetings.
206.04   Notice of special meetings.
206.05   Notice to news media of special meetings.
206.06   Notification of discussion of specific types of public business.
206.07   General provisions.
206.08   Smoking prohibited.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Public meetings - see Ohio R.C. 121.22
§ 206.01 ADOPTION OF RULES.
   The following rules are hereby adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 121.22(F) for
notification of the public and news media of the time and place of meetings of
Council, boards and other bodies of the municipality.
§ 206.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FISCAL OFFICER. The Village Fiscal Officer, as established by §
232.01 of this code.
   DAY. A calendar day.
   MEETING. Any prearranged discussion of the public business of a municipal
body by a majority of the members of such municipal body.
   MUNICIPAL BODY. Any legislative authority or board, commission, committee,
agency, authority or similar decision-making body of the municipality.
   ORAL NOTIFICATION. Notification given orally either in person or by
telephone, directly to the person for whom such notification is intended, or by
leaving an oral message for such person at the address, or if by telephone at
the telephone number, of such person as shown on the records kept by the Fiscal
Officer under this chapter.
   POST. To post in an area accessible to the public during the usual business
hours at the office of the Fiscal Officer and in the lobby of the municipal
building.
   SPECIAL MEETING. A meeting which is neither a regular meeting nor an
adjournment of a regular (or special) meeting to another time or day to
consider items specifically stated on the original agenda of such regular (or
special) meeting.
   WRITTEN NOTIFICATION. Notification in writing mailed, telegraphed or
delivered to the address of the person for whom such notification is intended,
as shown on the records kept by the Fiscal Officer under this chapter, or in
any way delivered to such person. If mailed, such notification shall be mailed
by first-class mail, deposited in a U.S. postal service mailbox not later than
the second day preceding the day of the meeting to which such notification
refers, provided that at least one regular mail delivery day falls between the
day of mailing and the day of such meeting.
§ 206.03 NOTICE OF REGULAR AND ORGANIZATIONAL MEETINGS.
   (a)   The Fiscal Officer shall post a statement of the time and place of
regular meetings of each municipal body for each calendar year not later than
the second day preceding the day of the first regular meeting (other than the
organizational meeting) of the calendar year of that municipal body. The Fiscal
Officer shall check at reasonable intervals to ensure that such statement
remains so posted during such calendar year. If, at any time during the
calendar year, the time or place of regular meetings, or of any regular
meeting, is changed on a permanent or temporary basis, a statement of the time
and place of such changed regular meetings shall be so posted by the Fiscal
Officer at least 24 hours before the time of the first changed regular meeting.
   (b)   The Fiscal Officer shall post a statement of the time and place of any
organizational meeting of a municipal body at least 24 hours before the time of
such organizational meeting.
   (c)   Upon the adjournment of any regular or special meeting to another day,
the Fiscal Officer shall promptly post notice of the time and place of such
adjourned meeting.
§ 206.04 NOTICE OF SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (a)   Except in the case of a special meeting provided for in §
206.05(e), the Fiscal Officer shall, not later than 24 hours before the time of
a special meeting of a municipal body, post a statement of the time, place and
purpose of such special meeting.
   (b)   The statement required under division (a) of this section, and the
notifications required under §
206.05, shall state such specific or general purpose then known to the Fiscal
Officer to be intended to be considered at such special meeting and may state,
as an additional general purpose, that any other business as may properly come
before such municipal body at such meeting may be considered and acted upon.
§ 206.05 NOTICE TO NEWS MEDIA OF SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (a)   Any news media organization that wishes to be given advance
notification of special meetings of a municipal body shall file with the Fiscal
Officer a written request therefor.
   (b)   Except in the event of an emergency requiring immediate official
action as provided for in division (e) of this section, a special meeting shall
not be held unless at least 24 hours advance notice of the time, place and
purposes of such special meeting is given to the news media that have requested
such advance notification in accordance with division (c) of this section.
   (c)   (1)   News media requests for such advance notification of special
meetings shall specify the following:
         A.   The municipal body that is the subject of such request;
         B.   The name of the medium;
         C.   The name and address of the person to whom written notifications
to the medium may be mailed, telegraphed or delivered; and
         D.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers (including addresses
and telephone numbers at which notification may be given either during or
outside of business hours) of at least two persons to either one of whom oral
notifications to the medium may be given.
      (2)   Such request shall be effective for one year from the date of
filing with the Fiscal Officer or until the Fiscal Officer receives written
notice from such medium canceling or modifying such request, whichever is
earlier. Each requesting news medium shall be informed of such period of
effectiveness at the time it files its request. Such request may be modified or
extended only by filing a completely new request with the Fiscal Officer. A
request shall not be deemed to be made unless it is complete, in all respects,
and such request may be conclusively relied on by the municipality, the
municipal body that is the subject of such request and the Fiscal Officer.
   (d)   The Fiscal Officer shall give such oral notification or written
notification, or both, as the Fiscal Officer determines, to the news media that
have requested such advance notification, in accordance with division (c) of
this section, of the time, place and purposes of each special meeting, at least
24 hours prior to the time of such special meeting.
   (e)   In the event of an emergency requiring immediate official action, a
special meeting may be held without giving 24 hours advance notification
thereof to the requesting news media. The persons calling such meeting, or any
one or more of such persons or the Fiscal Officer on their behalf, shall
immediately give oral notification or written notification, or both, as the
person giving such notification determines, of the time, place and purposes of
such special meeting, to such news media that have requested such advance
notification in accordance with division (c) of this section. The minutes or
the call, or both, of any such special meeting shall state the general nature
of the emergency requiring immediate official action.
§ 206.06 NOTIFICATION OF DISCUSSION OF SPECIFIC TYPES OF PUBLIC BUSINESS.
   (a)   Any person, upon written request and as provided for in this chapter,
may obtain reasonable advance notification of all meetings at which any
specific type of public business is scheduled to be discussed.
   (b)   Such person may file a written request with the Fiscal Officer
specifying: the person’s name, the address(es) and telephone number(s) at or
through which the person can be reached during and outside of business hours;
the specific type of public business the discussion of which the person is
requesting advance notification of; the municipal body that is the subject of
such request; and the number of calendar months (not to exceed three) which the
request covers. Such request may be canceled by request from such person to the
Fiscal Officer.
   (c)   Each written request must be accompanied by cash, or a check or money
order payable to the municipality, in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) for
each month covered by the request, which amount has been determined by Council
to represent a reasonable fee to cover costs of providing such advance
notification.
   (d)   The Fiscal Officer shall, if possible, give such advance notification
under this section in writing. If such written notification cannot be given or
has not been given, the Fiscal Officer shall give oral notification.
§ 206.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Any notification provided in this chapter to be given by the Fiscal
Officer may be given by any person acting on behalf of or under the authority
of the Fiscal Officer.
   (b)   A reasonable attempt at notification shall constitute notification in
compliance with this chapter.
   (c)   A certificate by the Fiscal Officer as to compliance with this chapter
shall be conclusive upon the municipality and the municipal body involved.
   (d)   The Fiscal Officer shall maintain a record of the date and manner, and
the time, if pertinent under this chapter, of all actions taken with regard to
notices and notifications under this chapter.
   (e)   To better ensure compliance with this chapter as to notice and
notification, it shall be the responsibility of the chairperson or secretary of
a municipal body other than Council, or the person calling the meetings, to
timely advise the Fiscal Officer of future meetings, and of the subject matters
to be discussed thereat, of such municipal body.
§ 206.08 SMOKING PROHIBITED.
   The smoking of all types of tobacco products is prohibited during Council
meetings.
(Ord. 11-89, passed 1-2-1990)
CHAPTER 208
Village Records
208.01   Creation of Village Records Commission.
208.02   Function.
208.03   Disposal of records.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Records commission - municipal corporation - see Ohio R.C. 149.39
§ 208.01 CREATION OF VILLAGE RECORDS COMMISSION.
   (a)   There is hereby created a Village Records Commission (“Commission”)
composed of the Mayor, as chairperson, Fiscal Officer, Village Solicitor, and a
citizen appointed by the Mayor.
   (b)   Each respective officer may designate an assistant or deputy to
represent them on the Commission. The Commission shall appoint a secretary, who
may or may not be a member of the Commission to keep a record of all
proceedings.
   (c)   The Commission shall meet at least once every six months and upon call
of the chairperson.
(Ord. 97.05, passed 3-3-1997; Am. Ord. 2005-02, passed 2-7-2005)
§ 208.02 FUNCTION.
   (a)   The function of the Commission shall include providing rules for
retention and disposal of records of the village and reviewing applications for
one-time records disposal and schedules of records retention and disposition
submitted by village offices.
   (b)   The Commission may at any time review any schedule it has previously
approved and, for good cause shown, revise that schedule.
(Ord. 97.05, passed 3-3-1997; Am. Ord. 2005-02, passed 2-7-2005)
§ 208.03 DISPOSAL OF RECORDS.
   (a)   When village records have been approved for disposal, a list of such
records shall be sent to the auditor of state. If the auditor of state
disapproves of the action by the Village Records Commission, in whole or in
part, he or she shall so inform the Commission within a period of 60 days and
these records shall not be destroyed.
   (b)   Before public records are disposed of, the Ohio Historical Society
shall be informed and given the opportunity for a period of 60 days to select
for its custody such public records as it considers being of continuing
historical value.
(Ord. 2005-02, passed 2-7-2005)
CHAPTER 210
Paying Routine Bills
210.01   Fiscal Officer action authorized.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Annexation duties - see Ohio R.C. 709.03, 709.06
   Certification of assessments - see Ohio R.C. 727.30, 727.33
   Income tax collection - see Ohio R.C. 733.85
§ 210.01 FISCAL OFFICER ACTION AUTHORIZED.
   (a)   The Fiscal Officer of the village, upon approval of the Mayor, is
hereby authorized to pay the following bills of the village without prior
approval of Village Council:
      (1)   All employee wages and salaries, payroll withholding, and health
insurance for employees;
      (2)   All routine and recurring bills of the village, such as utility
bills and other regular monthly or periodic charges to the village;
      (3)   All other routine bills for which a late payment charge, interest,
or penalty would accrue if the bill is not paid on time;
      (4)   Bills for the purchase of ordinary supplies needed by the staff and
employees of the village not in excess of sixty dollars ($60.00); and
      (5)   Bills of an emergency nature for the Water and/or Sewerage
Department shall be approved as follows. Approval must be by two of the
following: Utility Superintendent, the Mayor, President Pro Tem, or any member
of Village Council.
   (b)   No bill referred to in this section shall be paid unless an
appropriation has been made by Village Council authorizing the expenditure of
the funds to pay the bill.
   (c)   All such payments made under authority of this section shall be
reviewed by Village Council at its next regular session. Not later than two
days before the date of Council’s next regular meeting, the Fiscal Officer
shall present to the President of Council a written itemized listing of all
bills paid under authority of this section which have not previously been
reviewed by Council.
(Ord. 2005-07, passed 6-6-2005)
TITLE FOUR - Legislation
               
Chap. 220. Council.
               
Chap. 222. Ordinances and Resolutions.
               
Chap. 224. Initiative and Referendum.
               
Chap. 226. Contracts.
               
Chap. 228. Mayor.
CHAPTER 220
Council
220.01   Membership; election; terms of office.
220.02   President Pro Tempore.
220.03   Vacancy when President Pro Tempore becomes Mayor.
220.04   Qualifications of members.
220.05   Compensation and bonds of Village officers and employees.
220.06   Vacancies.
220.07   Judge of election and qualification of members; quorum and special
meetings.
220.08   Rules; journal; expulsion of members.
220.09   Meetings.
220.10   General powers.
220.11   Failure to take oath or give bond.
220.12   Notice when new bond required.
220.13   Care, supervision and management of public institutions.
220.14   Council member salaries.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Passage of ordinances and resolutions - see ADM.
222.01 et seq.
   Publication of ordinances and resolutions - see ADM.
222.05 et seq.
   Emergency ordinances - see ADM.
222.13
   Contracts by Council - see ADM.
226.01,
226.02
§ 220.01 MEMBERSHIP; ELECTION; TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The legislative power of the municipality shall be vested in, and exercised
by, a Council, composed of six members, who shall be elected by the electors of
the municipality at large, for terms of four years.
(ORC 731.09)
§ 220.02 PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE.
   (a)   At the first meeting in January of each year, the Council shall
immediately proceed to elect a President Pro Tempore from its own number, who
shall serve until the first meeting in January next after his or her election.
The Council may provide employees for the municipality as it determines, and
employees may be removed at any regular meeting by a majority of the members
elected to the Council.
   (b)   When the Mayor is absent from the municipality, or is unable, for any
cause, to perform his or her duties, the President Pro Tempore shall be the
acting Mayor, and shall have the same powers and perform the same duties as the
Mayor.
(ORC 731.10)
§ 220.03 VACANCY WHEN PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE BECOMES MAYOR.
   When the President Pro Tempore of the Council becomes the Mayor, the vacancy
thus created shall be filled as provided in §
220.06, and the Council shall elect another President Pro Tempore from its own
number, who shall have the same rights, powers, and duties as his or her
predecessor.
(ORC 731.11)
§ 220.04 QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.
   (a)   Each member of the Council shall have resided in the municipality for
at least one year immediately preceding the member’s election, and shall be an
elector of the municipality. No member of the Council shall hold any other
public office, be interested in any contract with the municipality, or hold
employment with the municipality, except that the member may be a notary
public, a member of the state militia, or a volunteer firefighter of the
village; provided that such member shall not receive any compensation for his
or her services as a volunteer firefighter of the village in addition to his or
her regular compensation as a member of the Council. Any member who ceases to
possess any of these qualifications, or who moves from the municipality, shall
forfeit his or her office.
   (b)   The purpose of establishing a one-year residency requirement in this
section is to recognize that the municipality has a substantial and compelling
interest in encouraging qualified candidacies for election to the office of
member of the Council by ensuring that a candidate for the office has every
opportunity to become knowledgeable with and concerned about the problems and
needs of the area the candidate seeks to represent. In enacting this
requirement, the municipality finds that the one-year period is reasonably
related to this purpose, while leaving unimpaired a person’s right to travel,
to vote, and to be a candidate for public office.
(ORC 731.12)
§ 220.05 COMPENSATION AND BONDS OF VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   The Council shall fix the compensation and bonds of all officers, clerks,
and employees of the municipality, except as otherwise provided by law. The
Council shall, in the case of elective officers, fix their compensation for the
ensuing term of office at a meeting held not later than five days prior to the
last day fixed by law for filing as a candidate for such office. All bonds
shall be made with sureties subject to the approval of the Mayor. The
compensation so fixed shall not be increased or diminished during the term for
which any officer is elected or appointed. This section does not prohibit the
payment of any increased costs of continuing to provide the identical benefits
provided to an officer at the commencement of his or her term of office.
(ORC 731.13)
§ 220.06 VACANCIES.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) of this section, when the
office of a member of the Council becomes vacant, the vacancy shall be filled
by election by the Council for the unexpired term. If the Council fails within
30 days to fill the vacancy, the Mayor shall fill it by appointment, except
that subject to division (b) of this section, when the vacancy occurs because
of the operation of Ohio R.C. 733.25, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the successor shall hold office only for the period the President
Pro Tempore of the Council holds the office of Mayor.
   (b)   When a vacancy occurs in the office of a member of the Council of a
village with a population of less than 2,000 because of the operation of Ohio
R.C. 733.25, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, at the time the
President Pro Tempore becomes Mayor, the President Pro Tempore shall decide
whether he or she wishes to serve the remainder of his or her unexpired term as
a member of the Council when the Mayor’s successor is elected and qualified in
accordance with Ohio R.C. 733.25, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance. If the President Pro Tempore decides to serve the remainder of his
or her unexpired term as a member of the Council, the vacancy on the Council
shall not be filled and the President Pro Tempore shall resume serving his or
her unexpired term on the Council as soon as the Mayor’s successor is elected
and qualified. If the President Pro Tempore decides not to resume serving the
remainder of his or her unexpired term as a member of the Council as soon as
the Mayor’s successor is elected and qualified, then the vacancy in the office
of the member of the Council shall be filled in accordance with this section.
(ORC 731.43(A))
§ 220.07 JUDGE OF ELECTION AND QUALIFICATION OF MEMBERS; QUORUM AND SPECIAL
MEETINGS.
   The Council shall be the judge of the election and qualification of its
members. A majority of all the members elected shall be a quorum, but a less
number may adjourn from day to day and compel attendance of absent members in a
manner and under penalties as are prescribed by ordinance. The Council shall
provide rules for the manner of calling special meetings.
(ORC 731.44)
§ 220.08 RULES; JOURNAL; EXPULSION OF MEMBERS.
   The Council shall determine its own rules, and keep a journal of its
proceedings. It may punish or expel any member for disorderly conduct or
violation of its rules, and declare his or her seat vacant for absence without
valid excuse, where the absence has continued for two months. No expulsion
shall take place without the concurrence of two-thirds of all the members
elected, and until the delinquent member has been notified of the charge
against him or her, and has had an opportunity to be heard.
(ORC 731.45)
§ 220.09 MEETINGS.
   The Council shall not be required to hold more than one regular meeting in
each week. The meetings may be held at a time and place as is prescribed by
ordinance, and shall, at all times, be open to the public. The Mayor, or any
three members of the Council, may call special meetings upon at least 12 hours’
notice to each member, served personally or left at his or her usual place of
residence.
(ORC 731.46)
§ 220.10 GENERAL POWERS.
   The Council shall have the management and control of the finances and
property of the municipality, except as otherwise provided.
(ORC 731.47)
§ 220.11 FAILURE TO TAKE OATH OR GIVE BOND.
   The Council may declare vacant the office of any person elected or appointed
to the office who, within ten days after he or she has been notified of his or
her appointment or election, or obligation to give a new or additional bond,
fails to take the required official oath or to give any bond required of him or
her.
(ORC 731.49)
§ 220.12 NOTICE WHEN NEW BOND REQUIRED.
   (a)   When the Council declares by resolution that an officer shall give a
new bond, written notice shall be served by the Fiscal Officer upon the officer
designated, and a copy of the notice, with a statement of the time and place of
service, shall be recorded in the proceedings of the Council.
   (b)   If the officer fails to give such new bond, with sureties, to the
satisfaction of the Mayor, within ten days after such service, the Council
shall declare the office vacant, and the vacancy shall be filled in the manner
provided in Title VII of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (c)   When a new bond is accepted or the Council declares the office vacant,
the sureties of the original bond shall cease to be liable for the acts of such
officer done thereafter, but shall continue to be liable for his or her acts
then already done.
(ORC 731.50)
§ 220.13 CARE, SUPERVISION AND MANAGEMENT OF PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS.
   Council shall provide by resolution or ordinance for the care, supervision,
and management of all public parks, baths, libraries, market houses,
crematories, sewage disposal plants, houses of refuge and correction,
workhouses, infirmaries, hospitals, pesthouses or any of such institutions
owned, maintained or established by the municipality. When Council determines
to plat any of the streets, it shall provide for the platting thereof.
(ORC 735.27)
§ 220.14 COUNCIL MEMBER SALARIES.
   (a)   The procedure for the payment of salaries of the Council members of
the Village of Commercial Point is established.
   (b)   The Council members will be paid annually on or before December 31 of
each calendar year.
   (c)   The salary for the members of the Council commencing January 1, 2022
shall be set at the sum of $75 per meeting of Council attended.
   (d)   The salary for the President Pro Tempore of the Council commencing
January 1, 2022 shall be set at the sum of $80 for each meeting of Council
attended.
   (e)   Council members shall only be compensated for meetings actually
attended and pursuant to Ohio R.C. § 731.13, the compensation so fixed pursuant
to this section shall not be increased or diminished and this section shall
have no effect upon those members of the Council of the Village of Commercial
Point during the term for which such member was elected or appointed and this
section will not be effective upon each individual Council member until such
time as he or she is re-elected. This section, however, shall be effective
immediately upon passage and approval for those members of the Council of the
Village of Commercial Point elected or appointed after such date of approval.
   (f)   Members of Council may waive all or a portion of the salary set forth
in divisions (c) and (d) above.
   (g)   For purpose of this division, MEETING OF COUNCIL is defined as a
special meeting of Council or a regular meeting of Council per R.C. § 731.46,
or a Committee of the Whole Meeting, so long as the Committee of the Whole
Meeting occurs on a separate day from a special or regular meeting of Council.
(Ord. 5-71, passed 6-5-1971; Am. Ord. 1500.30, passed 12-4-1989; Am. Ord.
2200.16, passed 11-6-1995; Am. Ord. 99-9, passed 11-1-1999; Am. Ord. 04-28,
passed 12-20-2004; Am. Ord. 2007-32, passed 8-6-2007; Am. Ord. 2012-16, passed
- -2012; Am. Ord. 2021-10, passed 5-3-2021)
CHAPTER 222
Ordinances and Resolutions
222.01   Passage procedure.
222.02   Style of ordinances.
222.03   Subject and amendment of ordinances and resolutions.
222.04   Authentication and recording of ordinances and resolutions.
222.05   Publication of ordinances and resolutions; proof of publication and
circulation.
222.06   Notice for proposed amendments to the Municipal Charter.
222.07   Times of publication required.
222.08   Publication and certification of ordinances in book form.
222.09   Adoption of technical ordinances and codes.
222.10   Certificate of Fiscal Officer as to publication.
222.11   Publication when no newspaper published in Village. (Repealed)
222.12   Effect of not making publication.
222.13   Ordinances providing for appropriations or street improvements;
emergency ordinances.
222.14   Ordinances and resolutions as evidence.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Publication where no newspaper printed - see Ohio R.C. 701.04
   Charter method of passage or publication - see Ohio R.C. 701.05
   Annexation - see Ohio R.C. 709.23 et seq.
   Improvements - see Ohio R.C. 727.09, 727.12, 727.23
   Assessments - see Ohio R.C. 727.25 et seq., 729.09, 729.11
   Declaratory judgments - see Ohio R.C. 2721.03
   Initiated ordinances - see ADM.
224.01 et seq.
   Referendums - see ADM.
224.02 et seq.
§ 222.01 PASSAGE PROCEDURE.
   (a)   The following procedures shall apply to the passage of ordinances and
resolutions of the municipality:
      (1)   Each ordinance and resolution shall be read by title only, provided
that Council may, by a majority vote of its members, require any reading to be
in full.
      (2)   Each ordinance or resolution shall be read on three different days,
provided that Council may dispense with this rule by a vote of at least three-
fourths of its members.
      (3)   The vote on the passage of each ordinance or resolution shall be
taken by yeas and nays and entered upon the journal.
      (4)   Each ordinance or resolution shall be passed, except as otherwise
provided by law, by a vote of at least a majority of all the members of
Council.
   (b)   Action by Council, not required by law to be by ordinance or
resolution, may be taken by motion approved by at least a majority vote of the
members present at the meeting when the action is taken.
(ORC 731.17)
§ 222.02 STYLE OF ORDINANCES.
   The style of all ordinances shall be: “Be it ordained by the Village Council
of Commercial Point, State of Ohio.”
(ORC 731.18)
§ 222.03 SUBJECT AND AMENDMENT OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   No ordinance or resolution shall contain more than one subject, which shall
be clearly expressed in its title. No ordinance or section thereof shall be
revived or amended unless the new ordinance contains the entire ordinance or
section revived or amended and unless the ordinance or section so amended is
repealed. Each such resolution and ordinance shall be adopted or passed by a
separate vote of Council and the yeas and nays shall be entered upon the
journal.
(ORC 731.19)
§ 222.04 AUTHENTICATION AND RECORDING OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   Ordinances and resolutions shall be authenticated by the signature of the
presiding officer and Clerk of Council of the municipality. Ordinances of a
general nature or providing for improvements shall be published as provided by
§§
222.05 and
222.07 before going into operation. No ordinance shall take effect until the
expiration of ten days after the first publication of such notice. As soon as a
resolution or ordinance is passed and signed, it shall be recorded by the
Fiscal Officer in a book furnished by Council for that purpose.
(ORC 731.20)
§ 222.05 PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS; PROOF OF PUBLICATION AND
CIRCULATION.
   (a)   (1)   A succinct summary of each municipal ordinance or resolution and
all statements, orders, proclamations, notices and reports required by law or
ordinance to be published, shall be published using at least one of the
following methods:
         A.   In a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality;
         B.   On the official public notice web site established under R.C. §
125.182;
         C.   On the web site and social media account of the municipality.
      (2)   Proof of the publication shall be made by affidavit of the
proprietor of the newspaper or the operator of the official public notice web
site, as applicable, and shall be filed with the Clerk of the Legislative
Authority.
   (b)   The publication shall contain notice that the complete text of each
such ordinance or resolution may be obtained or viewed at the office of the
Clerk of the Legislative Authority and may be viewed at any other location
designated by the Legislative Authority. The Legal Counsel of the municipality
shall review the summary of an ordinance or resolution published under this
section before forwarding it to the Clerk for publication, to ensure that the
summary is legally accurate and sufficient.
   (c)   Upon publication of a summary of an ordinance or resolution in
accordance with this section, the Clerk of Council shall supply a copy of the
complete text of each such ordinance or resolution to any person, upon request,
and may charge a reasonable fee, set by Council, for each copy supplied. The
Clerk shall post a copy of the text at his or her office and at every other
location designated by Council.
(ORC 731.21)
§ 222.06 NOTICE FOR PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE MUNICIPAL CHARTER.
   In accordance with Section 9 of Article XVIII of the Ohio Constitution,
notice of proposed amendments to the Municipal Charter, if and when one is
adopted by and for the municipality, shall be given in one of the following
ways:
   (a)   Not less than 30 days prior to the election at which the amendment is
to be submitted to the electors, the Fiscal Officer of the Village shall mail a
copy of the proposed Charter amendment to each elector whose name appears upon
the poll or registration books of the last regular or general election held
therein.
   (b)   The full text of the proposed Charter amendment shall be published
once a week for not less than two consecutive weeks in a newspaper published in
the municipality, with the first publication being at least 15 days prior to
the election at which the amendment is to be submitted to the electors. If no
newspaper is published in the municipality, then such publication shall be made
in a newspaper of general circulation within the municipality.
(ORC 731.211)
§ 222.07 TIMES OF PUBLICATION REQUIRED.
   The publication required in §
222.05 shall be for the following times:
   (a)   Summaries of ordinances or resolutions, and proclamations of
elections, once a week for two consecutive weeks;
   (b)   Notices, not less than two nor more than four consecutive weeks;
   (c)   All other matters shall be published once.
(ORC 731.22)
§ 222.08 PUBLICATION AND CERTIFICATION OF ORDINANCES IN BOOK FORM.
   (a)   When ordinances are revised, codified, rearranged, published in book
form and certified as correct by the Clerk of Council and the Mayor, that
publication shall be a sufficient publication, and the ordinances so published,
under appropriate titles, chapters and sections, shall be held the same in law
as though they had been published in accordance with §
222.05. A new ordinance so published in book form, a summary of which has not
been published as required by §§
222.05 and
222.07 and which contains entirely new matter, shall be published as required
by those sections. If the revision or codification is made by the municipality
and contains new matter, it shall be a sufficient publication of the
codification, including the new matter, to publish, in the manner required by
those sections, a notice of the enactment of the codifying ordinance,
containing the title of the ordinance and a summary of the new matters covered
by it. This revision and codification may be made under appropriate titles,
chapters and sections and in one ordinance containing one or more subjects.
   (b)   Except as provided by this section, all ordinances, including
emergency ordinances, shall be published in accordance with §
222.05.
(ORC 731.23)
§ 222.09 ADOPTION OF TECHNICAL ORDINANCES AND CODES.
   (a)   Council may adopt standard ordinances and codes, prepared and
promulgated by the state, or any department, board or other agency thereof, or
any code prepared and promulgated by a public or private organization which
publishes a model or standard code, including, but not limited to, codes and
regulations pertaining to fire, fire hazards, fire prevention, plumbing,
electricity, buildings, refrigeration machinery, piping, boilers, heating or
air conditioning, by incorporation by reference.
   (b)   The publication required by §§
222.05 through
222.10 shall clearly identify the code, shall state the purpose of the code,
shall state that a complete copy of the code is on file with the Clerk of
Council for inspection by the public and also on file in the County Law Library
and that the Clerk has copies available for distribution to the public at cost.
If Council amends or deletes any provision of the code, the publication shall
contain a brief summary of the deletion or amendment.
   (c)   If the agency which originally promulgated or published the code
thereafter amends such code, Council may adopt such amendment or change by
incorporation by reference in an amending ordinance by the same procedure as
required for the adoption of the original code, without the necessity of
setting forth in full in the amending ordinance the provisions of the original
ordinance or code.
   (d)   Ordinances or codes adopted by the municipality under this section
shall be deemed to be a full and complete compliance with §§
222.05 through
222.11, and no other publication is necessary.
(ORC 731.231)
§ 222.10 CERTIFICATE OF CLERK AS TO PUBLICATION.
   Immediately after the expiration of the period of publication of summaries
of ordinances required by §
222.07, the Clerk of Council shall enter on the record of ordinances, in a
blank to be left for that purpose under the recorded ordinance, a certificate
stating in which manner and on what dates the publication was made, and shall
sign the Clerk’s name thereto officially. The certificate shall be prima facie
evidence that legal publication of the ordinance or summary of the ordinance
was made.
(R.C. § 731.24)
§ 222.11 PUBLICATION WHEN NO NEWSPAPER PUBLISHED IN VILLAGE. (REPEALED)
§ 222.12 EFFECT OF NOT MAKING PUBLICATION.
   It is a sufficient defense to any suit or prosecution under an ordinance, to
show that no publication or posting was made as required by §§ 222.05 through
222.10.
(R.C. § 731.25)
§ 222.13 ORDINANCES PROVIDING FOR APPROPRIATIONS OR STREET IMPROVEMENTS;
EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.
   Ordinances or other measures providing for appropriations for the current
expenses of the municipality, or for street improvements petitioned for by the
owners of a majority of the feet front of the property benefitted and to be
especially assessed for the cost thereof, and emergency ordinances or measures
necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety
in the municipality, shall go into immediate effect. Such emergency ordinances
or measures must, upon a yea and nay vote, receive a two-thirds vote of all the
members elected to the Council, and the reasons for such necessity shall be set
forth in one section of the ordinance or other measure.
(ORC 731.30)
§ 222.14 ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS AS EVIDENCE.
   Printed copies of the ordinances and resolutions of the municipality,
published under its authority, and transcripts of any resolutions or
ordinances, or of any act or proceeding of the municipality, recorded in any
book or entered on any minutes or journal kept under the direction of the
municipality, and certified by the Fiscal Officer, shall be received in
evidence throughout the state for any purpose for which the original books,
ordinances, minutes or journals would be received.
(ORC 731.42)
CHAPTER 224
Initiative and Referendum
224.01   Initiative petitions.
224.02   Referendum petitions.
224.03   More than one ordinance required; application of chapter.
224.04   Presentation of petitions.
224.05   Copy of proposed ordinance or measure to be filed with Fiscal Officer.
224.06   Words to be printed in red.
224.07   Designation of committee filing petition; public inspection of
petitions; ordinances passed or repealed prior to election.
224.08   Itemized statement by circulator of petition.
224.09   Prohibited practices relative to petitions.
224.10   Accepting premiums for signing.
224.11   Threats in securing signatures.
224.12   Application of chapter if Charter adopted.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Initiative and referendum - see Ohio Const. Art. II, Sec. 1 et seq.; Ohio
R.C. 3519.01 et seq.
   Transfer of powers to county - see Ohio Const. Art. X, Sec. 1
   Acquisition of public utility - see Ohio Const. Art. XVIII, Sec. 5
   Adoption of Charter - see Ohio Const. Art. XVIII, Secs. 7, 8, 9
   Application to various plans of government - see Ohio R.C. 705.91
   Charter municipalities may adopt own provisions as to - see Ohio R.C. 705.91
   Recall of elective officer - see Ohio R.C. 705.91, 705.92
§ 224.01 INITIATIVE PETITIONS.
   (a)   Ordinances and other measures providing for the exercise of any powers
of government granted by the Constitution or delegated to the municipality by
the General Assembly may be proposed by initiative petition. Such initiative
petition must contain the signatures of not less than 10% of the number of
electors who voted for Governor at the most recent general election for the
office of Governor in the municipality.
   (b)   When a petition is filed with the Fiscal Officer, signed by the
required number of electors proposing an ordinance or other measure, the Fiscal
Officer shall, after ten days, transmit a certified copy of the text of the
proposed ordinance or measure to the Board of Elections. The Fiscal Officer
shall transmit the petition to the Board, together with the certified copy of
the proposed ordinance or other measure. The Board shall examine all signatures
on the petition to determine the number of electors of the municipality who
signed the petition. The Board shall return the petition to the Fiscal Officer
within
ten days after receiving it, together with a statement attesting to the number
of such electors who signed the petition.
   (c)   The Board shall submit such proposed ordinance or measure for the
approval or rejection of the electors of the municipality at the next general
election occurring subsequent to 75 days after the Fiscal Officer certifies the
sufficiency and validity of the initiative petition to the Board. No ordinance
or other measure proposed by initiative petition and approved by a majority of
the electors voting upon the measure in the municipality shall be subject to
the veto of the Mayor.
   (d)   As used in this section, “certified copy” means a copy containing a
written statement attesting that it is a true and exact reproduction of the
original proposed ordinance or other measure.
(ORC 731.28)
§ 224.02 REFERENDUM PETITIONS.
   (a)   Any ordinance or other measure passed by Council shall be subject to
the referendum except as provided in §
224.03. No ordinance or other measure shall go into effect until 30 days after
it is passed by Council, except as provided in §
224.03.
   (b)   When a petition, signed by 10% of the number of electors who voted for
Governor at the most recent general election for the office of Governor in the
municipality, is filed with the Fiscal Officer within 30 days after any
ordinance or other measure is filed with the Mayor or passed by Council, or, if
the Mayor has vetoed the ordinance or any measure and returned it to Council,
such petition may be filed within 30 days after Council has passed the
ordinance or measure over his or her veto, ordering that such ordinance or
measure be submitted to the electors of the municipality for their approval or
rejection, such Fiscal Officer shall, after ten days, and not later than 4:00
p.m. of the seventy-fifth day before the day of election, transmit a certified
copy of the text of the ordinance or measure to the Board of Elections. The
Fiscal Officer shall transmit the petition to the Board, together with the
certified copy of the ordinance or measure. The Board shall examine all
signatures on the petition to determine the number of electors of the
municipality who signed the petition. The Board shall return the petition to
the Fiscal Officer within ten days after receiving it, together with a
statement attesting to the number of such electors who signed the petition. The
Board shall submit the ordinance or measure to the electors of the
municipality, for their approval or rejection, at the next general election
occurring subsequent to 75 days after the Fiscal Officer certifies the
sufficiency and validity of the petition to the Board.
   (c)   No such ordinance or measure shall go into effect until approved by
the majority of those voting upon it. Sections
224.01 through 224.13 do not prevent the municipality, after the passage of any
ordinance or other measure, from proceeding at once to give any notice or make
any publication required by such ordinance or other measure.
   (d)   As used in this section, “certified copy” means a copy containing a
written statement attesting that it is a true and exact reproduction of the
original ordinance or other measure.
(ORC 731.29)
§ 224.03 MORE THAN ONE ORDINANCE REQUIRED; APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   Whenever Council is required to pass more than one ordinance or other
measure to complete the legislation necessary to make and pay for any public
improvement, §§
224.01 through 224.13 shall apply only to the first ordinance or other measure
required to be passed and not to any subsequent ordinances and other measures
relating thereto.
(ORC 731.30)
§ 224.04 PRESENTATION OF PETITIONS.
   (a)   Any initiative or referendum petition may be presented in separate
parts, but each part of any initiative petition shall contain a full and
correct copy of the title and text of the proposed ordinance or other measure,
and each part of any referendum petition shall contain the number and a full
and correct copy of the title of the ordinance or other measure sought to be
referred. Each signer of any such petition must be an elector of the
municipality in which the election, upon the ordinance or measure proposed by
such initiative petition, or the ordinance or measure referred to by such
referendum petition, is to be held. Petitions shall be governed in all other
respects by the rules set forth in Ohio R.C. 3501.38. In determining the
validity of any such petition, all signatures which are found to be irregular
shall be rejected, but no petition shall be declared invalid in its entirety
when one or more signatures are found to be invalid, except when the number of
valid signatures is found to be less than the total number required by this
section.
   (b)   The petitions and signatures upon such petitions shall be prima facie
presumed to be in all respects sufficient. No ordinance or other measure
submitted to the electors of the municipality, and receiving an affirmative
majority of the votes cast thereon, shall be held ineffective or void on
account of the insufficiency of the petitions by which such submission of the
ordinance or measure was procured, nor shall the rejection, by a majority of
the votes cast thereon, of any ordinance or other measure submitted to the
electors of the municipality, be held invalid for such insufficiency.
   (c)   Ordinances proposed by initiative petition and referendums receiving
an affirmative majority of the votes cast thereon, shall become effective on
the fifth day after the day on which the Board of Elections certifies the
official vote on such question.
(ORC 731.31)
§ 224.05 COPY OF PROPOSED ORDINANCE OR MEASURE TO BE FILED WITH FISCAL OFFICER.
   (a)   Whoever seeks to propose an ordinance or measure in the municipality
by initiative petition or files a referendum petition against any ordinance or
measure shall, before circulating such petition, file a certified copy of the
proposed ordinance or measure with the Fiscal Officer.
   (b)   As used in this section, “certified copy” means a copy containing a
written statement attesting that it is a true and exact reproduction of the
original proposed ordinance or measure or of the original ordinance or measure.
(ORC 731.32)
§ 224.06 WORDS TO BE PRINTED IN RED.
   At the top of each part of the petition mentioned in §
224.05, the following words shall be printed in red:
   NOTICE
   Whoever knowingly signs this petition more than once, signs a name other
than his or her own, or signs when not a legal voter is liable to prosecution.
(ORC 731.33)
§ 224.07 DESIGNATION OF COMMITTEE FILING PETITION; PUBLIC INSPECTION OF
PETITIONS; ORDINANCES PASSED OR REPEALED PRIOR TO ELECTION.
   (a)   The petitioners may designate in any initiative or referendum petition
a committee of not less than three of their number, who shall be regarded as
filing the petition.
   (b)   After a petition has been filed with the Fiscal Officer, it shall be
kept open for public inspection for ten days.
   (c)   If, after a petition proposing an ordinance or other measure has been
filed with the Fiscal Officer, the proposed ordinance or other measure, or a
substitute for the proposed ordinance or measure approved by such committee, is
passed by Council, the majority of the committee shall notify the Board of
Elections in writing and such proposed ordinance or measure shall not be
submitted to a vote of the electors.
   (d)   If, after a verified referendum petition has been filed against any
ordinance or measure, Council repeals such ordinance or measure, or it is held
to be invalid, the Board shall not submit such ordinance or measure to a vote
of the electors.
(ORC 731.34)
§ 224.08 ITEMIZED STATEMENT BY CIRCULATOR OF PETITION.
   (a)   The circulator of an initiative or referendum petition, or his or her
agent, shall, within five days after such petition is filed with the Fiscal
Officer, file an itemized statement, made under penalty of election
falsification, showing in detail:
      (1)   All moneys or things of value paid, given or promised for
circulating such petition;
      (2)   Full names and addresses of all persons to whom such payments or
promises were made;
      (3)   Full names and addresses of all persons who contributed anything of
value to be used in circulating such petitions; and
      (4)   Time spent and salaries earned while circulating or soliciting
signatures to petitions by persons who were regular salaried employees of some
person who authorized them to solicit signatures for or circulate the petition
as a part of their regular duties.
   (b)   The statement provided for in division (a) of this section shall not
be required from persons who take no other part in circulating a petition than
signing declarations to parts of the petition and soliciting signatures to
them.
   (c)   Such statement shall be open to public inspection for a period of one
year.
(ORC 731.35)
§ 224.09 PROHIBITED PRACTICES RELATIVE TO PETITIONS.
   No person shall, directly or indirectly:
   (a)   Willfully misrepresent the contents of any initiative or referendum
petition;
   (b)   Pay or offer to pay any elector anything of value for signing an
initiative or referendum petition;
   (c)   Promise to help another person to obtain appointment to any office
provided for by the Constitution or laws of the state or by the ordinances of
any municipal corporation, or to any position or employment in the service of
the state or any political subdivision thereof, as a consideration for
obtaining signatures to an initiative or referendum petition;
   (d)   Obtain signatures to any initiative or referendum petition as a
consideration for the assistance or promise of assistance of another person in
securing an appointment to any office or position provided for by the
Constitution or laws of the state or by the ordinances of any municipal
corporation therein, or employment in the service of the state or any
subdivision thereof;
   (e)   Alter, add to or erase any signature or name on the parts of a
petition after such parts have been filed with the Municipal Fiscal Officer; or
   (f)   Fail to file the sworn itemized statement required by §
224.08.
(ORC 731.36)
§ 224.10 ACCEPTING PREMIUMS FOR SIGNING.
   No person shall accept anything of value for signing an initiative or
referendum petition.
(ORC 731.38)
§ 224.11 THREATS IN SECURING SIGNATURES.
   No person shall, directly or indirectly, by intimidation or threats,
influence or seek to influence any person to sign or abstain from signing, or
to solicit signatures to or abstain from soliciting signatures to, an
initiative or referendum petition.
(ORC 731.40)
§ 224.12 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER IF CHARTER ADOPTED.
   Sections
224.01 through
224.12 will not apply to the municipality if and when it adopts its own Charter
containing an initiative and referendum provision for its own ordinances and
other legislative measures.
(ORC 731.41)
CHAPTER 226
Contracts
226.01   General restriction.
226.02   Contracts by Council.
226.03   Contracts by Village Administrator; central purchasing.
226.04   Bids and proceedings.
226.05   Award to lowest responsive and responsible bidder.
226.06   Alterations or modifications of contracts.
226.07   Permanent and continuing request for authorization to participate in
cooperative purchasing programs of the Ohio Department of Transportation
established pursuant to R.C. § 5513.01(B) and its successors.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Contracts for utility services without advertising for bids - see Ohio R.C.
9.30
   Contracts for work on public buildings and improvements - see Ohio R.C.
153.50 et seq.
   Service contracts with county - see Ohio R.C. 307.14 et seq.
   Police protection contracts - see Ohio R.C. 505.43, 737.04
   Gas company monopolies prohibited - see Ohio R.C. 743.33
§ 226.01 GENERAL RESTRICTION.
   The Council shall not enter into any contract which is not to go into full
operation during the term for which all the members of such Council are
elected.
(ORC 731.48)
§ 226.02 CONTRACTS BY COUNCIL.
   (a)   All contracts made by the Council shall be executed in the name of the
municipality and signed on its behalf by the Mayor and Fiscal Officer. Except
where the contract is for equipment, services, materials or supplies to be
purchased under Ohio R.C. 125.04, 713.23(D), or 5513.01, or available from a
qualified nonprofit agency pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4115.31 through 4115.35, or
required to be purchased from a qualified nonprofit agency under Ohio R.C.
125.60 through 125.6012, when any expenditure, other than the compensation of
persons employed in the municipality, exceeds fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00), such contracts shall be in writing and made to the lowest and
best bidder after advertising once a week for not less than two consecutive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the municipality. The
Legislative Authority may also cause notice to be inserted in trade papers or
other publications designated by it or to be distributed by electronic means,
including posting the notice on the Legislative Authority’s internet web site.
If the Legislative Authority posts the notice on its web site, it may eliminate
the second notice otherwise required to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the municipality, provided that the first notice published
in such newspaper meets all of the following requirements:
      (1)   It is published at least two weeks before the opening of bids.
      (2)   It includes a statement that the notice is posted on the
Legislative Authority’s internet web site.
      (3)   It includes the internet address of the Legislative Authority’s
internet web site.
      (4)   It includes instructions describing how the notice may be accessed
on the Legislative Authority’s internet web site.
   (b)   The bids shall be opened and shall be publicly read by the Fiscal
Officer or a person designated by the Fiscal Officer at the time, date and
place specified in the advertisement to bidders or specifications. The time,
date and place of bid openings may be extended to a late date by the Council,
provided that written or oral notice of the change shall be given to all
persons who have received or requested specifications no later than 96 hours
prior to the original time and date fixed for the opening. This section does
not apply to the municipality if an Administrator has been appointed pursuant
to the provisions of Ohio R.C. 735.271, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
(ORC 731.14) (Am. Ord. 2012-18, passed 12-3-2012)
§ 226.03 CONTRACTS BY VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR; CENTRAL PURCHASING.
   (a)   If the municipality has established the position of Administrator as
provided by Ohio R.C. 735.271, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the Administrator shall make contracts, purchase supplies and
materials, and provide labor for any work under the Administrator’s supervision
involving not more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). When an
expenditure, other than the compensation of persons employed by the
municipality, exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), the expenditure
shall first be authorized and directed by ordinance of the Council. When so
authorized and directed, except where the contract is for equipment, services,
materials, or supplies to be purchased under Ohio R.C. 125.04, 713.23(D), or
5513.01 or available from a qualified nonprofit agency pursuant to Ohio R.C.
4115.31 through 4115.35, or required to be purchased from a qualified nonprofit
agency under Ohio R.C. 125.60 through 125.6012, the Administrator shall make a
written contract with the lowest and best bidder after advertisement for not
less than two nor more than four consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation within the municipality. The bids shall be opened and shall be
publicly read by the Administrator or a person designated by the Administrator
at the time, date and place specified in the advertisement to bidders or
specifications. The time, date and place of bid openings may be extended to a
later date by the Administrator, provided that written or oral notice of the
change shall be given to all persons who have received or requested
specifications no later than 96 hours prior to the original time and date fixed
for the opening. All contracts shall be executed in the name of the
municipality and signed on its behalf by the Administrator and the Fiscal
Officer.
   (b)   The Council may provide, by ordinance, for central purchasing for all
offices, departments, divisions, boards, and commissions of the municipality,
under the direction of the Administrator who shall make contracts, purchase
supplies or materials, and provide labor for any work of the municipality in
the manner provided by this section.
(ORC 731.141) (Am. Ord. 2012-18, passed 12-3-2012)
§ 226.04 BIDS AND PROCEEDINGS.
   Each bid on any contract under §
222.02 or §
222.04 shall contain the full name of every person interested in such bid. If
the bid is for the construction, demolition, alteration, repair, or
reconstruction of an improvement, it shall meet the requirements of Ohio R.C.
153.54. If the bid is for any other contract authorized by §
222.02 or §
222.04, it shall be accompanied by a sufficient bond or certified check,
cashiers check, or money order on a solvent bank or savings and loan
association that, if the bid is accepted, a contract will be entered into and
the performance of it properly secured. If the bid for work embraces both labor
and materials, it shall be separately stated, with the price thereof. The
Council or Administrator, in the event an Administrator has been appointed as
provided by Ohio R.C. 735.271, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, may reject any and all bids. The contract shall be between the
municipality and the bidder, and the municipality shall pay such contract price
in cash. When a bonus is offered for completion of a contract prior to a
specified date, the Council or Administrator, in the event an Administrator has
been appointed as provided in Ohio R.C. 735.271, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, may exact a prorated penalty in like sum for each day or
delay beyond the specified date. When there is reason to believe there is
collusion or combination among bidders, the bids of those concerned therein
shall be rejected.
(ORC 731.15)
§ 226.05 AWARD TO LOWEST RESPONSIVE AND RESPONSIBLE BIDDER.
   (a)   (1)   If the municipality is required by law or by an ordinance or
resolution adopted under division (c) of this section to award a contract to
the lowest responsive and responsible bidder, a bidder on the contract shall be
considered responsive if the bidder’s proposal responds to bid specifications
in all material respects and contains no irregularities or deviations from the
specifications which would affect the amount of the bid or otherwise give the
bidder a competitive advantage. The factors that the municipality shall
consider in determining whether a bidder on the contract is responsible include
the experience of the bidder, the bidder’s financial condition, conduct and
performance on previous contracts, facilities, management skills, and ability
to execute the contract properly.
      (2)   For purposes of this division, the provision of a bid guaranty in
accordance with Ohio R.C. 153.54(A)(1) and (B) issued by a surety licensed to
do business in this state is evidence of financial responsibility, but the
municipality may request additional financial information for review from an
apparent low bidder after it opens all submitted bids. The municipality shall
keep additional financial information it receives pursuant to a request under
this division confidential, except under proper order of a court. The
additional financial information is not a public record under Ohio R.C. 149.43.
      (3)   An apparent low bidder found not to be responsive and responsible
shall be notified by the municipality of that finding and the reasons for it.
The notification shall be given in writing and either by certified mail or, if
the municipality has record of an internet identifier of record associated with
the bidder, by ordinary mail and by that internet identifier of record.
   (b)   Where the municipality has adopted an ordinance or resolution under
division (c) of this section and determines to award a contract to a bidder
other than the apparent low bidder or bidders for the construction,
reconstruction, improvement, enlargement, alteration, repair, painting or
decoration of a
public improvement, it shall meet with the apparent low bidder or bidders upon
a filing of a timely written protest. The protest must be received within five
days of the notification required in division (a) of this section. No final
award shall be made until the municipality either affirms or reverses its
earlier determination. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Ohio Revised
Code, the procedure described in this division is not subject to Ohio R.C.
Chapter 119.
   (c)   The municipality may, by ordinance or resolution, adopt a policy of
requiring each competitively bid contract it awards to be awarded to the lowest
responsive and responsible bidder in accordance with this section.
   (d)   As used in this section, “internet identifier of record” means an
electronic mail address, or any other designation used for self-identification
or routing in internet communication or posting, provided for the purpose of
receiving communication.
(ORC 9.312)
§ 226.06 ALTERATIONS OR MODIFICATIONS OF CONTRACTS.
   When it becomes necessary in the opinion of the Council or Administrator, in
the event an Administrator has been appointed as provided in Ohio R.C. 735.271,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, in the prosecution of any
work under contract, to make alterations or modifications in such contract,
such alterations or modifications shall be made only by the Council by
resolution or by the Administrator in writing, in the event an Administrator
had been appointed as provided in Ohio R.C. 735.271, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, but such resolution or written modification
shall be of no effect until the price to be paid for the work and material, or
both, under the altered or modified contract has been agreed upon in writing
and signed by the contractor, and by the Mayor or Administrator in the event an
Administrator has been appointed as provided in Ohio R.C. 735.271, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, on behalf of the municipality. No
contractor shall recover anything for work or material because of any
alteration or modification unless such contract is made as provided in this
section, nor shall the contractor recover for such work or material, or either,
more than the agreed price. The law relating to requiring bids and the awarding
of contracts for public buildings, so far as they apply, shall remain in
effect. A duplicate copy of each contract shall be filed in the office of the
Fiscal Officer.
(ORC 731.16)
§ 226.07 PERMANENT AND CONTINUING REQUEST FOR AUTHORIZATION TO PARTICIPATE IN
COOPERATIVE PURCHASING PROGRAMS OF THE OHIO DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
ESTABLISHED PURSUANT TO R.C. § 5513.01(B) AND ITS SUCCESSORS.
   (a)   From and after January 31, 2022, the Village of Commercial Point
hereby permanently requests authorization to participate in the cooperative
purchasing programs established by the Director of the Ohio Department of
Transportation pursuant to R.C. § 5513.01(B) and its successors. This request
is permanent and continuing in nature and does not require renewal by the
legislative authority of the Village of Commercial Point to be effective.
   (b)   The Village Administrator is directed and authorized to act as the
village's agent in all contracts entered into under the cooperative purchasing
programs established by the Director of the Ohio Department of Transportation
pursuant to R.C. § 5513.01(B), and shall agree to be bound by the terms and
conditions prescribed by the Director. The Village Administrator is hereby
authorized to agree in the name of the Village of Commercial Point to directly
pay vendors, under each such contract of the Ohio Department of Transportation
in which the Village of Commercial Point participates, for machinery,
materials, supplies, or other articles it receives pursuant to the contract.
   (c)   The Village of Commercial Point is responsible for resolving all
claims or disputes arising out of its participation in the cooperative
purchasing program under R.C. § 5513.01(B). The Village of Commercial Point
agrees to waive any claims, actions, expenses, or other damages arising out of
its participation in the cooperative purchasing program which the Village of
Commercial Point may have or claim to have against ODOT or its employees,
unless such liability is the result of negligence on the part of ODOT or its
employees.
(Ord. 2021-49, passed 11-29-2021)
CHAPTER 228
Mayor
228.01   Term; qualifications; powers.
228.02   Vacancy.
228.03   General duties.
228.04   Communications to Council.
228.05   Protest against excess of expenditures.
228.06   Supervision of conduct of officers.
228.07   Charges against delinquent officers.
228.08   Hearing of charges; action of Council.
228.09   Suspension of accused pending hearing.
228.10   Power of Council as to process.
228.11   Oaths; compulsory testimony; costs.
228.12   Disposition of fines and other moneys.
228.13   Annual report to Council.
228.14   Salary and benefits.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Contracts - see ADM.
226.02
§ 228.01 TERM; QUALIFICATIONS; POWERS.
   The Mayor shall be elected for a term of four years commencing on the first
day of January next after his or her election. He or she shall be an elector of
the municipality, and shall have resided in the municipality for at least one
year immediately preceding his or her election. He or she shall be the chief
conservator of the peace within the municipality, and shall have the powers and
duties provided by law. He or she shall be the President of the Council, and
shall preside at all regular and special meetings thereof, but shall have no
vote except in case of a tie.
(ORC 733.24)
§ 228.02 VACANCY.
   When the Mayor is absent from the municipality, or is unable for any cause
to perform his or her duties, the President Pro Tempore of the Council shall be
acting Mayor. In case of the death, resignation, or removal of the Mayor, such
President Pro Tempore shall become the Mayor and shall hold office until his or
her successor is elected and qualified. Such successor shall be elected to the
office for the unexpired term at the first regular municipal election that
occurs more than 40 days after the vacancy has occurred, except that when the
unexpired term ends within one year immediately following the date of such
election, an election to fill such unexpired term shall not be held and the
President of the Council shall hold the office for such unexpired term.
(ORC 733.25)
§ 228.03 GENERAL DUTIES.
   The Mayor shall perform all the duties prescribed by the bylaws and
ordinances of the municipality. He or she shall see that all ordinances,
bylaws, and resolutions of the Council are faithfully obeyed and enforced. He
or she shall sign all commissions, licenses, and permits granted by the
Council, or authorized by Title VII of the Ohio Revised Code, and such other
instruments as by law or ordinance require his or her certificate.
(ORC 733.30)
§ 228.04 COMMUNICATIONS TO COUNCIL.
   The Mayor shall communicate to the Council from time to time a statement of
the finances of the municipality, and other information relating thereto, and
the general condition of the affairs of the municipality as he or she deems
proper, or as is required by the Council.
(ORC 733.32)
§ 228.05 PROTEST AGAINST EXCESS OF EXPENDITURES.
   If, in the opinion of the Mayor, an expenditure authorized by the Council
exceeds the revenues of the municipality for the current year, he or she shall
protest against the expenditure and enter the protest, and the reason therefor,
on the journal of the Council.
(ORC 733.33)
§ 228.06 SUPERVISION OF CONDUCT OF OFFICERS.
   The Mayor shall supervise the conduct of all the officers of the
municipality, inquire into and examine the grounds of all reasonable complaints
against any officers, and cause their violations or neglect of duty to be
punished promptly or reported to the proper authority for correction.
(ORC 733.34)
§ 228.07 CHARGES AGAINST DELINQUENT OFFICERS.
   The Mayor shall have general supervision over each department and the
officers provided for in Title VII of the Ohio Revised Code. When the Mayor has
reason to believe that the head of a department or an officer has been guilty,
in the performance of his or her official duty, of bribery, misfeasance,
malfeasance, nonfeasance, misconduct in office, gross neglect of duty, gross
immorality, or habitual drunkenness, he or she shall immediately file with the
Council, except when the removal of the head of the department or officer is
otherwise provided for, written charges against the person, setting forth in
detail a statement of alleged guilt, and, at the same time, or as soon
thereafter as possible, serve a true copy of the charges upon the person
against whom they are made. Service may be made on the person or by leaving a
copy of the charges at the office of the person. Return thereof shall be made
to the Council, as is provided for the return of the service of summons in a
civil action.
(ORC 733.35)
§ 228.08 HEARING OF CHARGES; ACTION OF COUNCIL.
   Charges filed with Council under §
228.07 shall be heard at the next regular meeting thereof, unless Council
extends the time for the hearing, which shall be done only on the application
of the accused. The accused may appear in person and by counsel, examine all
witnesses, and answer all charges against him or her. The judgment or action of
Council shall be final, but to remove such officer the votes of two-thirds of
all members elected thereto shall be required.
(ORC 733.36)
§ 228.09 SUSPENSION OF ACCUSED PENDING HEARING.
   Pending any proceedings under §§
228.07 and
228.08, an accused person may be suspended by a majority vote of all members
elected to Council, but such suspension shall not be for a longer period than
15 days, unless the hearing of such charges is extended upon the application of
the accused, in which event the suspension shall not exceed 30 days.
(ORC 733.37)
§ 228.10 POWER OF COUNCIL AS TO PROCESS.
   For the purpose of investigating charges filed pursuant to §
228.07 against the head of any department or officer, Council may issue
subpoenas or compulsory process to compel the attendance of persons and the
production of books and papers before it, and Council may provide by ordinance
for exercising and enforcing this section.
(ORC 733.38)
§ 228.11 OATHS; COMPULSORY TESTIMONY; COSTS.
   In all cases in which the attendance of witnesses may be compelled for an
investigation under §
228.10, any member of Council may administer the requisite oaths, and Council
has the same power to compel the giving of testimony by attending witnesses as
is conferred upon courts. In all such cases, witnesses shall be entitled to the
same privileges and immunities as are allowed witnesses in civil cases.
Witnesses shall be paid the same fees and mileage provided for under Ohio R.C.
1901.26, and the costs of all such proceedings shall be payable from the
general fund of the municipality.
(ORC 733.39)
§ 228.12 DISPOSITION OF FINES AND OTHER MONEYS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.193, all fines,
forfeitures and costs in ordinance cases and all fees that are collected by the
Mayor, that in any manner come into the Mayor’s hands, or that are due the
Mayor or the Chief of Police or other officer of the municipality, any other
fees and expenses that have been advanced out of the treasury of the
municipality, and all money received by the Mayor for the use of the
municipality shall be paid by the Mayor into the treasury of the municipality
on the first Monday of each month. At the first regular meeting of the
legislative authority  each month, the Mayor shall submit a full statement of
all money received, from whom and for what purposes received, and when paid
into the treasury. Except as otherwise provided by Ohio R.C. 307.515 or Ohio
R.C. 4511.19, all fines and forfeitures collected by the Mayor in state cases,
together with all fees and expenses collected that have been advanced out of
the county treasury, shall be paid by the Mayor to the county treasury on the
first business day of each month. Except as otherwise provided by Ohio R.C.
307.515 or Ohio R.C. 4511.19, the Mayor shall pay all court costs and fees
collected by the Mayor in state cases into the municipal treasury on the first
business day of each month.
   (b)   This section does not apply to fines collected by the Mayor’s Court
for violations of Ohio R.C. 4513.263(B), or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, all of which shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of State
as provided in Ohio R.C. 4513.263(E).
(ORC. 733.40)
§ 228.13 ANNUAL REPORT TO COUNCIL.
   At the first regular meeting in January of each year, and at other times as
the Mayor deems expedient, he or she shall report to the Council concerning the
affairs of the municipality, and recommend such measures as seem proper to him
or her.
(ORC 733.41)
§ 228.14 SALARY AND BENEFITS.
   (a)   Beginning January 1, 2024, the Mayor shall receive an annual salary of
$25,000, which shall increase automatically each year thereafter on January 1
by a rate of 5.0%.
   (b)   The Mayor shall be eligible to receive all fringe benefits, including,
but not limited to, health insurance and other insurance benefits, which are
available to village employees.
   (c)   The Mayor may waive all or a portion of the salary and benefits
described in divisions (a) and (b) of this section.
(Ord. 3-67, passed 8-7-1967; Am. Ord. 2-8-70, passed 8-7-1970; Am. Ord. 5-71,
passed 6-5-1971; Am. Ord. 1500.30, passed 12-4-1989; Am. Ord. 2200.17, passed
11- -1995; Am. Ord. 99-9, passed 11-1-1999; Am. Ord. 2007-31, passed 8-6-2007;
Am. Ord. 2012-16, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 2022-14, passed 6-20-2022)
TITLE SIX - Administration
               
Chap. 230. Village Administrator.
               
Chap. 232. Village Fiscal Officer.
               
Chap. 234. Legal Counsel.
               
Chap. 236. Police Department.
               
Chap. 238. Fire Department.
               
Chap. 240. Miscellaneous Village Employees.
               
Chap. 242. Employee Guidelines.
               
Chap. 244. Parking Violations Bureau.
CHAPTER 230
Village Administrator
230.01   Employment of Village Administrator.
230.02   Salary.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Streets and public grounds - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 723
   Sidewalks and sewers - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 729
   Water works - see Ohio R.C. 743.01 et seq.
   Water pollution - see Ohio R.C. 743.25
   Gas, water and electricity - see Ohio R.C. 743.26 et seq.
   Care, supervision and management of public institutions - see ADM.
220.13
   Contracts by Village Administrator - see ADM.
226.03
§ 230.01 EMPLOYMENT OF VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR.
   (a)   In accordance with Ohio R.C. § 735.271, there is hereby created the
position of part-time Village Administrator. The salary of the part-time
Village Administrator shall be per contract with the village.
   (b)   The part-time Village Administrator shall have those powers, duties,
and functions as provided by the general laws of the State of Ohio; and
specifically those powers, duties, and functions authorized by Ohio R.C. §
735.273.
   (c)   After the effective date of this section, the appointment of the part-
time Village Administrator by the Mayor, and his or her confirmation by the
Council, the part-time Village Administrator shall serve under the general
supervision and control of the Mayor.
(Ord. 1700.02, passed 10-1-1979)
§ 230.02 SALARY.
   The Village Administrator shall receive a salary as shall be fixed by the
Village Council.
(Ord. 96.16, passed 10-7-1996; Am. Ord. 04-1, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. 2007-
19, passed 7-2-2007)
CHAPTER 232
Village Fiscal Officer
232.01   Fiscal Officer.
232.02   Salary.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Annexation duties - see Ohio R.C. 709.03, 709.06
   Certification of assessments - see Ohio R.C. 727.30, 727.33
   Income tax collection - see Ohio R.C. 733.85
   Authentication of ordinances and resolutions - see ADM.
222.04
   Publication of ordinances - see ADM.
222.10
   Initiative petitions - see ADM.
224.01
§ 232.01 FISCAL OFFICER.
   The Council of the Village of Commercial Point hereby combines the duties of
the Village Clerk and Village Treasurer into the appointed office of Village
Fiscal Officer in accordance with Ohio R.C. 733.262(B).
(Ord. 2007-21, passed 6-19-2007)
§ 232.02 SALARY.
   The Village Fiscal Officer shall receive a salary as shall be fixed by the
Village Council.
(Ord. 2007-25, passed 7-2-2007; Am. Ord. 2007-39, passed 9-10-2007)
CHAPTER 234
Legal Counsel
234.01   Employment of legal counsel.
234.02   Salary.
234.03   Duties.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Appointment in commission plan of government - see Ohio R.C. 705.46
   Approval of leases - see Ohio R.C. 715.011
   Preparation of bonds - see Ohio R.C. 733.70
   Attorneys - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4705
§ 234.01 EMPLOYMENT OF LEGAL COUNSEL.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, when it considers
it necessary, the legislative authority may provide legal counsel for the
municipality, or for any department or official of the municipality, for a
period not to exceed two years and shall provide compensation for the legal
counsel.
   (b)   (1)   A petition may be filed with the Fiscal Officer, signed by
registered electors residing in the municipality equal in number to not less
than 10% of the total vote cast for all candidates for Governor in the
municipality at the most recent general election at which a Governor was
elected, requesting that the question be placed before the electors whether,
instead of the legislative authority appointing legal counsel for the
municipality or for any department or official of the municipality, the Mayor
shall appoint an attorney or law firm as the legal counsel with the advice and
consent of the legislative authority. Within two weeks after receipt of the
petition, the Fiscal Officer shall certify it to the Board of Elections, which
shall determine its sufficiency and validity. The petition shall be certified
to the Board of Elections not less than 75 days prior to the election at which
the question is to be voted upon.
      (2)   At the election, if a majority of the electors of the municipality
approves the question, then effective immediately when the Mayor considers it
necessary, the Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the
legislative authority, an attorney or law firm as legal counsel for the
municipality, or for any department or official of the municipality, for a
period not to exceed two years. The appointment of legal counsel under this
division shall be pursuant to a contract approved by the Mayor and a majority
vote of the legislative authority. The contract shall provide for the
compensation and other terms of the engagement of the legal counsel, and the
legislative authority shall provide that compensation for the legal counsel.
   (c)   When acting under this section, the legislative authority acts in its
administrative capacity.
(ORC 733.48) (Ord. 2-66, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 10-69, passed 10-6-1969; Am.
Ord. 4-1-71, passed - -1971; Am. Ord. 3-72, passed 3-13-1972; Am. Ord. 1-73,
passed 2-5-1973; Am. Ord. 1500.13, passed 3-7-1977; Am. Ord. 3-91, passed 4-1-
1991; Am. Ord. 2211, passed 2-27-1995; Am. Ord. 97-06, passed 3-3-1997; Am.
Ord. 99-11, passed 10-4-1999; Am. Ord. 01-18, passed 12-3-2001; Am. Ord. 02-19,
passed 12-9-2002; Am. Ord. 04-20, passed 8-25-2004; Am. Ord. 2005-13, passed 8-
1-2005; Am. Ord. 2005-19, passed 9-12-2005; Am. Ord. 2006-01, passed 1-9-2006)
§ 234.02 SALARY.
   The village legal counsel shall receive compensation as shall be fixed by
the Village Council.
(Ord. 2-66, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 10-69, passed 10-6-1969; Am. Ord. 4-1-71,
passed - -1971; Am. Ord. 3-72, passed 3-13-1972; Am. Ord. 1-73, passed 2-5-
1973; Am. Ord. 1500.13, passed 3-7-1977; Am. Ord. 3-91, passed 4-1-1991; Am.
Ord. 2211, passed 2-27-1995; Am. Ord. 97-06, passed 3-3-1997; Am. Ord. 99-11,
passed 10-4-1999; Am. Ord. 01-18, passed 12-3-2001; Am. Ord. 02-19, passed 12-
9-2002; Am. Ord. 04-20, passed 8-25-2004)
§ 234.03 DUTIES.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the legal counsel to:
      (1)   Draft all village legislation;
      (2)   To prosecute and defend all actions by or against the village or
any department or officer thereof during the term of his or her employment; and
      (3)   To render written legal opinions to the Council or any department
or officer of the village upon request to do so.
   (b)   The village legal counsel shall serve the village as legal counsel for
civil representation as well as matters involving prosecutorial functions,
which shall include, but not be limited to, the handling of traffic citations
issued by any law enforcement agency of the Village of Commercial Point.
(Ord. 2-66, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 10-69, passed 10-6-1969; Am. Ord. 4-1-71,
passed - -1971; Am. Ord. 3-72, passed 3-13-1972; Am. Ord. 1-73, passed 2-5-
1973; Am. Ord. 1500.13, passed 3-7-1977; Am. Ord. 2211, passed 2-27-1995; Am.
Ord. 97-06, passed 3-3-1997; Am. Ord. 99-11, passed 10-4-1999; Am. Ord. 01-18,
passed 12-3-2001; Am. Ord. 02-19, passed 12-9-2002; Am. Ord. 04-20, passed 8-
25-2004)
CHAPTER 236
Police Department
236.01   Position of Chief of Police established.
236.02   Salary.
236.03   Waiving the requirement that Chief of Police become a resident of the
village.
236.04   Auxiliary police officers.
236.05   Position of Captain established.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Recovered property and disposition - see Ohio R.C. 737.29 et seq., 4513.60
et seq.
   Police Pension and Disability Fund - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 742
   Police officer may arrest on view - see Ohio R.C. 2935.03, 2935.05, 2935.07
§ 236.01 POSITION OF CHIEF OF POLICE ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established the position of Chief of Police for the Village
of Commercial Point which shall be classified as a full-time position within
the Police Department of the Village of Commercial Point.
(Ord. 99-12, passed 11-1-1999; Am. Ord. 2007-03, passed 2-25-2007; Am. Ord.
2021-12, passed 5-18-2021)
§ 236.02 SALARY.
   The compensation for the position of full-time Chief of Police shall be as
fixed by the Village Council.
(Ord. 3-67, passed 8-7-1967; Am. Ord. 2-8-70, passed 8-3-1970; Am. Ord. 5-71,
passed 6-5-1971; Am. Ord. 99-12, passed 11-1-1999; Am. Ord. 2007-03, passed 2-
25-2007; Am. Ord. 2007-34, passed 8-6-2007)
§ 236.03 WAIVING THE REQUIREMENT THAT CHIEF OF POLICE BECOME A RESIDENT OF THE
VILLAGE.
   (a)   The Chief of Police need not be a resident of the Village of
Commercial Point.
   (b)   Such requirement is hereby waived as permitted by Ohio R.C. § 737.15.
(Ord. 04-2, passed 4-5-2004)
§ 236.04 AUXILIARY POLICE OFFICERS.
   (a)   Established. There is hereby established within the Commercial Point
Police Department an auxiliary police unit.
   (b)   Governed by Ohio Revised Code. The auxiliary police unit shall be
governed in accordance with Ohio R.C. § 737.161, and shall operate in
accordance with the provisions of the laws of the United States and the State
of Ohio, and in accordance with the ordinances of the Village of Commercial
Point.
   (c)   Qualifications. No person shall be appointed as a member of the
auxiliary police unit unless such person has previously been awarded, or is in
the process of obtaining, a certificate by the executive director of the Ohio
police officer training council attesting to his or her satisfactory completion
of an approved state, county, municipal or department of natural resources
peace officer basic training program as provided in Ohio R.C. § 109.77.
   (d)   Chief of Police duties. The Chief of Police shall have exclusive
control of the stationing and transferring of all auxiliary police officers and
shall have control of the assignment, training, stationing and the direction of
the work of such unit. Members of the auxiliary police unit who have obtained
the certificate specified in division (c) above of this section shall have all
police powers, but shall perform only such police duties as are assigned by the
Chief of Police. All auxiliary members shall obey the chain of command of the
Commercial Point Police Department and shall take orders from all full-time or
part-time members thereof.
   (e)   Mayor’s duties. The Mayor shall prescribe general rules and
regulations for the organization, training, administration, control and conduct
of the auxiliary police unit.
   (f)   Services and compensation. All services rendered and performed by
members of the auxiliary police unit shall be on a voluntary basis. Members of
the auxiliary police unit shall be paid one dollar ($1.00) annually. Members of
the unit shall not be eligible for any employee benefits, nor shall such
members be eligible for membership in the Police Relief and Pension Fund under
Ohio R.C. §§ 741.31 to 741.54 inclusive.
   (g)   Compensation for Mayor’s Court appearances. 
      (1)   The Council of the Village of Commercial Point hereby authorizes
compensation to be made to auxiliary officers appearing in Mayor’s Court at a
flat fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per appearance.
      (2)   Compensation to auxiliary officers for appearances in Mayor’s Court
shall be retroactive to January 1, 2005.
(Ord. 4-92.2, passed 4-6-1992; Am. Ord. 2005-04, passed 1-17-2005)
§ 236.05 POSITION OF CAPTAIN ESTABLISHED.
   (a)   The position of Captain is hereby established in the Village of
Commercial Point Police Department.
   (b)   The position of Captain shall be part-time and compensated at no more
than 20 hours per week.
   (c)   The Mayor of the Village of Commercial Point is hereby authorized to
appoint an individual to the position of part-time Captain subject to R.C. §§
737.16 and 737.17.
(Ord. 2020-08, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 238
Fire Department
Editor’s Note: The Village does not have a Fire Department, but instead
contracts with Scioto Township for fire protection.
CHAPTER 240
Miscellaneous Village Employees
240.01   Zoning inspector.
240.02   Secretary.
240.03   Administrative assistant.
240.04   General maintenance employee.
240.05   General laborer.
240.06   Utility complex superintendent.
240.07   Utility clerk.
240.08   Street commissioner.
240.09   Plant operator.
240.10   Plant superintendent.
240.11   Part-time Village Engineer.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Public Employee’s Retirement System - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 145
   Strikes by public employees - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4117
§ 240.01 ZONING INSPECTOR.
   (a)   The position of village zoning inspector is hereby created for the
Village of Commercial Point.
   (b)   The village zoning inspector of Commercial Point shall be classified
as a part-time position and shall be compensated at a rate of ninety two
dollars and thirty one cents ($92.31) every two weeks plus an additional
payment of money for every zoning permit issued as outlined in the village
zoning inspector Additional Payment Schedule located in division (f) below.
   (c)   The pay period for the position of the village Zoning inspector shall
begin at 12:01 a.m. on Saturday and continue for 14 consecutive days, ending n
Friday at midnight of the 14th day. All time reports must be submitted before
the end of tour on the last day of the pay period. The compensation check shall
be available by 9:00 a.m. at the Village Municipal office on the Friday
following the pay period. If the Friday following the pay period is a holiday,
the compensation check shall be available by 9:00 a.m. on the preceding
Thursday at the Village Municipal office.
   (d)   Monies for the compensation for the village zoning inspector shall be
paid from the general fund, account number 1000-410-190-0000.
   (e)   The village zoning inspector shall report directly to the Village
Mayor.
   (f)   Additional payment schedule.
Additional Payment Schedule
Permit Payment
       (in dollars)
Additional Payment Schedule
Permit                                                           Payment
                                                                 (in dollars)
Single Family Residence                                          $25.00
Modular Home                                                     25.00
Twin Single                                                      25.00
Apartment Building (per unit)                                    25.00
Multi-Family/Townhouse (per unit)                                25.00
Garages and Carports (up to and including 480 square feet)       10.00
Garages and Carports (over 480 square feet)                      15.00
Buildings - Permanent or Movable (up to and including 480 square 10.00
feet)
Buildings - Permanent or Movable (over 480 square feet)          15.00
New Construction - Commercial/Industrial                         25.00
Converting Single Family Residence to Two or more Residences     25.00
Remodeling or Structure Change - R1/R2                           25.00
Remodeling or Structure Change - Commercial/ Industrial          25.00
Demolition (over 480 Square Feet)                                10.00
Temporary Mobile Home (six months maximum)                       10.00
Deck/Patios                                                      10.00
Fence                                                            10.00
Swimming Pools - Above and Below Ground (over 2,500 gallon)      10.00
Signs Requiring Permits                                          15.00
 
(Ord. 05-10, passed 4-4-2005; Am. Ord. 2007-6, passed 2-25-2007; Am. Ord. 2007-
33, passed 8-6-2007)
§ 240.02 SECRETARY.
   (a)   There is hereby formally created the position of secretary to the
Village of Commercial Point who shall be compensated at a rate as determined by
the Village Council, with the compensation to be paid weekly.
   (b)   That Council hereby reaffirms the previous action of Council taken
November of 1999 to employ a secretary for the village, which action was not
formally adopted by ordinance.
(Ord. 2-1-69, passed 2-3-1969; Am. Ord. 00-5, passed 11- -2005)
§ 240.03 ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT.
   (a)   (1)   The administrative assistant of the village shall be compensated
at a rate as determined by the Village Council.
      (2)   The rate shall be based on a maximum of 30 hours per week.
   (b)   Compensation for the administrative assistant shall be paid bi-weekly.
   (c)   Monies for the compensation for the administrative assistant shall be
paid from the general fund, account number 1000-110-162-0000.
   (d)   The Administrative Assistant of the Village of Commercial Point shall
be classified as a part- time position within the Mayor’s office staff.
(Ord. 04-5, passed 5-3-2004; Am. Ord. 04-32, passed 12-20-2004; Am. Ord. 2006-
19, passed 3-3-2007)
§ 240.04 GENERAL MAINTENANCE EMPLOYEE.
   (a)   Full-time general maintenance employee.
      (1)   The position of general maintenance employee of the Village of
Commercial Point is established.
      (2)   A.   The general maintenance employee of the village be compensated
at a rate as determined by the Village Council.
         B.   Compensation is to be based on a 40 hour week and paid bi-weekly.
   (b)   Part-time maintenance position.
      (1)   There is hereby established a maintenance position for the Village
of Commercial Point which shall be a part-time position.
      (2)   The compensation for the position of part-time maintenance position
shall be as established by the Village Council.
(Ord. 00-6, passed 1-8-2001; Am. Ord. 04-15, passed 8-2-2004)
§ 240.05 GENERAL LABORER.
   (a)   The position of general laborer of the Village of Commercial Point is
established.
   (b)   The general laborer of the village shall be compensated at the rate as
determined by the Village Council.
   (c)   Compensation is to be based on a 40 hour week and paid bi-weekly.
(Ord. 04-12, passed 7-6-2004)
§ 240.06 UTILITY COMPLEX SUPERINTENDENT.
   (a)   The position of utility complex superintendent of the Village of
Commercial Point is established.
   (b)   (1)   The Utility Complex Superintendent of the Village be compensated
at the annual rate not less than thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000.00) and
not to exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00)
      (2)   The rate is based on a 40 hour week and the compensation to be paid
bi-weekly.
(Ord. 04-14, passed 8-2-2004)
§ 240.07 UTILITY CLERK.
   (a)   There is hereby created a part-time position of utility clerk within
the Utility Department of the Village of Commercial Point who shall be
responsible for the reading of all water meters within the village, the billing
of all water and sewerage charges and such other duties as may be established
by policy.
   (b)   The utility clerk of the village shall be compensated at a rate of not
less than nine dollars ($9.00) per hour and not to exceed ten dollars and 61
cents ($10.61) per hour. The rate shall be based on a maximum of 100 hours per
month and the compensation shall be paid monthly.
(Ord. 96.18, passed 12-2-1996; Am. Ord. 04-21, passed 11-1-2004; Am. Ord. 2006-
25, passed 2-5-2007)
§ 240.08 STREET COMMISSIONER.
   (a)   The Village Council does hereby employ a street commissioner.
   (b)   The duties to be performed by the street commissioner shall be such as
are designated by law, the Mayor and Village Council.
   (c)   The compensation for the position of street commissioner shall be as
established by the Village Council.
(Ord. 1-12-69, passed 12-1-1969; Am. Ord. 5-70, passed 5-4-1970)
§ 240.09 PLANT OPERATOR.
   (a)   There is hereby established the position of plant operator for the
Village of Commercial Point. This position shall be classified as a full time
position within the Utility Department.
   (b)   The plant operator shall be compensated at the rate established by
Village Council.
   (c)   Compensation shall be paid bi-weekly.
(Ord. 2007-04, passed 2-5-2007)
§ 240.10 PLANT SUPERINTENDENT.
   (a)   There is hereby established the position of plant superintendent for
the Village of Commercial Point. This position shall be classified as a full
time position within the Utility Department.
   (b)   The plant superintendent shall be compensated at the rate established
by Village Council.
   (c)   Compensation shall be paid bi-weekly.
(Ord. 2007-04, passed 2-5-2007)
§ 240.11 PART-TIME VILLAGE ENGINEER.
   (a)   The position of a part-time Village Engineer is hereby established
within the village.
   (b)   A part-time Village Engineer shall be hired for a maximum of 40 hours
per month at a compensation rate of thirty dollars ($30.00) per hour plus OPERS
and Worker’s Compensation Insurance.
   (c)   Engineering services will be performed "as needed." The Mayor and/or
Village Administrator shall approve all hours prior to the performance of the
work. Engineering hours shall not exceed 40 hours per month without approval of
Village Council.
(Ord. 2016-09, passed 6- -2016)
CHAPTER 242
Employee Guidelines
242.01   Village of Commercial Point Employee guidelines adopted by reference.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Welfare - see Ohio Const., Art. II, § 34
   Workers’ compensation - see Ohio Const., Art. II, § 35; Ohio R.C. Ch. 4123
   Wages and hours on public works - see Ohio Const., Art. II, § 37; Ohio R.C.
Ch. 4115
   Blanket bonds - see Ohio R.C. 3.06
   Deductions for dues and savings - see Ohio R.C. 9.41, 9.43
   Expenses for attendance at conference or convention - see Ohio R.C. 733.79
   Strikes by public employees - see Ohio R.C. 4117.15
§ 242.01 VILLAGE OF COMMERCIAL POINT EMPLOYEE GUIDELINES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   Council hereby ratifies and affirms its prior adoption of the Village of
Commercial Point Employee Guidelines, a copy of which is on file in the office
of the Fiscal Officer and incorporated herein by reference.   
(Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-6-2006; Am. Ord. 2008-04, passed 2-4-2008)
CHAPTER 244
Parking Violations Bureau
244.01   Definitions.
244.02   Parking Violations Bureau.
244.03   Parking tickets; service.
244.04   Answers to charge; penalties.
244.05   Failure to answer; notice of violations.
244.06   Waiver of fine or ticket.
244.07   Denials; hearings.
244.08   Judgments.
244.09   Joint liability of owner and operator; rental vehicles.
244.10   Effect of multiple judgments.
244.11   Impoundment; immobilization.
244.99   Fines, penalties and costs.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Noncriminal parking infractions, see R.C. Ch. 4521
   Stop, stopping and standing defined, see §
402.01
   Parking near stopped fire apparatus or emergency vehicle, see §
432.28
   Lights on parked or stopped vehicles, see §
438.09
   Parking of bicycles; locks, see §
444.08
   Parking regulations, see Ch.
452
   Storage of junk vehicles, see §
660.07
§ 244.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following meanings shall apply:
   DISABILITY PARKING SPACE or HANDICAP PARKING SPACE means a motor vehicle
parking location that is reserved for the exclusive standing or parking of a
vehicle that is operated by or on behalf of a person with a disability that
limits or impairs the ability to walk and displays a placard or license plates
issued under R.C. § 4503.44.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER or OFFICER means every officer authorized to direct
or regulate traffic, and shall also mean any village employee and/or agent
whose duties include the issuance of parking tickets while engaged in such
duty.
   PARKING VIOLATION means any of the following: A violation of any provision
of
Chapter 452 of the Commercial Point Code of Ordinances; a violation of §§
404.07,
404.10,
432.28,
432.47,
434.12,
438.09,
438.33,
440.12,
444.08,
444.12; a violation of §
660.07; or a violation of a parking regulation lawfully issued by the Mayor,
Village Administrator, or Chief of Police that occurs within the village,  or a
violation arising under any provision of the Village of Commercial Point
Codified Ordinances which specifies the jurisdiction of the Parking Violations
Bureau by reference to this chapter.
   PERSON WITH A DISABILITY THAT LIMITS OR IMPAIRS THE ABILITY TO WALK has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 4503.44.
   VEHICLE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(Ord. 2023-01, passed 4-11-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Local, noncriminal parking infraction definitions, see R.C. § 4521.01
§ 244.02 PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU.
   (a)   Establishment. There is hereby established a Parking Violations
Bureau, within the Village of Commercial Point Police Department.
   (b)   Jurisdiction.
      (1)   A.   The Parking Violations Bureau shall have jurisdiction over
each parking violation that is a violation of
Chapter 452 of the Commercial Point Code of Ordinances; a violation of §§
404.07,
404.10,
432.28,
432.47,
434.12,
438.09,
438.33,
440.12,
444.08,
444.12; a violation of §
660.07; or a violation of a parking regulation lawfully issued by the Mayor,
Village Administrator, or Chief of Police that occurs within the village, or a
violation arising under any provision of the Village of Commercial Point
Codified Ordinances which specifies the jurisdiction of the Parking Violations
Bureau by reference to this chapter (hereafter, "parking violation").
         B.   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, each
parking violation, and the enforcement of the same, shall be handled pursuant
to and be governed by the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   The Pickaway County Juvenile Court and the Circleville Municipal
Court's Traffic Division shall retain jurisdiction over each parking infraction
that occurs within the territorial jurisdiction of the respective court that is
not within the jurisdiction of the Parking Violations Bureau as determined
under division (b)(1) of this section. However, notwithstanding any other
provision of law to the contrary, each such parking violation and the
enforcement of such parking violation shall be handled by the Juvenile Court or
the Traffic Division pursuant to, and be governed by, the provisions of this
chapter.
   (c)   Violations Clerk. The Mayor is hereby appointed the Violations Clerk
for the Bureau, and shall appoint hearing examiners and necessary clerical
employees for the Bureau. No person shall be employed as a hearing examiner
unless such person is an attorney admitted to the practice of law in the State
of Ohio or is a former law enforcement officer. The Mayor may delegate, in his
or her sole discretion, any of the powers or duties of the Violations Clerk
provided for under this chapter to any deputy violations clerks.
   (d)   Contracted Services. The Mayor is hereby authorized to contract with
any governmental or nongovernmental entity to provide services in processing,
collection, and enforcing parking tickets issued by law enforcement officers
and civil judgments and default civil judgments entered pursuant to this
chapter. No contract so entered into shall affect the responsibilities of
hearing examiners, as prescribed in this chapter, or the ultimate
responsibility of the Violations Clerk to collect, retain and disburse fines,
penalties, fees, and costs for parking violations, and monies paid in
satisfaction of judgments and default judgments.
   (e)   Fines and Penalties.
      (1)   The fines, penalties, fees, and costs for parking violations,
failure to timely answer a parking ticket, failure to timely answer a notice of
violation, hearing costs, failure to timely pay judgments, judgment releases
and immobilization fees shall be as set forth in the fee schedule found in §
244.99.
      (2)   The fines, penalties, fees, and costs for parking violations, and
monies paid for satisfaction of judgments, which are collected by the Bureau,
shall be collected, retained and disbursed by the Bureau to the Village of
Commercial Point.
      (3)   The fines and penalties for parking violations shall be collected,
retained, and disbursed by the Clerk of the Juvenile Court or the Violations
Clerk of the Traffic Violations Bureau if the parking violation occurred within
the territorial jurisdiction of the respective court and if it did not occur
within the jurisdiction of the Parking Violations Bureau. The fines and
penalties collected by the Clerk of the Juvenile Court or the violations clerk
of the Circleville Municipal Court Traffic Division shall be disbursed by the
clerk to the local authority whose ordinance, resolution, or regulation was
violated.
(Ord. 2023-01, passed 4-11-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Establishing parking violations bureau, see R.C. § 4521.04
   Jurisdiction of parking violations bureau, see R.C. § 4521.05
§ 244.03 PARKING TICKETS; SERVICE.
   (a)   Adoption. A parking ticket, in the form prescribed by division (b) of
this section, is hereby adopted and shall be used in all cases in which a
person is charged with committing a parking violation subject to the
jurisdiction of the Parking Violation Bureau. ln the alternative, the "Ohio
Uniform Traffic Ticket" described in State Traffic Rule 3(A) and (B) may be
used as the parking ticket. Any parking ticket issued for a parking violation
pursuant to this section shall be the summons and complaint for the purposes of
this chapter.
   (b)   Contents. A parking ticket issued for a violation of any provision
subject to the jurisdiction of the Parking Violations Bureau shall contain
provisions that:
      (1)   Advise the person to whom the ticket is issued that he or she must
answer in relation to the parking violation charged in the ticket;
      (2)   Advise the person to whom the ticket is issued that if he or she
fails to answer in a timely manner, additional penalties shall apply;
      (3)   Specify the allowable answers that may be made to the parking
violation charged, as provided in §
244.04;
      (4)   Advise the person that he or she will be afforded a hearing if he
or she denies in his or her answer that he or she committed the parking
violation;
      (5)   Specify the entity to which, the time within which, and the
allowable manners in which the answer must be made;
      (6)   Indicate the penalties that may result from failure to timely
answer and the fine that arises from the parking ticket;
      (7)   Warn that failure to timely answer or to appear at a requested
hearing will be considered an admission of the parking violation;
      (8)   Warn that a default civil judgment potentially may be entered
against the person and, if different, the owner of the vehicle if the person
fails to timely answer or to appear at a requested hearing; and
      (9)   Any other information as required by law.
   (c)   Duty of Issuing Officer. The law enforcement officer issuing the
parking ticket shall complete the parking ticket by:
      (1)   Identifying the parking violation charged;
      (2)   Recording the license plate number, type, and make or model of the
vehicle;
      (3)   Indicating the date, time and place of the violation;
      (4)   Signing the ticket and affirming the facts it contains; and
      (5)   Identifying the offender and serving the ticket by one of the
following methods:
         A.   If the operator of the vehicle is present, the officer shall
record on the parking ticket, in the space provided for identification of the
offender, the name of the operator and shall then personally serve the ticket
upon the operator.
         B.   If the operator of the vehicle is not present, the officer shall
insert the word "owner" in the space provided for the identification of the
offender and shall then constructively serve the parking ticket upon the owner
of the vehicle by affixing it to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
   (d)   Constructive Service.
      (1)   Constructive service of a parking ticket upon an owner of a vehicle
by affixation as provided in division (c)(5) of this section, or by the
procedure described in division (d)(2) of this section, has the same force and
effect, and potentially subjects both the owner and the operator of the vehicle
whose act or omission resulted in the parking infraction, if different, to the
same fine and the same penalties for failure to timely answer or to appear, if
a hearing is requested, as if the parking ticket were personally served on both
the owner and operator of the vehicle at the time of the violation.
      (2)   An operator of a vehicle who is not the owner of the vehicle, but
who operates it with the express or implied permission of the owner is the
agent of the owner for purposes of the receipt of parking tickets served in
accordance with this section, and personal service of a parking ticket upon the
operator in accordance with this section constitutes constructive service upon
the owner for purposes of this chapter. The operator of a rented or leased
vehicle whose act or omission resulted in an alleged parking infraction shall
not be considered an agent of the owner if the owner is engaged in the business
of renting and leasing vehicles pursuant to a written rental or lease agreement
if the owner follows the procedures set forth in §
244.09.
   (e)   Joint Liability. Except as provided in §
244.09, when a parking ticket is issued for a parking violation and is served
pursuant to this section, the operator of the vehicle whose act or omission
resulted in the parking violation for which the ticket was issued and the owner
of the vehicle involved in the parking violation, if different, are jointly
liable for the parking violation and any fine or penalty arising out of the
parking violation. Any owner of a vehicle who pays any fine or penalty imposed
for a parking violation pursuant to this chapter may recover the amount paid
from the operator of the vehicle whose act or omission resulted in the parking
violation.
   (f)   No Arrest. No person upon whom a parking ticket charging a parking
violation subject to the jurisdiction of the Parking Violations Bureau is
served shall be arrested as a result of the commission of the parking
violation.
   (g)   Records. The original of the parking ticket issued pursuant to this
section or any true copy of the same shall be considered a record kept in the
ordinary course of business of the Village of Commercial Point and the Police
Department, and shall be prima facie evidence of the facts it contains.
(Ord. 2023-01, passed 4-11-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of parking ticket, see R.C. § 4521.03
§ 244.04 ANSWERS TO CHARGE; PENALTIES.
   (a)   Answer to Charge. A person who is personally or constructively served
with a parking ticket charging the commission of a parking violation subject to
the jurisdiction of the Parking Violations Bureau shall answer the charge in
person or by mail to the Parking Violations Bureau. Such answer shall be made
within 30 days of the date of issuance of the ticket, and shall be in one of
the following forms:
      (1)   An admission that the person committed the parking violation, by
payment of the fine for said parking violation, as established by the Village
Parking Fee Schedule set forth in §
244.99, in accordance with division (b)(1) of this section;
      (2)   An admission that the person committed the parking violation, with
a written request that the fine be waived or reduced, in accordance with
division (b)(2) of this section.
      (3)   A denial that the person committed the parking violation and
request for a hearing relative to the parking violation, in accordance with
division (b)(3) of this section. If the person desires the presence, at the
hearing, of the officer who issued the parking ticket, the person must request
the officer's presence in his or her answer.
   (b)   Manner of Answering.
      (1)   If the person answers by admitting the parking violation and paying
the fine, such payment shall be made by paying in person at the Parking
Violations Bureau within the Village of Commercial Point Police Department, by
sending payment through the mail to the Parking Violations Bureau within the
Village of Commercial Point Police Department, or by depositing payment in the
Utilities and Parking Violations Box outside the Commercial Point Municipal
Building. The person shall note the number of the parking ticket on their
method of payment, when paying by check or credit card, or the person shall
send a copy of the ticket with his or her payment.
      (2)   If the person answers by admitting the parking violation but that
admission includes a request that the fine be waived, the person shill submit a
written explanation and evidence to the Parking Violations Bureau with his or
her answer. The explanation and evidence shall explain the circumstances
surrounding the parking violation. The answer, written explanation, and
evidence may be submitted to the Parking Violations Bureau in person or by
mail. The person's request for waiver shall be processed in accordance with §
244.06.
      (3)   If the person answers by denying the parking violation and
requesting a hearing relative to the parking violation, the written answer and
request for hearing shall be submitted to the Parking Violations Bureau in
person or by mail, and shall be processed in accordance with §
244.07.
   (c)   Timeliness of Answer. For an answer to be considered timely, it must
be submitted in one of the manners provided in division (b) of this section on
or before the date that is 30 days from the date of issuance of the parking
ticket. For answers that are mailed, the postmark must be a date that is on or
before the date that is 30 days from the date of issuance of the parking
ticket.
   (d)   Failure to Answer. If a person who is personally or constructively
served with a parking ticket charging the commission of a parking violation
subject to the jurisdiction of the Parking Violations Bureau fails to timely
answer the charge, as provided in division (a) of this section, the Parking
Violations Bureau shall issue the proper notifications of infraction pursuant
to § 244.05 and proceed according to that section.
   (e)   Additional Penalty. Failure to timely answer to a charge may result in
the imposition of additional penalties, as set forth in the fee schedule found
in §
244.99.
   (f)   Records. The issuance of a parking ticket, the filing of or failure to
file an answer by a person personally or constructively served with the ticket,
the substance of the answer, the payment of any fine, and all other relevant
information shall be entered into the records of the Parking Violations Bureau.
(Ord. 2023-01, passed 4-11-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Answer to charge of parking infraction, see R.C. § 4521.06
§ 244.05 FAILURE TO ANSWER; NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (a)   Notice. When a person is personally or constructively served with a
parking ticket charging the commission of a parking violation subject to the
jurisdiction of the Parking Violations Bureau and the person fails to answer
the charge within 30 days of the date of issuance of the ticket, the Parking
Violations Bureau shall send notifications of the parking violation as follows:
      (l)   If the person who fails to answer was the operator of the vehicle
involved in the parking violation at the time of the commission of the parking
violation and was personally served with the parking ticket, a notification of
the violation shall be sent to that person, and additionally if such person is
not the owner of the vehicle, as determined from the records of the Bureau of
Motor Vehicles, a notification of the violation also shall be sent to the owner
at his or her most recent address appearing in such records;
      (2)   If the person who fails to answer was the owner of the vehicle and
was constructively served with the parking ticket, a notification of the
violation shall be sent to the owner at his or her most recent address
appearing in the records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles.
   (b)   Content of Notice. A notification of violation shall be sent within 12
months after the expiration of time specified in §
244.04(a) for making an answer, shall be sent by first class mail, and shall
contain all of the following:
      (1)   An identification of the parking violation with which the person
was charged and the time and date of the parking violation, which
identification may be a copy of the parking ticket charging the parking
violation that was personally or constructively served upon the person;
      (2)   An identification of the amount of the fine, penalties, and costs
arising out of the parking violation that are due;
      (3)   A warning that the person must answer the parking violation charged
in the ticket within 30 days or a default civil judgment in the amount of the
fines, penalties, and costs due may be entered against the person;
      (4)   A description of the allowable answers that may be made, and the
manners in which they may be made, as set forth in §
244.04, and notification that the person will be afforded a hearing before a
hearing officer if he or she denies in his or her answer that the parking
violation was committed;
      (5)   An identification of the manners in which and the entity to which
an answer may be made;
      (6)   A warning that if the person fails to appear at a requested
hearing, a default civil judgement in the amount of the fine, penalties, and
costs due may be entered against the person.
   (c)   Answer to Notice. A person who receives a notice for failure to answer
pursuant to this section may answer the parking violation with which he or she
is charged by answering as provided in §
244.04(a). An answer to a notice sent pursuant to this section shall be made
within 30 days after the date on which the notice was mailed and shall be one
of the answers specified in §
244.04(a), except that if the answer includes payment of the fine arising out
of the parking violation any penalty arising out of such violation also shall
be paid. The answer shall be governed by the provision of §
244.04(b), except that any determination of the amount to be paid under an
answer admitting the commission of the parking violation with explanation also
shall consider any penalty arising out of such violation.
   (d)   Failure to Answer Notice. If a person who is issued a notice for
failure to answer under this section fails to timely answer the notice, as
provided in division (c) of this section, the failure to answer shall be
considered an admission that the person committed the parking violation, and a
default civil judgment, in the amount of the fine, penalties, and costs due may
be entered against the person. Failure to timely answer the notice may result
in the imposition of additional penalties, as set forth in the fee schedule
found in §
244.99.
   (e)   Records. The sending of the notification for failure to answer, the
filing or failure to file an answer to the notice by the person to whom it was
sent, the substance of the answer, the payment of any fine, and any other
relevant information shall be entered into the record of the Parking Violations
Bureau.
(Ord. 2023-01, passed 4-11-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Failure to answer parking infraction charge, see R.C. § 4521.07
§ 244.06 WAIVER OF FINE OR TICKET.
   (a)   Admission and Request for Waiver. When a person answers by admitting
the parking violation but that admission includes a request that the fine be
waived, in accordance with §
244.04(a)(2) and (b)(2), the Violations Clerk, or his or her designee, shall,
within 30 days, determine whether the explanation and evidence mitigates the
fact that the person committed the parking violation and notify the person, in
writing, of the determination.
   (b)   Determination.
      (1)   If the Violations Clerk, or his or her designee, determines that
the explanation meets any of the conditions outlined in division (d) of this
section and mitigates the fact that the person committed the parking violation,
the Clerk shall eliminate or reduce the amount of the fine arising out of the
parking violation. If the fine is eliminated or reduced and the person has
previously paid the fine, the amount paid in excess of the revised fine shall
be returned to the person; if the fine is eliminated or reduced and the person
has not previously paid the fine, the person shall be instructed to pay only
the amount of the revised fine, if any.
      (2)   If the Violations Clerk, or his or her designee, determines that
the explanation does not meet any of the conditions outlined in division (d) of
this section and does not mitigate the fact that the person committed the
parking violation, the person shall be instructed to pay the full amount of the
fine arising out of the parking violation.
   (c)   Timely Payment. If the person has admitted he or she committed a
parking violation and the person's fine is reduced in accordance with division
(b)(1) of this section and the person has not previously paid the fine, or if
the person owes the full amount of the fine in accordance with division (b)(2)
of this section, the determination sent to the person shall instruct him or her
to pay the amount due within ten days of receipt of the notice of
determination. Failure to pay the amount of the fine due within the ten days
indicated, may result in the imposition of additional penalties, as set forth
in the fee schedule found in §
244.99. Furthermore, the determination and the amounts due shall be considered
a judgment and shall be treated as if they were a judgment rendered subsequent
to a hearing held pursuant to §
244.07.
   (d)   Conditions for Waiver. The Violations Clerk, or his or her designee,
is authorized to waive the parking ticket, or waive the fine, or reduce the
fine if the Clerk, or his or her designee, determines that the explanation
provided by the person to whom the parking ticket was issued meets any of the
following conditions:
      (1)   The vehicle was temporarily disabled;
      (2)   Emergency parking due to a medical emergency;
      (3)   The vehicle is a government vehicle parked while the operator is on
official government business and that business has caused the vehicle to be
parked in excess of the posted time limit or on an expired meter;
      (4)   The person was cited for a violation of §
452.04 of the Commercial Point Codified Ordinances and provides proof that at
the time of violation, the person or the person for whose transport the motor
vehicle was being operated had been issued a removable windshield placard that
was then valid, or special handicapped license plates that were then valid, or
a parking card that was then valid, but the person failed or neglected to
display the placard, plates or parking card as required (in such cases the fine
may be reduced in accordance with the fees for failure to display required
placard, plates or parking card set forth in the village Parking Fee Schedule
found in §
244.99; or
      (5)   Any other extraordinary circumstance that mitigates the fact that
the person committed a parking violation.
   (e)   Conditions for Waiver or Reduction for Disabled Parking Space
Violation. The Violations Clerk, or his or her designee, is authorized to waive
the parking ticket, or waive the fine, or reduce the fine relating to a parking
ticket issued for a violation of §
452.04(f) of the Commercial Point Codified Ordinances in the following
circumstances only:
      (1)   If the person is charged with a violation of §
452.04(f) of the Commercial Point Codified Ordinances and provides a sworn
affidavit from a licensed medical professional showing that the person suffered
an injury not more than 72 hours prior to the time the person was issued the
ticket and that, because of the injury, the person meets at least one of the
criteria contained in R.C. § 4503.44(A)(1), the fine may be waived.
      (2)   If the person is charged with a violation of §
452.04(f) of the Commercial Point Codified Ordinances and the person provides
written proof showing that at the time of the violation, the offender or the
person for whose transport the motor vehicle was being operated had been issued
a removable windshield placard that then was valid or special license plates
that then were valid, or a parking card that then was valid or special
handicapped license plates that then were valid, but the offender or the person
neglected to display the placard, license plates, parking card or special
handicapped license plates as required, the fine may be reduced in accordance
with the fees set forth in the Parking Fee Schedule found in §
244.99.
(Ord. 2023-01, passed 4-11-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Answer to charge of parking infraction, see R.C. § 4521.06
§ 244.07 DENIALS; HEARINGS.
   (a)   Right to Hearing. A person who is personally or constructively served
with a parking ticket charging the commission of a parking violation subject to
the jurisdiction of the Parking Violations Bureau, or who receives notice of
the violation pursuant to §
244.05, who answers by denying he or she committed the parking violation shall
be granted a hearing to determine if the person committed the parking
violation.
   (b)   Hearing. The Parking Violations Bureau shall set a date for the
hearing and notify the person, in writing, of the date, time, and place of the
hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing examiner of the Parking
Violations Bureau, and each hearing shall be conducted in such manner as the
hearing examiner considers appropriate. Rules regarding the admissibility of
evidence shall not be strictly applied in the hearing, but all testimony shall
be under oath.
   (c)   Burden of Proof; Evidence.
      (1)   At the hearing, the village has the burden of proving, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the person for whom the hearing is being
conducted committed the parking violation. The village shall submit the
original parking ticket that was personally or constructively served on the
person or a true copy of the ticket, and information from the Ohio Bureau of
Motor Vehicles that identifies the owner of the vehicle. The ticket and
information in proper form is prima facie evidence that the registered owner of
the vehicle was the person who committed the parking violation.
      (2)   The village may present additional evidence and testimony at the
hearing. The village does not have to be represented at the hearing by an
attorney.
      (3)   The person for whom the hearing is being conducted may present any
relevant evidence and testimony at the hearing. The person does not have to
attend the hearing if he or she submits documentary evidence to the hearing
examiner prior to the day of the hearing.
   (d)   Presence of Officer. If the person, in his or her answer, denied that
he or she committed the parking violation and requested the presence at the
hearing of the officer who issued the parking ticket, the officer shall be
required to attend the hearing unless the hearing examiner determines that the
officer's presence is not required. If the officer’s presence at the hearing
has been requested and the officer is unable to attend the hearing on the day
and at the time scheduled, the hearing examiner may grant a reasonable
continuance.
   (e)   Decisions.
      (1)   If the person for whom the hearing is being conducted appears at
the scheduled hearing or submits evidence in accordance with division (c)(3) of
this section, the hearing examiner shall consider all evidence and testimony
presented and shall determine whether the village has established, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the person committed the parking violation.
If the hearing examiner determines that the person committed the parking
violation, an order indicating the determination as a judgment against the
person and requiring the person to pay the appropriate fine and any additional
penalties and/or hearing costs shall be entered in the records of the Parking
Violations Bureau.
      (2)   If the person for whom the hearing is being conducted fails to
appear at the scheduled hearing and fails to submit evidence in accordance with
division (c)(3) of this section, the hearing examiner shall, if he or she
determines for any evidence and testimony presented at the hearing, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the person committed the parking violation,
enter a default judgment against the person and require the person to pay the
appropriate fine and any additional penalties and/or hearing costs. A default
judgment entered under this division shall be entered in the records of the
Parking Violations Bureau.
      (3)   If a person who is sent a notification of violation pursuant to §
244.05 of the Commercial Point Codified Ordinances does not timely answer, as
provided in §
244.05(c), the hearing examiner shall, if he or she determines from any
evidence and testimony presented by the village, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the person committed the parking violation, enter a default
judgment against the person and require the person to pay the appropriate fine
and any additional penalties and/or hearing costs. A default judgment entered
under this division shall be entered in the records of the Parking Violations
Bureau.
      (4)   If the hearing examiner does not determine, by a preponderance of
the evidence, that a person in any of the classes described in divisions (e)
(1), (e)(2) or (e)(3) of this section committed the parking violation, the
hearing examiner shall enter judgment against the village and shall enter the
judgment and dismissal in the records of the Parking Violations Bureau. No
additional penalties or hearing costs shall be entered against the person if
the hearing examiner finds the person did not commit the parking violation.
   (f)   Default Judgments. A default judgment entered under this section may
be vacated by the hearing examiner who entered it if all of the following
apply:
      (1)   The person against whom the default judgment was entered files a
motion with the Parking Violations Bureau within one year of the date of entry
of the judgment;
      (2)   The motion sets forth a sufficient defense to the parking violation
out of which the judgment arose; and
      (3)   The motion sets forth excusable neglect as to the person's failure
to attend the hearing or answer the notification of the violation.
   (g)   Hearing Costs. When authorized under division (e) of this section, the
hearing examiner may include in the judgment entered against any person the
costs associated with the requested hearing, as set forth in the fee schedule
found in §
244.99.
(Ord. 2023-01, passed 4-11-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Hearing upon denial of parking infraction charge, see R.C. § 4521.08
§ 244.08 JUDGMENTS.
   (a)   Payment of Judgments. Payment of any judgment or default judgment
entered against a person pursuant to this chapter shall be made to the Parking
Violations Bureau Clerk or his or her designee within ten days of entry. All
money paid in satisfaction of a judgment or default judgment shall be disbursed
by the Clerk to the Village's General Fund, and the Clerk shall enter the fact
of payment of the money and its disbursement in the records of the Bureau. If
payment is not made within the required ten days, the Parking Violations Bureau
may assess an additional penalty, as set forth in the fee schedule found in §
244.99. The judgment or default judgment may then be filed with the Clerk of
the Circleville Municipal Court, and when so filed, shall have the same force
and effect as a money judgment in a civil action rendered in the Court.
   (b)   Judgments Filed with the Circleville Municipal Court. Judgments and
default judgments filed with a court pursuant to this division shall be
maintained in accordance with R.C. § 4521.08(C). When a judgment or default
judgment is filed with the Court, execution may be levied, and such other
measures may be taken for its collection as are authorized for the collection
of an unpaid money judgment in a civil action rendered in the Court. The
Circleville Municipal Court may assess costs against the judgment debtor, in an
amount not exceeding $10 for each parking violation, to be paid upon
satisfaction of the judgment.
   (c)   Appeals. Any person against whom a judgment or default judgment is
entered pursuant to §
244.07, and the village if a judgment is entered against it pursuant to §
244.07, may appeal the judgment or default judgment to the Circleville
Municipal Court if the judgment or default judgment was entered by the Bureau,
or to the Pickaway County Juvenile Court if the judgment or default judgment
was entered by the Juvenile Court, by filing notices of appeal with the Parking
Violations Bureau or the Juvenile Court, and the Circleville Municipal Court or
the Clerk of the Juvenile Court within 15 days of the date of entry of the
judgment and by the payment of such reasonable costs as the Circleville
Municipal Court or the Pickaway County Juvenile Court requires. Upon the filing
of an appeal, the applicable court shall schedule a hearing date and notify the
parties of the date, time, and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be held
by the applicable court in accordance with the rules of the court. Service of a
notice of appeal under this division by a person does not stay enforcement and
collection of the judgment or default judgment from which appeal is taken by
the person unless the person who files the appeal posts bond with the Parking
Violations Bureau, or the Pickaway County Juvenile Court in the full amount of
the judgment, plus court costs, at or before the service of the notice of
appeal. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the judgment on appeal of
the Circleville Municipal Court or the Pickaway County Juvenile Court is final,
and no other appeal of the judgment of the Parking Violations Bureau, or the
Juvenile Court, whichever is applicable, and no appeal of the judgment of the
Circleville Municipal Court or the Juvenile Court, may be taken.
   (d)   Time for Filing Judgment. A judgment or default judgment entered
pursuant to §
244.07 may be filed with the Circleville Municipal Court under division (b) of
this section at any time within three years after the date of issuance of the
parking ticket charging the parking violation out of which the judgment arose.
(Ord. 2023-01, passed 4-11-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Hearing upon denial of parking infraction charge, see R.C. § 4521.08
§ 244.09 JOINT LIABILITY OF OWNER AND OPERATOR; RENTAL VEHICLES.
   (a)   When Owner Not Liable. An owner of a vehicle is not jointly liable
with the operator of the vehicle whose act or omission resulted in a parking
ticket for the parking violation or any fine, penalty, or processing fee
arising out of the parking violation under this chapter if either of the
following apply:
      (1)   The owner answers the charge of the parking violation under §§
244.04 or
244.05, the answer denies that the owner committed the violation and requests a
hearing concerning the violation, the owner additionally asserts and provides
reasonable evidence at that time to prove that the vehicle, at the time of the
commission of the parking violation, was being used by the operator without the
owner's express or implied consent, and the Parking Violations Bureau or the
Pickaway County Juvenile Court determines that the vehicle was being used
without the owner's express or implied consent at that time. If the Bureau or
the Juvenile Court does not so determine, it shall conduct the hearing
concerning the parking violation according to §
244.07.
      (2)   The owner answers the charge of the parking violation under §§
244.04 or
244.05, the answer denies that the owner committed the parking violation, the
owner additionally submits evidence at that time that proves that, at the time
of the alleged commission of the parking violation, the owner was engaged in
the business of renting or leasing vehicles under written rental or lease
agreements, and the owner additionally submits evidence that proves that, at
the time of the alleged commission of the parking violation, the vehicle in
question was in the care, custody, or control of a person other than the owner
pursuant to a written rental or lease agreement. If the owner does not so
prove, the Parking Violations Bureau or the Pickaway County Juvenile Court
shall conduct a hearing relating to the parking violation according to §
244.07.
      (3)   The owner, at a hearing concerning the parking violation conducted
in accordance with §
244.07, proves that the vehicle, at the time of the parking violation, was
being used by the operator without the owner's express or implied consent or
proves the facts described in division (a)(2) of this section.
   (b)   Rentals.
      (1)   An owner of a vehicle who is engaged in the business of renting or
leasing vehicles under written rental or lease agreements, but who does not
satisfy the additional requirements of division (a)(2) of this section is not
liable for any penalties or processing fees arising out of a parking violation
involving the vehicle if at the time of the commission of the parking
violation, the vehicle was in the care, custody, or control of a person other
than the owner pursuant to a written rental or lease agreement, and if the
owner answers the charge of the parking violation by denying that the owner
committed the parking violation or by paying the fine arising out of the
parking violation within 30 days after actual receipt of the parking ticket
charging the violation or, if the owner did not receive the parking ticket,
within 30 days after receipt of the notification of violation.
      (2)   Proof that the vehicle was in the care, custody, or control of a
person other than the owner pursuant to a written rental or lease agreement at
the time of the alleged parking violation shall be established by sending a
true copy of the rental or lease agreement or an affidavit to that effect to
the Parking Violations Bureau or the Pickaway County Juvenile Court, as
applicable, within 30 days after the date of receipt by the owner of the
parking ticket charging the violation or, if the owner did not receive the
parking ticket, within 30 days after receipt of the notification of violation.
The submission of a true copy of a written rental or lease agreement or
affidavit shall be prima facie evidence that a vehicle was in the care,
custody, or control of a person other than the owner. The affidavit authorized
by this section shall be accompanied by a postage-paid, self-addressed
envelope, shall be in a form the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall
prescribe, and shall include space for the Parking Violations Bureau or the
Juvenile Court to indicate receipt of the affidavit. Within 30 days of receipt
of the affidavit, the Bureau or Court, as applicable, shall return a receipted
copy of the affidavit to the rental or lease company. In addition, any
information required by division (a)(2) of this section may be provided on
magnetic tape, or another computer or electronic or digital readable media in a
format acceptable to the Parking Violations Bureau or Juvenile Court.
(Ord. 2023-01, passed 4-11-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Liability of owner, see R.C. § 4521.09
§ 244.10 EFFECT OF MULTIPLE JUDGMENTS.
   (a) Notice of Judgment to Registrar.
      (1)   If a judgment or default judgment is entered against a person
pursuant to §
244.08 for a violation of §
452.04 of the Commercial Point Codified Ordinances and the person has not paid
the judgment or default judgment within ten days of the date of entry of the
judgment, the Parking Violations Bureau may give notice of that fact to the
Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles. The notice, if given, shall be given not
earlier than 16 days nor later than three years after the date of entry of the
judgment, and shall be in a form and manner, and contain such information, as
the Registrar prescribes.
      (2)   If three or more judgments or default judgments have been entered
against a person pursuant to §
244.08 and the person has not paid the judgments or default judgments within
ten days of the date of entry of the third judgment, the Parking Violations
Bureau may give notice of that fact to the Registrar. The notice, if given,
shall be given not earlier than 16 days nor later than three years after the
date of entry of the third judgment, and shall be in a form and manner, and
contain such information, as the registrar prescribes.
   (b)   Issuance of Certificate of Registration Prohibited. Upon receipt of a
notice as provided in division (a) of this section, neither the registrar nor
any deputy registrar shall accept any application for the registration or
transfer of registration of any motor vehicle owned or leased by the person
named in the notice unless the person presents a release as provided in
division (c) of this section or unless the registrar is properly notified by
the Parking Violations Bureau that the judgment or default judgment described
in division (a)(1) of this section or the judgments or default judgments
described in division (a)(2) of this section have been paid, dismissed, or
reversed on appeal, or that the initial notice was given in error and is
therefore canceled.
   (c)   Release of Vehicle. When a notice as provided in division (a) of this
section is given to the registrar and the judgments or default judgments are
subsequently paid, dismissed, or reversed on appeal, or it is discovered that
the notice was given in error and is therefore canceled, the Parking Violations
Bureau shall immediately notify the registrar of such payment, dismissal,
reversal, or cancellation. The notification shall be in a form and manner, and
contain such information, as the registrar prescribes. If the initial notice
was not given in error, the Parking Violations Bureau shall charge the person a
processing fee, as set forth in the fee schedule found in §
244.99, for each judgment or default judgment to cover the costs of the Ohio
Bureau of Motor Vehicles in administering this section. Upon payment of the
fee, the Parking Violations Bureau shall give to the person a release to be
presented at the time of registering or transferring the registration of a
motor vehicle owned or leased by the person. All fees collected under this
division shall be transmitted monthly to the Registrar for deposit in the
Public Safety Highway Purposes Fund established by R.C. § 4501.06.
   (d)   Yearly Notice. The Parking Violations Bureau shall provide further
notice to the Registrar no later than 13 months after the date the Registrar
entered the original notice into the records of any judgments or default
judgments that are still outstanding.
   (e)   Determining Number of Judgments. In determining whether the judgments
or default judgments that have been entered against a person as provided in
division (a)(2) of this section total three or more, the Parking Violations
Bureau may apply to that total any violation the person committed during the
relevant time period by illegally standing or parking a vehicle in a disability
parking space, irrespective of the amount of the fine imposed for such
violation.
(Ord. 2023-01, passed 4-11-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Notice of unpaid or default judgments, see R.C. § 4521.10
§ 244.11 IMPOUNDMENT; IMMOBILIZATION.
   (a)   Impoundment or Immobilization.
      (1)   Any vehicle with three or more parking violations in which
judgments or default judgments have been entered against a person by the
Parking Violations Bureau pursuant to §
244.08, or have been filed with the Pickaway County Municipal Court pursuant to
§
244.08, is subject to impoundment or immobilization by the Commercial Point
Police Department. Impoundment or immobilization pursuant to this division is
permitted without regard to whether the vehicle, at the time of the impoundment
or immobilization, is legally parked.
      (2)   Any vehicle that is left unattended upon any street, bridge or
causeway, and which is illegally parked so as to constitute a danger to persons
or property or an obstruction to the normal movement of traffic, or so as to
unreasonably interfere with street cleaning or snow removal operations, as more
fully set forth in Chapter 452 of the Commercial Point Codified Ordinances, is
subject to impoundment or immobilization by the Commercial Point Police
Department.
      (3)   Any vehicle or "abandoned junk motor vehicle" as defined in R.C. §
4513.63 which is left on private property or on a public street or other
property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking, or
upon or within the right-of-way of any road or highway without notification to
the Commercial Point Police Department of the reasons for leaving such vehicle
in such place, is subject to impoundment or immobilization by the Commercial
Point Police Department. Prior to disposal of an "abandoned junk motor vehicle"
as defined in R.C. § 4513.63, it shall be photographed by a Commercial Point
police officer.
      (4)   Any vehicle which has been stolen or operated without the consent
of the owner, and which is located upon either public or private property, is
subject to impoundment or immobilization by the Commercial Point Police
Department.
      (5)   Any vehicle which displays illegal license plates or fails to
display the current lawfully required plates, and which is located upon any
public street or other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking, is subject to impoundment or immobilization by the
Commercial Point Police Department.
      (6)   Any vehicle which has been used in or connected with the commission
of a felony, and which is located upon either public or private property, is
subject to impoundment or immobilization by the Commercial Point Police
Department.
      (7)   Any vehicle which has been damaged or wrecked so as to be
inoperable or to violate equipment provisions of the Commercial Point Traffic
Code whereby its continued operation would constitute a condition hazardous to
life, limb or property, and which is located upon any public street or other
property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking, is
subject to impoundment or immobilization by the Commercial Point Police
Department.
      (8)   Any vehicle which is left unattended either on public or private
property due to the removal of an ill, injured or arrested operator, or due to
the abandonment thereof by the operator during or immediately after pursuit by
a law enforcement officer, is subject to impoundment or immobilization by the
Commercial Point Police Department.
      (9)   Any vehicle which has been operated by any person who has failed to
stop in case of an accident or collision, and which is located either on public
or private property, is subject to impoundment or immobilization by the
Commercial Point Police Department.
      (10)   Any vehicle which has been operated by any person who is driving
without a lawful license or while his or her license has been suspended or
revoked, and which is located upon a public street or other property open to
the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking, is subject to
impoundment or immobilization by the Commercial Point Police Department.
   (b)   Limitations on Towing and Storage Expenses and Charges.
      (1)   Any vehicle removed under authority of division (a)(3) hereof shall
be ordered into storage and/or disposed of as provided under R.C. §§ 4513.60 et
seq.
      (2)   Any other vehicle removed under authority of this section shall be
ordered into storage, and the Commercial Point Police Department shall
forthwith notify the registered vehicle owner of the fact of such removal and
impounding, reasons therefor and the place of storage.
   (c)   Release of Vehicle.
      (1)   Impoundment.
         A.   A vehicle impounded under division (a)(1) of this section shall
be released to the owner upon the owner or any lienholder of the vehicle
presenting a valid certificate of title to the vehicle to the Parking
Violations Bureau and upon the owner or lienholder either paying the payment of
the judgments or default fault judgments and paying the fines, penalties, fees,
and costs due on the parking violation(s) issued or outstanding or upon the
owner or any lienholder of the vehicle posting a bond equal to the amount of
any fine, fees, or costs associated with the parking violation; however, in no
case shall the required bond be in excess of $1,000.
         B.   A vehicle impounded under any paragraph of division (a) of this
section other than division (a)(1), which is impounded in connection with the
commission of a parking violation requiring the payment of a fine, shall be
released to the owner upon the owner or any lienholder of the vehicle
presenting a valid certificate of title to the vehicle to the Parking
Violations Bureau and upon the owner or lienholder either admitting the parking
violation and paying the fine for said violation or upon the owner or
lienholder posting a bond equal to the amount of any fine, fees, or costs
associated with the parking violation; however, in no case shall the required
bond be in excess of $1,000.
         C.   A vehicle impounded under any paragraph of division (a) of this
section other than division (a)(1), which is not impounded in connection with
the commission of a parking violation requiring the payment of a fine, shall be
released to the owner upon the owner or any lienholder of the vehicle
presenting a vehicle certificate of title to the vehicle to the Parking
Violations Bureau.
         D.   Upon payment of any monies due under division (b) of this section
or the posting of bond pursuant to this section, the owner or any lienholder of
the vehicle may claim the vehicle from the place of storage upon presentation
of proof of ownership, and the payment of all expenses, charges, or fines
incurred with the place of storage for towing and storing the vehicle.
      (2)   Immobilization. A vehicle immobilized under division (a)(1) of this
section shall be released to the owner upon the owner or any lienholder of the
vehicle presenting a valid certificate of title to the vehicle to the Parking
Violations Bureau and upon the owner or lienholder paying the payment of the
judgments or default judgments, and any costs associated with immobilizing the
vehicle, as set forth in the fee schedule found in §
244.99, and paying the fines, penalties, fees, and costs due on the parking
violation(s) issued or outstanding or upon the owner or any lienholder of the
vehicle posting a bond equal to the amount of any fine, fees, or costs
associated with the parking violation; however, in no case shall the required
bond be in excess of $1,000.
(Ord. 2023-01, passed 4-11-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Creation of noncriminal parking violations, see R.C. § 4521.02
§ 244.99 FINES, PENALTIES AND COSTS.
   On or after the effective date of this chapter, the fines, penalties, costs,
and fees for any parking violation administered pursuant to this chapter shall
be set as set forth hereinafter in the following Village Parking Fee Schedule.
The following fees and fines shall supersede any conflicting fine or fee
amounts elsewhere in the Codified Ordinances of the Village of Commercial
Point.
Commercial Point Code      Nature of Violation           Fee/Fine
Section
                           Parking vehicle with illegal
                           or expired registration;
                           parking in violation of any
                           posted sign; parking in
452.03; any other parking  violation of any section of
violation not specifically Chapter 452 not otherwise set $25
set forth below            forth below, or in violation
                           of any parking regulation
                           issued by the Mayor, Village
                           Administrator, or Police
                           Chief
452.03,                    Yellow curb; double parking;
452.10,                    loading zone; bus stops and   $25
452.11                     taxi stands; obstruct traffic
452.03                     Parking too close to fire     $50
                           hydrant
                           Parking in disability space
                           without valid placard,
452.04(f)                  parking card or license       $250
                           plate; parking in access
                           aisle
                           Failure to display required
452.04(f)                  placard, license plates,      $10
                           parking card or special
                           handicapped license plates
244.04(e)                  Failure to timely answer a    Additional $20
244.06(c)                  parking ticket
244.05                     Failure to timely answer a    Additional $25
                           Notice of Violation
                           Hearings (for failure to
                           appear at requested hearing
244.07                     or if judgment is entered     Up to $100
                           against the requester of the
                           hearing)
                           Failure to timely pay
244.08                     judgment or default judgment  $25
                            
244.10                     Judgment release              $5 processing fee per
                                                         judgment
244.11                     Booting fee                   $25
                          Booting removal fee           $25
                           Parking near stopped fire
432.28                     apparatus or emergency        $50
                           vehicle
438.09                     Lights on parked or stopped   $25
                           vehicles
444.08                     Parking of bicycles           $25
660.07                     Junk vehicles                 $50
444.12                     Skateboards                   $25
452.15                     Parking during snow ban       $50
                           Leaving junk and other
452.18                     vehicles on private or public $50
                           property with the permission
                           of the owner
                           Willfully leaving vehicles on
452.05                     private or public property    $25
                           without permission
452.06                     Parking in prohibited private $50
                           property and tow away zones
 
(Ord. 2023-01, passed 4-11-2023)
TITLE EIGHT - Judiciary
               
Chap. 260. Magistrate.
               
Chap. 262. Clerk of Mayor’s Court.
CHAPTER 260
Magistrate
260.01   Mayor authorized to enter into contract for employment.
260.02   Compensation for magistrate.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Release of Court Clerk’s liability for loss of funds - see Ohio R.C. 131.18
et seq.
   Municipal Court - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 1901
   Bond for Court Clerk required - see Ohio R.C. 1901.31(D)
   Notification to Director of liquor law convictions - see Ohio R.C. 4301.991
   Record of traffic violations - see Ohio R.C. 4513.37
§ 260.01 MAYOR AUTHORIZED TO ENTER INTO CONTRACT FOR EMPLOYMENT.
   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. § 1905.05, the Mayor of the Village of Commercial
Point is authorized to employ a magistrate to hear and determine prosecutions
and criminal causes in the Mayor’s Court for the Village of Commercial Point.
(Ord. 03-3, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 260.02 COMPENSATION FOR MAGISTRATE.
   The compensation to be received by the magistrate of the Mayor’s Court for
the Village of Commercial Point shall be the sum of one hundred dollars
($100.00) per Mayor’s Court session for an annual salary not to exceed two
thousand four hundred dollars ($2,400.00) per year which shall be payable
monthly upon receipt of appropriate itemized statements for these services.
(Ord. 03-3, passed 3-3-2003)
CHAPTER 262
Clerk of Mayor’s Court
262.01   Established.
262.02   Compensation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Release of Court Clerk’s liability for loss of funds - see Ohio R.C. 131.18
et seq.
   Municipal Court - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 1901
   Bond for Court Clerk required - see Ohio R.C. 1901.31(D)
   Notification to Director of liquor law convictions - see Ohio R.C. 4301.991
   Record of traffic violations - see Ohio R.C. 4513.37
§ 262.01 ESTABLISHED.
   The position of Clerk of Mayor’s Court of the Village of Commercial Point is
established.
(Ord. 04-11, passed 4-5-2004)
§ 262.02 COMPENSATION.
   The Clerk of Mayor’s Court of the Village be compensated at the rate of
fifty dollars ($50.00) per month and with the compensation to be paid
quarterly.
(Ord. 04-11, passed 4-5-2004)
TITLE TEN - Finances
               
Chap. 280. Federal General Revenue Sharing Trust Fund.
               
Chap. 281. Continuing Professional Training Fund.
CHAPTER 280:
Federal General Revenue Sharing Trust Fund
280.01   Established.
280.02   Monies received.
280.03   Permission to create Fund.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Contracts and purchasing - see ADM.
Ch. 208
§ 280.01 ESTABLISHED.
   There shall be and is hereby created and established a Federal General
Revenue Sharing Trust Fund.
(Ord. 12-72, passed - -1972)
§ 280.02 MONIES RECEIVED.
   The Fund shall be used to receive federal revenue sharing monies received by
the village under § 123A (1) of the State and Local Fiscal Assistance Act of
1972, being 31 U.S.C. §§ 1221 et seq.
(Ord. 12-72, passed - -1972)
§ 280.03 PERMISSION TO CREATE FUND.
   The Fund above mentioned is created by the Village Council after permission
to establish the fund was obtained from the Bureau of Inspection and
Supervision of Public Offices on November 6,1972, by virtue of authority set
forth in Ohio R.C. § 5705.12.
(Ord. 12-72, passed - -1972)
CHAPTER 281
Continuing Professional Training Fund
281.01   Creation of fund.
281.02   Use of fund.
§ 281.01 CREATION OF FUND.
   The Fiscal Officer of the village shall create an Education and Training
Fund within the 2017 permanent appropriations budget.
(Res. 09-2017, passed 2-20-2017)
§ 281.02 USE OF FUND.
   The Fiscal Officer shall use this fund to deposit and distribute all monies
received from Ohio Attorney General’s Office, Ohio Peace Officer Training
Commission in accordance with the guidelines for education and training.
(Res. 09-2017, passed 2-20-2017)
PART FOUR: TRAFFIC CODE
   TITLE TWO – Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
               
Chap. 402.   Definitions.
               
Chap. 404.   Enforcement; Impounding.
               
Chap. 406.   Traffic Control.
               
Chap. 408.   Penalties.
   TITLE FOUR – Public Ways and Traffic-Control Devices
               
Chap. 412.   Obstruction and Special Uses of Public Ways.
               
Chap. 414.   Traffic-Control Devices.
               
Chap. 416.   Pedestrians.
   TITLE SIX – Operation and Vehicles
               
Chap. 432.   Operation Generally.
               
Chap. 434.   O.V.I.; Reckless Operation; Speed.
               
Chap. 436.   Licensing; Accidents.
               
Chap. 438.   Safety and Equipment.
               
Chap. 440.   Commercial and Heavy Vehicles.
               
Chap. 442.   Drivers of Commercial Vehicles.
               
Chap. 444.   Bicycles, Skateboards and Motorcycles Generally.
               
Chap. 446.   Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles and All-Purpose Vehicles.
               
Chap. 448.   Watercraft.
   TITLE EIGHT – Parking
               
Chap. 452.   Parking Generally.
   
APPENDIX B - Traffic Schedules
TITLE TWO – Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
               
Chap. 402.   Definitions.
               
Chap. 404.   Enforcement; Impounding.
               
Chap. 406.   Traffic Control.
               
Chap. 408.   Penalties.
CHAPTER 402
Definitions
402.01   Meaning of words and phrases.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Blind person defined, see §
416.02
   Commercial car defined, see §
442.01
   Funeral procession defined, see §
432.24
   Snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle and all-purpose vehicle defined, see §
446.01
   Street racing defined, see §
434.10
§ 402.01 MEANING OF WORDS AND PHRASES.
   Except as otherwise provided, the definitions set forth in R.C. § 4501.01
shall apply to this traffic code and the penal laws of the municipality. Except
as otherwise provided, the following words and phrases, when used in this
traffic code, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this
chapter.
   AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR. Every self-propelled vehicle designed or used for
drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery, but having no provision for
carrying loads independently of such other vehicles, and used principally for
agricultural purposes.
   ALLEY. A street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of
lots or buildings in urban districts, and not intended for the purpose of
through vehicular traffic, and any street or highway that has been declared an
“alley” by the Legislative Authority of the municipality in which the street or
highway is located.
   ARTERIAL STREET. Any United States or state numbered route, controlled-
access highway, or other major radial or circumferential street or highway
designated by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions as part
of a major arterial system of streets or highways.
   BEACON. A highway traffic signal with one or more signal sections that
operate in a flashing mode.
   BICYCLE. Every device, other than a device that is designed solely for use
as a play vehicle by a child, that is propelled solely by human power upon
which a person may ride, and that has two or more wheels, any of which is more
than 14 inches in diameter.
   BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine passengers,
and used for the transportation of persons other than in a ridesharing
arrangement, and every motor vehicle, automobile for hire, or funeral car,
other than a taxicab or motor vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement,
designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory fronting upon a street or highway,
including the street or highway, between successive intersections within the
municipality, where 50% or more of the frontage between successive
intersections is occupied by buildings in use for business, or within or
outside the municipality where 50% or more of the frontage for a distance of
300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business, and the
character of the territory is indicated by official traffic-control devices.
   CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE. A motor vehicle that is designed to carry nine or
fewer passengers and is operated for hire pursuant to a prearranged contract
for the transportation of passengers on public roads and highways along a route
under the control of the person hiring the vehicle and not over a defined and
regular route. PREARRANGED CONTRACT means an agreement, made in advance of
boarding, to provide transportation from a specific location in an chauffeured
limousine. The term does not include any vehicle that is used exclusively in
the business of funeral directing. (R.C. § 4501.01(LL))
   CHILD-CARE CENTER. Has the same meaning as set forth in R.C. § 5104.01.
   COMMERCIAL TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle having motive power designed or used
for drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load
thereon, or designed or used for drawing other vehicles while carrying a
portion of the other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both.
   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every street or highway in respect to which
owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right or
access to or from the same except at certain points only and in a manner as may
be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over the street or
highway.
   CROSSWALK.
      (1)   That part of a roadway at intersections ordinarily included within
the real or projected prolongation of property lines and curb lines or, in the
absence of curbs, the edges of the traversable roadway;
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere,
distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface;
      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this definition, there
shall not be a crosswalk where the Legislative Authority has placed signs
indicating no crossing.
   DRIVER. Any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
   ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a “class 1 electric bicycle”, a “class 2 electric
bicycle”, or a “class 3 electric bicycle” as defined below.
      (1)   CLASS 1 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that
provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles per hour.
      (2)   CLASS 2 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that may
provide assistance regardless of whether the rider is pedaling and is not
capable of providing assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles
per hour.
      (3)   CLASS 3 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that
provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 28 miles per hour.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Emergency vehicles of municipal, township or county
departments or public utility corporations, when identified as such as required
by law, the Director of Public Safety, or local authorities, and motor vehicles
when commandeered by a police officer.
   EXPLOSIVES. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is intended for
the purpose of producing an explosion that contains any oxidizing and
combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities, or
packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion, or
by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause a sudden
generation of highly heated gases, such that the resultant gaseous pressures
are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects, or of
destroying life or limb. Manufactured articles shall not be held to be
explosives when the individual units contain explosives in limited quantities
of such nature or in such packing that it is impossible to procure a
simultaneous or a destructive explosion of the units, to the injury of life,
limb, or property by fire, friction, concussion, percussion, or by a detonator,
such as fixed ammunition for small arms, firecrackers, or safety fuse matches.
   EXPRESSWAY. A divided arterial highway for through traffic with full or
partial control of access with an excess of 50% of all crossroads separated in
grade.
   FLAMMABLE LIQUID. Any liquid which has a flash point of 70°F or less, as
determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.
   FREEWAY. A divided multi-lane highway for through traffic with crossroads
separated in grade and with full control of access.
   FUNERAL ESCORT VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, including a funeral hearse, while
used to facilitate the movement of a funeral procession.
   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load thereon.
   HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way open to
the use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of vehicular travel.
   HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle used in snow and ice removal or road
surface maintenance, including a snow plow, traffic line striper, road sweeper,
mowing machine, asphalt distributing vehicle, or other such vehicle designed
for use in specific highway maintenance activities.
   HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SIGNAL. A power-operated traffic control device by which
traffic is warned or directed to take some specific action. The term does not
include a power-operated sign, steadily illuminated pavement marker, warning
light, or steady burning electric lamp.
   HYBRID BEACON. A type of beacon that is intentionally placed in a dark mode
between periods of operation where no indications are displayed and, when in
operation, displays both steady and flashing traffic control signal
indications.
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of
two highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or
the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways that join at
any other angle might come into conflict. The junction of an alley or driveway
with a roadway or highway does not constitute an intersection unless the
roadway or highway at the junction is controlled by a traffic control device.
      (2)   If a highway includes two roadways that are 30 feet or more apart,
then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway constitutes a separate intersection. If both intersecting highways
include two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of any two
roadways of such highways constitutes a separate intersection.
      (3)   At a location controlled by a traffic control signal, regardless of
the distance between the separate intersections as described in division (2) of
this definition:
         (a)   If a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk has not been designated
on the roadway within the median between the separate intersections, the two
intersections and the roadway and median constitute one intersection.
         (b)   Where a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk line is designated
on the roadway on the intersection approach, the area within the crosswalk and
any area beyond the designated stop line or yield line constitute part of the
intersection.
         (c)   Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on the departure
from the intersection, the intersection includes the area that extends to the
far side of the crosswalk.
   LANED HIGHWAY. A highway the roadway of which is divided into two or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
   LOCAL AUTHORITIES. Every county, municipal, and other local board or body
having authority to adopt police regulations under the Constitution and laws of
this state.
   LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICE. Means a device weighing less than 100 pounds
that has handlebars, is propelled by an electric motor or human power, and has
an attainable speed on a paved level surface of not more than 20 miles per hour
when propelled by the electric motor.
   MEDIAN. The area between two roadways of a divided highway, measured from
edge of traveled way to edge of traveled way, but excluding turn lanes. The
width of a median may be different between intersections, between interchanges,
and at opposite approaches of the same intersection.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than muscular
power or power collected from overhead electric trolley wires, except motorized
bicycles, electric bicycles, road rollers, traction engines, power shovels,
power cranes and other equipment used in construction work, and not designed
for or employed in general highway transportation, hole-digging machinery,
well- drilling machinery, ditch-digging machinery, farm machinery, and trailers
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat or
saddle for the use of the operator and designed to travel on not more than
three wheels in contact with the ground, including but not limited to motor
vehicles known as “motor-driven cycle”, “motor scooter”, “autocycle”, “cab-
enclosed motorcycle”, or “motorcycle” without regard to weight or brake
horsepower.
   MOTORIZED BICYCLE or MOPED. Any vehicle having either two tandem wheels or
one wheel in the front and two wheels in the rear, that may be pedaled, and
that is equipped with a helper motor of not more than 50 cubic centimeters
piston displacement that produces not more than one brake horsepower and is
capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of not greater than 20 miles per
hour on a level surface. The terms do not include an electric bicycle.
   MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR. Any self-propelled vehicle designed for, and used by,
a person with a disability and that is incapable of a speed in excess of eight
miles per hour.
   MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR. A type of agricultural tractor that has
two or more wheels or tires on each side of one axle at the rear of the
tractor, is designed or used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery,
has no provision for carrying loads independently of the drawn vehicles or
machinery, and is used principally for agricultural purposes.
   NATURAL RESOURCES OFFICER. An officer appointed pursuant to R.C. § 1501.24.
   OPERATE. To cause or have caused movement of a vehicle.
   OPERATOR. Any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   PARKED or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle upon a street, road, alley,
highway or public ground, whether accompanied or unaccompanied by a driver, but
does not include the temporary standing of a vehicle for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or loading merchandise or passengers.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any natural person afoot. The term includes a personal delivery
device as defined in R.C. § 4511.513 unless the context clearly suggests
otherwise.
   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
   POLE TRAILER. Every trailer or semitrailer attached to the towing vehicle by
means of a reach, pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing
vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular shaped loads
such as poles, pipes, or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining
themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or
to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
   PREDICATE MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAFFIC OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12, 4511.132,
4511.16, 4511.20, 4511.201, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32,
4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40,
4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451,
4511.452, 4511.46, 4511.47, 4511.48, 4511.481, 4511.49, 4511.50, 4511.511,
4511.53, 4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.56, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60,
4511.61, 4511.64, 4511.66, 4511.661, 4511.68, 4511.70, 4511.701, 4511.71,
4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, 4511.73, 4511.763, 4511.771, 4511.78, or
4511.84;
      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.17(A)(2), 4511.51(A) through (D), or
4511.74(A);
      (3)   A violation of any provision of R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.76 for
which no penalty otherwise is provided in the section that contains the
provision violated;
      (4)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.214;
      (5)   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any section or provision set forth or described in division (1),
(2), (3), or (4) of this definition.
   PRIVATE ROAD OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL. A private toll road or road, including
any adjacent sidewalks that generally run parallel to the road, within a
shopping center, airport, sports arena,  or other similar business or
recreation facility that is privately owned but where the public is allowed to
travel without access restrictions. The term includes a gated toll road but
does not include a road within a private gated property where access is
restricted at all times, a parking area, a driving aisle within a parking area,
or a private grade crossing.
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership used for
vehicular travel by the owner, and those having express or implied permission
from the owner, but not by other persons.
   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Any of the following:
      (1)   Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under contract to
a municipality, township, or county, and private ambulances and nontransport
vehicles bearing license plates issued under R.C. § 4503.49;
      (2)   Motor vehicles used by public law enforcement officers or other
persons sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state;
      (3)   Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required by the
Director of Public Safety, when used in response to fire emergency calls or to
provide emergency medical service to ill or injured persons, and when operated
by a duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer rescue service or a
volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to the rules or
directives of that service. The State Fire Marshal shall be designated by the
Director of Public Safety as the certifying agency for all public safety
vehicles described herein;
      (4)   Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor vehicles when
used by volunteer firefighters responding to emergency calls in the fire
department service when identified as required by the Director of Public
Safety;
      (5)   Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency medical service
to an ill or injured person, when certified as a public safety vehicle, shall
be considered such a vehicle when transporting an ill or injured person to a
hospital, regardless of whether such vehicle has already passed a hospital;
      (6)   Vehicles used by the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit for the
enforcement of orders and rules of the Public Utilities Commission as specified
in R.C. § 5503.34.
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property operating upon rails placed
principally on a private right-of-way.
   RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal, or device erected by authority of
a public body or official or by a railroad, and intended to give notice of the
presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine or an electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated by a railroad.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory, not comprising a business district,
fronting on a street or highway, including the street or highway, where, for a
distance of 300 feet or more, the frontage is improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.
   RIDESHARING ARRANGEMENT. Includes the transportation of persons in a motor
vehicle where the transportation is incidental to another purpose of a
volunteer driver, and includes arrangements known as carpools, vanpools, and
buspools.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Either of the following, as the context requires:
      (1)   The right of a vehicle or pedestrian to proceed uninterruptedly in
a lawful manner in the direction in which it, he or she is moving, in
preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching from a different
direction into its, his or her path;
      (2)   A general term denoting land, property, or the interest therein,
usually in the configuration of a strip, acquired for or devoted to
transportation purposes. When used in this context, “right-of-way” includes the
roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch, and slopes extending to the right-of-way
limits under the control of the state or local authority.
   ROAD SERVICE VEHICLE. Means wreckers, utility repair vehicles, and state,
county, and municipal service vehicles equipped with visual signals by means of
flashing, rotating, or oscillating lights.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes two or
more separate roadways, the term means any roadway separately, but not all the
roadways collectively.
   RURAL MAIL DELIVERY VEHICLE. Every vehicle used to deliver United States
mail on a rural mail delivery route.
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians, and protected or marked or indicated by adequate
signs so as to be plainly visible at all times.
   SCHOOL BUS. Every bus designed for carrying more than nine passengers which
is owned by a public, private or governmental agency or institution of
learning, and operated for the transportation of children to or from a school
session or a school function, or owned by a private person and operated for
compensation for the transportation of children to or from a school session or
a school function; provided, “school bus” does not include a bus operated by a
municipally owned transportation system, a mass transit company operating
exclusively within the territorial limits of a municipality, or within  those
limits and the territorial limits of municipalities immediately contiguous to
the municipality, nor a common passenger carrier certified by the Public
Utilities Commission unless the bus is devoted exclusively to the
transportation of children to and from a school session or a school function,
and “school bus” does not include a van or bus used by a licensed child care
center or type A family child care home to transport children from the child
care center or type A family child care home to a school if the van or bus does
not have more than 15 children in the van or bus at any time.
   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or property
with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part of its own
weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by another
vehicle.
   SHARED-USE PATH. A bikeway outside the traveled way and physically separated
from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and either within
the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment. A shared-use path
also may be used by pedestrians, including skaters, joggers, users of manual
and motorized wheelchairs, and other authorized motorized and non- motorized
users. A shared-use path does not include any trail that is intended to be used
primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or other similar uses,
or any other single track or natural surface trail that has historically been
reserved for non-motorized use.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
line of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   STANDING. When prohibited, means any halting of a vehicle, even momentarily,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device.
   STATE HIGHWAY. A highway under the jurisdiction of the Department of
Transportation, outside the limits of municipalities, provided that the
authority conferred upon the Director of Transportation in R.C. § 5511.01 to
erect state highway route markers and signs directing traffic shall not be
modified by R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.79 and 4511.99.
   STATE ROUTE. Every highway which is designated with an official state route
number and so marked.
   STOP. When required, means a complete cessation of movement.
   STOP INTERSECTION. Any intersection at one or more entrances of which stop
signs are erected.
   STOPPING. When prohibited, means any halting of a vehicle, even momentarily,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device.
   STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way open to the
use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of vehicular travel.
   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every street or highway as provided in R.C. § 4511.65, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   THRUWAY. A through highway whose entire roadway is reserved for through
traffic and on which roadway parking is prohibited.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars, and
other devices, either singly or together, while using for purposes of travel
any highway or private road open to public travel.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE. A flagger, sign, signal, marking, or other device
used to regulate, warn, or guide traffic, placed on, over, or adjacent to a
street, highway, private road open to public travel, pedestrian facility, or
shared-use path by authority of a public agency or official having
jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road open to public travel, by
authority of the private owner or private official having jurisdiction.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. Any highway traffic signal by which traffic is
alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed.
   TRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or property
wholly on its own structure, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, including
any vehicle when formed by or operated as a combination of a semitrailer and a
vehicle of the dolly type, such as that commonly known as a trailer dolly, a
vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production
materials between a local place of storage or supply and the farm when drawn or
towed on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour and a
vehicle designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of
storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a
street or highway for a distance of more than ten miles or at a speed of more
than 25 miles per hour.
   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers, designed and
used to carry property.
   TYPE A FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME. Has the same meaning as set forth in R.C. §
5104.01.
   URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street or
highway which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or
dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of
one-quarter of a mile or more, and the character of the territory is indicated
by official traffic-control devices.
   VEHICLE. Every device, including a motorized bicycle and an electric
bicycle, in, upon, or by which any person or property may be transported or
drawn upon a highway, except that the term does not include any motorized
wheelchair, any electric personal assistive mobility device, any low-speed
micromobility device, any personal delivery device as defined in R.C. §
4511.513, any device that is  moved by power collected from overhead electric
trolley wires or that is used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, or
any device, other than a bicycle, that is moved by human power.
   WASTE COLLECTION VEHICLE. A vehicle used in the collection of garbage,
refuse, trash, or recyclable materials.
   WILDLIFE OFFICER. An officer designated pursuant to R.C. § 1531.13.
(R.C. § 4511.01)
CHAPTER 404
Enforcement; Impounding
404.01   Police may remove ignition key.
404.02   Resisting an enforcing official.
404.03   Road workers, motor vehicles and equipment excepted.
404.04   Emergency, public safety and coroners’ vehicles excepted.
404.05   Application to persons riding, driving animals upon roadway.
404.06   Application to drivers of government vehicles.
404.07   Impounding of vehicles; redemption.
404.08   Traffic direction in emergencies; obedience to school guards.
404.09   Furnishing false information incident to traffic citation.
404.10   Impounding vehicles on private, residential or agricultural property.
404.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Arrest without warrant for misdemeanor, see R.C. § 2935.03
   Authority of arresting officer when radar, electrical or mechanical timing
device used, see R.C. § 4511.091
   Burden of proof, see R.C. § 2901.05
   Discharge for delay in trial, see R.C. § 2945.73
   Disposition of unclaimed vehicles, see R.C. §§ 737.32, 4513.61 et seq.
   Distinctive uniform required for traffic officers, see R.C. § 4549.15
   Extension of time for hearing or trial, see R.C. § 2945.72
   Marking motor vehicles used by traffic officers, see R.C. § 4549.13
   Power of trial court of record to suspend license for certain violations,
see R.C. §§ 4510.05, 4510.15
   Right of trial by jury, see R.C. § 2945.17
   State point system suspension, see R.C. § 4507.021
   Time within which hearing or trial must be held, see R.C. § 2945.71
   Uniform application of Ohio Traffic Law, see R.C. § 4511.06
   Use of private property for vehicular travel, see R.C. § 4511.08
   Dereliction of duty, see §
654.12
   Disposition of property held by Police Department, see §
654.16
   Exceptions for emergency or public safety vehicles, see §§
432.19,
434.08
   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer, see §
654.05
   Limitation on criminal prosecutions, see §
606.06
   Parking violations waiver, see §
452.14
   Obstructing justice, see §
654.07
   Obstructing official business, see §
654.06
   Resisting arrest, see §
654.08
   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation, see §
654.11
   Suspension of riding privileges; impounding of bicycles, see §
444.10
§ 404.01 POLICE MAY REMOVE IGNITION KEY.
   A law enforcement officer may remove the ignition key left in the ignition
switch of an unlocked and unattended motor vehicle parked on a street or
highway. The officer removing the key shall place notification upon the vehicle
detailing his or her name and badge number, the place where the key may be
reclaimed, and the procedure for reclaiming the key. The key shall be returned
to the owner of the motor vehicle upon presentation of proof of ownership.
(R.C. § 4549.05)
§ 404.02 RESISTING AN ENFORCING OFFICIAL.
   (a)   No person shall resist, hinder, obstruct or abuse any sheriff,
constable or other official while that official is attempting to arrest
offenders under any provision of this traffic code. No person shall interfere
with any person charged under any provision of this traffic code with the
enforcement of the law relative to public highways.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.36)
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance,
obstruction, resistance or interference alleged consisted of constitutionally
protected speech only.
§ 404.03 ROAD WORKERS, MOTOR VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT EXCEPTED.
   (a)   The provisions of this traffic code, except for §
434.01, do not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment
while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway within an area
designated by traffic-control devices, but apply to those persons and vehicles
when traveling to or from that work.
   (b)   The driver of a highway maintenance vehicle owned by this state or any
political subdivision of this state, while the driver is engaged in the
performance of official duties upon a street or highway, provided the highway
maintenance vehicle is equipped with flashing lights and any other markings as
are required by law and the lights are in operation when the driver and vehicle
are so engaged, shall be exempt from criminal prosecution for violations of
R.C. §§ 4511.22, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33,
4511.35, 4511.66, 4513.02 and 5577.01 to 5577.09, and any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (c)   (1)   This section does not exempt a driver of a highway maintenance
vehicle from civil liability arising from a violation of R.C. § 4511.22,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.66
or 4513.02 or 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
      (2)   This section does not exempt a driver of a vehicle who is not a
state employee and who is engaged in the transport of highway maintenance
equipment from criminal liability for a violation of R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   As used in this section, “engaged in the performance of official
duties” includes driving a highway maintenance vehicle to and from the
manufacturer or vehicle maintenance provider and transporting a highway
maintenance vehicle, equipment, or materials to and from a work location.
(R.C. § 4511.04)
§ 404.04 EMERGENCY, PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORONERS’ VEHICLES EXCEPTED.
   (a)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.12, 4511.13, 4511.131, 4511.132,
4511.14, 4511.202, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26,
4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34,
4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42,
4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59,
4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.62, 4511.66, 4511.68, 4511.681 and 4511.69, and any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle if the emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle and if the driver of the vehicles is giving an audible signal by siren,
exhaust whistle or bell. This section does not relieve the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.041)
   (b)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29,
4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38 and
4511.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to
a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle
in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance. This division does not relieve a coroner, deputy coroner or
coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with
due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.042)
§ 404.05 APPLICATION TO PERSONS RIDING, DRIVING ANIMALS UPON ROADWAY.
   Every person riding, driving or leading an animal upon a roadway is subject
to the provisions of this traffic code, applicable to the driver of a vehicle,
except those provisions of this traffic code which by their nature are
inapplicable.
(R.C. § 4511.05)
§ 404.06 APPLICATION TO DRIVERS OF GOVERNMENT VEHICLES.
   The provisions of this traffic code applicable to the drivers of vehicles
shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United
States, any state or any political subdivision thereof, including this
municipality, except as may be otherwise provided by law and subject to such
specific exceptions as are set forth with reference to authorized emergency and
public safety vehicles.
§ 404.07 IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES; REDEMPTION.
   (a)   Police officers are authorized to provide for the removal of a vehicle
under the following circumstances.
      (1)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street, bridge or
causeway and is so illegally parked so as to constitute a hazard or obstruction
to the normal movement of traffic, or so as to unreasonably interfere with
street cleaning or snow removal operations.
      (2)   A.   When any vehicle or abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in
§
452.16 is left on private property for more than 72 consecutive hours without
the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the
property, or on a public street or other property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of
any road or highway, for 48 consecutive hours or longer, without notification
to the Police Chief or his or her designate of the reasons for leaving such
vehicle in such place.
         B.   Prior to the removal of abandoned junk motor vehicles, it shall
be photographed by a law enforcement officer. The officer shall record the make
of the motor vehicle, the serial number, when available, and shall also detail
the damage or missing equipment to substantiate the value of the vehicle.
         C.   The records and photographs relating to the abandoned motor
vehicle shall be retained by the law enforcement agency ordering the
disposition of any motor vehicle for the periods set forth in R.C. § 4513.63.
      (3)   When any vehicle has been stolen or operated without the consent of
the owner and is located upon either public or private property.
      (4)   When any vehicle displays illegal license plates or fails to
display the current lawfully required plates and is located upon any public
street or other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking.
      (5)   When any vehicle has been used in or connected with the commission
of a felony and is located upon either public or private property.
      (6)   When any vehicle has been damaged or wrecked so as to be inoperable
or violates equipment provisions of this Traffic Code whereby its continued
operation would constitute a condition hazardous to life, limb or property, and
is located upon any public street or other property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking.
      (7)   When any vehicle is left unattended either on public or private
property due to the removal of an ill, injured or arrested operator, or due to
the abandonment thereof by the operator during or immediately after pursuit by
a law enforcement officer.
      (8)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who has failed to
stop in case of an accident or collision and is located either on public or
private property.
      (9)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who is driving
without a lawful license or while his or her license has been suspended or
revoked and is located upon a public street or other property open to the
public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking.
      (10)   When any vehicle is found for which two or more citation tags for
violations of this Traffic Code have been issued and the owner or operator
thereof has failed to respond to such citation tags as lawfully required, and
is located upon a public street or other property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking.
      (11)   When any vehicle is left unattended and parked upon the streets of
the village for a period of more than 24 hours adjacent to a parcel of land not
owned by or in control of the person parking the vehicle and the person with
the right to the possession of the adjacent property who is adversely affected
by the motor vehicle which is parked for a continuous period of more than 24
hours.
   (b)   (1)   Any vehicle removed under authority of division (a)(2) hereof
shall be ordered into storage and/or disposed of as provided under R.C. §§
4513.60 et seq.
      (2)   Any other vehicle removed under authority of this section shall be
ordered into storage and the municipal police shall forthwith notify the
registered vehicle owner of the fact of such removal and impounding, reasons
therefor and the place of storage.
      (3)   Any person desiring to redeem an impounded vehicle shall appear at
the police offices to furnish satisfactory evidence of identity and ownership
or right to possession.
      (4)   Prior to issuance of a release form, the claimant, owner or
operator shall either pay the amount due for any fines for violations on
account of which such vehicle was impounded or, as the court may require, post
a bond in an amount set by the court, to appear to answer to such violations.
      (5)   The pound operator shall release such vehicle upon the receipt of
the release form and payment of all towage and storage charges.
   (c)   No owner or operator shall remove an impounded vehicle from the place
of storage without complying with the above procedure. Possession of a vehicle
which has been impounded and unlawfully taken from the place of storage, by the
owner or operator, shall constitute prima-facie evidence that it was so removed
by the owner or operator.
(Ord. 97.04, passed 3-3-1997)
§ 404.08 TRAFFIC DIRECTION IN EMERGENCIES; OBEDIENCE TO SCHOOL GUARDS.
   (a)   Police officers shall direct or regulate traffic in accordance with
the provisions of this traffic code, provided that, in the event of fire or
other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, they are
authorized to direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the
provisions of this traffic code. Firefighters, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity. The direction of traffic may be by word or audible signal, by gesture
or visible signal or by any combination thereof. No person shall fail to comply
with any lawful order or direction of any police officer or firefighter issued
pursuant to this section.
   (b)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any school crossing guard invested with authority to direct, control or
regulate traffic in the vicinity of the school to which the guard may be
assigned.
§ 404.09 FURNISHING FALSE INFORMATION INCIDENT TO TRAFFIC CITATION.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly present, display or orally communicate a
false name, Social Security number or date of birth to a law enforcement
officer who is in the process of issuing to the person a traffic ticket or
complaint.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4513.361)
§ 404.10 IMPOUNDING VEHICLES ON PRIVATE, RESIDENTIAL OR AGRICULTURAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   (1)   The Chief of Police or his or her designate upon complaint of
any person adversely affected may order into storage any motor vehicle, other
than an abandoned motor vehicle as defined in § 452.16, that it has been left
on private residential or private agricultural property for at least four hours
without the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the
property.
      (2)   A.   The Chief of Police, or his or her designate, upon complaint
of the owner of a repair garage or place of storage, may order into storage any
motor vehicle, other than an abandoned motor vehicle, that has been left at the
garage or place of storage for a longer period than that agreed upon. The place
of storage shall be designated by the Chief of Police or his or her designate.
         B.   When ordering a motor vehicle into storage pursuant to this
division, the Chief of Police or his or her designate shall, whenever possible,
arrange for the removal of such motor vehicle by a private tow truck operator
or towing company. Subject to §
452.17(a), the owner of a motor vehicle that has been removed pursuant to this
division may recover the vehicle only in accordance with §
452.17(c).
   (b)   This section does not apply to any private residential or private
agricultural property that is established as a private tow-away zone in
accordance with §
452.06.
   (c)   As used in the section PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY means private
property on which is located one or more structures that are used as a home,
residence or sleeping place by one or more persons, if no more than three
separate households are maintained in the structure or structures. PRIVATE
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY does not include any private property on which is located
one or more structures that are used as a home, residence or sleeping place by
two or more persons, if more than three separate households are maintained in
the structure or structures.
   (d)   Any person who registers a complaint that is the basis of a Police
Chief’s order for the removal and storage of a motor vehicle under this section
shall provide the identity of the law enforcement agency with which the
complaint was registered to any person who identifies himself or herself as the
owner or operator of the motor vehicle and requests information pertaining to
its location.
(Ord. 97.04, passed 3-3-1997)
§ 404.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 406
Traffic Control
406.01   Authority and considerations for placement of devices.
406.02   Conformity with State Manual.
406.03   Powers of designated person.
406.04   Posting of signs and signals required.
406.05   Designated person’s powers not limited.
406.06   Records of designated person.
406.07   Reservation of power to Council.
406.08   Violations subject to general code penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Alteration of prima facie speed limits, see R.C. §§ 4511.21, 4511.22,
4511.23
   Designation of through streets and erection of stop or yield signs, see R.C.
§ 4511.65
   Placing and maintaining local traffic-control devices, see R.C. §§ 4511.10,
4511.11
   Power to designate highway as a freeway, expressway or thruway, see R.C. §
4511.011
   Power to erect stop signs at grade crossings, see R.C. § 4511.61
   Uniform system of traffic-control devices, see R.C. §§ 4511.09, 4511.11
   Traffic-control devices defined, see §
402.01
§ 406.01 AUTHORITY AND CONSIDERATIONS FOR PLACEMENT OF DEVICES.
   Council may designate a person to place and maintain traffic-control devices
upon any street or highway under municipal jurisdiction as are necessary to
effectuate the provisions of this traffic code, or to regulate, warn or guide
traffic, and such other traffic-control devices as the person shall deem
necessary for the proper control of traffic. The designated person shall
determine the location, timing and coordination of the traffic-control devices
upon the basis of an applicable engineering or traffic investigation and shall
consider the following:
   (a)   The maximum safety and protection of vehicular and pedestrian traffic
from physical injury or property damage;
   (b)   The existing and potential traffic movement, volume and conditions;
   (c)   The location and frequency of accidents, including studies of remedial
measures;
   (d)   The recommendations of the Chief of Police and Fire Chief;
   (e)   The acceleration of transportation of persons and property by vehicles
so as to expedite travel and promote public safety;
   (f)   The convenience and welfare of the general public in parking,
standing, loading and unloading, and the use of the streets as affecting
business concerns and places of assembly; and
   (g)   Economy in the expenditure of money.
§ 406.02 CONFORMITY WITH STATE MANUAL.
   All traffic-control devices placed pursuant to the provisions of this
traffic code shall conform to the Ohio Manual and Specifications for a Uniform
System of Traffic-Control Devices, as adopted under R.C. § 4511.09.
§ 406.03 POWERS OF DESIGNATED PERSON.
   The person designated by Council pursuant to §
406.01 is hereby authorized to:
   (a)   Designate any street or highway as a through street or highway and
require that all vehicles stop or yield the right-of-way as may be required
before entering the same;
   (b)   Designate any intersection as a stop intersection and require all
vehicles to stop at one or more entrances to the intersection;
   (c)   Designate any intersection as a yield intersection and require all
vehicles to yield the right-of-way as required;
   (d)   Designate any street as a one-way street and require that all vehicles
thereon be moved in one specific direction;
   (e)   Designate and mark lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular
direction regardless of the centerline of the roadway;
   (f)   Erect signs directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or
allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the same direction;
   (g)   Designate those portions of any street, where overtaking and passing
other traffic or driving to the left of the center or centerline of the roadway
would be especially hazardous, by appropriate signs or markings on the street
to indicate the beginning and end of such zones. These zones may be marked by
an auxiliary yellow line placed parallel and to the right of the normal
centerline or offset marked lane line;
   (h)   Place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections
and require that a specific course of direction be traveled by vehicles
proceeding in lanes by either permitting, prohibiting or requiring turns at the
intersections;
   (i)   Install traffic-control devices, signals and signs at any location to
regulate traffic;
   (j)   Establish safety zones, crosswalks, zones of quiet and play streets;
   (k)   Close any street or portion thereof to vehicular traffic which is in
the process of construction, reconstruction or repair;
   (l)   Determine the location of any necessary bus stops and taxicab stands;
   (m)   Determine the location and limiting hours of truck loading zones;
   (n)   Designate dangerous railroad crossings and erect stop signs thereat;
   (o)   Erect “No U Turn” signs at any location to prohibit a vehicle from
being turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction;
   (p)   Regulate or prohibit the stopping, standing and parking of vehicles on
streets, alleys or public property by erecting signs plainly indicating the
prohibitions, restrictions or limitations;
   (q)   Designate individual parking spaces by markings, which may either be
parallel or at a prescribed angle to the curb or edge of the roadway.
§ 406.04 POSTING OF SIGNS AND SIGNALS REQUIRED.
   No provision of this chapter shall be effective until signs, signals,
markings or other devices giving notice of the local traffic regulations are
posted upon or at the entrance to the street or part thereof affected, as may
be most appropriate, so that in a proper position they are sufficiently legible
to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
§ 406.05 DESIGNATED PERSON’S POWERS NOT LIMITED.
   The powers of the person designated by Council pursuant to §
406.01 shall not be limited by the specific enumeration of subjects contained
in this chapter.
§ 406.06 RECORDS OF DESIGNATED PERSON.
   The person designated by Council pursuant to §
406.01 shall keep a record of all rules, regulations and proceedings
promulgated in connection with this chapter.
§ 406.07 RESERVATION OF POWER TO COUNCIL.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, Council may override any
decision of the person designated by Council pursuant to §
406.01 and may assume any of the powers delegated to the person, by a
resolution adopted by a vote of a majority of the members duly elected thereto.
Upon the adoption of any such resolution, the same may be changed only by an
amending or repealing resolution adopted by Council.
§ 406.08 VIOLATIONS SUBJECT TO GENERAL CODE PENALTY.
   Any person violating the rules and regulations promulgated in connection
with this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be subject to the penalties provided for in §§
408.01 and
408.02.
CHAPTER 408
Penalties
408.01   Penalties for misdemeanor.
408.02   General code penalty.
408.03   Suspension of driver’s license.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Criteria for probation; conditions for probation, see R.C. § 2951.02
   Definition of “imprisoned”, see R.C. § 1.05
   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served, see R.C. § 2947.14
   Definition of “dangerous offender”, see §
698.01
   Definition of “repeat offender”, see §
698.01
   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor, see §
698.03
   Multiple sentences, see §
698.05
   Organizational penalties, see §
698.04
§ 408.01 PENALTIES FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor shall be sentenced in accordance with §
698.02.
§ 408.02 GENERAL CODE PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates any provision of this traffic code for which no
penalty otherwise is provided in the section violated is guilty of one of the
following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this
section, a minor misdemeanor;
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more predicate motor vehicle or
traffic offenses, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.99)
   (b)   Violations committed while distracted.
      (1)   As used in this section and each section referenced in division (b)
(2) of this section, all of the following apply:
         A.   DISTRACTED means doing either of the following while operating a
vehicle:
            1.   Using an electronic wireless communications device, as defined
in R.C. § 4511.204, in violation of that section.
            2.   Engaging in any activity that is not necessary to the
operation of a vehicle and impairs, or reasonably would be expected to impair,
the ability of the operator to drive the vehicle safely.
         B.   DISTRACTED does not include operating a motor vehicle while
wearing an earphone or earplug over or in both ears at the same time. A person
who so wears earphones or earplugs may be charged with a violation of R.C. §
4511.84, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         C.   DISTRACTED does not include conducting any activity while
operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or on behalf of a utility,
provided that the driver of the vehicle is acting in response to an emergency,
power outage, or a circumstance affecting the health or safety of individuals.
As used in this division (b)(1)C.:
            1.   UTILITY means an entity specified in R.C. § 4905.03(A), (C),
(D), (E), or (G).
            2.   UTILITY SERVICE VEHICLE means a vehicle owned or operated by a
utility.
      (2)   If an offender violates R.C. § 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12,
4511.121, 4511.132, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25,
4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33,
4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41,
4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451, 4511.46, 4511.47,
4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.64,
4511.71, 4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, or 4511.73, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
violation, the offender is subject to the applicable penalty for the violation
and, notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, is subject to an additional fine of not
more than $100 as follows:
         A.   1.   Subject to Traffic Rule 13, if a law enforcement officer
issues an offender a ticket, citation, or summons for a violation of any of the
aforementioned sections of the Ohio Revised Code, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that indicates that the offender was distracted
while committing the violation and that the distracting activity was a
contributing factor to the commission of the violation, the offender may enter
a written plea of guilty and waive the offender’s right to contest the ticket,
citation, or summons in a trial provided that the offender pays the total
amount of the fine established for the violation and pays the additional fine
of $100.
            2.   In lieu of payment of the additional fine of $100, the
offender instead may elect to attend a distracted driving safety course, the
duration and contents of which shall be established by the Ohio Director of
Public Safety. If the offender attends and successfully completes the course,
the offender shall be issued written evidence that the offender successfully
completed the course. The offender shall be required to pay the total amount of
the fine established for the violation, but shall not be required to pay the
additional fine of $100, so long as the offender submits to the court both the
offender’s payment in full and such written evidence within 90 days of the
underlying violation that resulted in the imposition of the additional fine
under division (b) of this section.
         B.   1.   If the offender appears in person to contest the ticket,
citation, or summons in a trial and the offender pleads guilty to or is
convicted of the violation, the court, in addition to all other penalties
provided by law, may impose the applicable penalty for the violation and may
impose the additional fine of not more than $100.
            2.   If the court imposes upon the offender the applicable penalty
for the violation and an additional fine of not more than $100, the court shall
inform the offender that, in lieu of payment of the additional fine of not more
than $100, the offender instead may elect to attend the distracted driving
safety course described in division (b)(2)A. of this section. If the offender
elects the course option and attends and successfully completes the course, the
offender shall be issued written evidence that the offender successfully
completed the course. The offender shall be required to pay the total amount of
the fine established for the violation, but shall not be required to pay the
additional fine of not more than $100, so long as the offender submits to the
court the offender’s payment and such written evidence within 90 days of the
underlying violation that resulted in the imposition of the additional fine
under division (b) of this section.
      (3)   If a law enforcement officer issues an offender a ticket, citation,
or summons for a violation of any of the sections of the Revised Code listed in
division (b)(2) of this section that indicates that the offender was distracted
while committing the violation and that the distracting activity was a
contributing factor to the commission of the violation, the officer shall do
both of the following:
         A.   Report the issuance of the ticket, citation, or summons to the
officer’s law enforcement agency;
         B.   Ensure that such report indicates the offender’s race.
(R.C. § 4511.991)
§ 408.03 SUSPENSION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4510.07 or in any other provision of
the Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of any provision of this traffic code that is substantially
equivalent to a provision of the Revised Code, and a court is permitted or
required to suspend a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to any other
penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege for the period of
time the court determines appropriate, but the period of suspension imposed for
the violation of the provision of this traffic code shall not exceed the period
of suspension that is permitted or required to be imposed for the violation of
the provision of the Revised Code to which the provision of this traffic code
is substantially equivalent.
(R.C. § 4510.05)
TITLE FOUR – Public Ways and Traffic-control Devices
         
Chap. 412.   Obstruction and Special Uses of Public Ways.
         
Chap. 414.   Traffic-Control Devices.
         
Chap. 416.   Pedestrians.
CHAPTER 412
Obstruction and Special Uses of Public Ways
412.01   Placing injurious material or obstruction in street.
412.02   Zones of quiet.
412.03   Play streets.
412.04   Toy vehicles on roadway.
412.05   Freeway use prohibited by pedestrians, bicycles and animals.
412.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to regulate processions or assemblages, see R.C. § 4511.07
   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required, see §
440.06
   Parking in alleys or narrow streets; exceptions, see §
452.12
   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway, see §
452.09
   Sidewalk obstructions; damage or injury, see §
660.10
§ 412.01 PLACING INJURIOUS MATERIAL OR OBSTRUCTION IN STREET.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a
highway, lane, road, street or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or
other articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle or animal
traveling along or upon the highway, except such substances that may be placed
upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
      (2)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any
highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the
same.
      (3)   Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a
highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the
highway from the vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a highway without
proper authority.
   (b)   No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or a
vehicle, shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway, lane, road,
street or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or other articles which
may damage or injure any person, vehicle or animal traveling along or upon the
highway, except substances that may be placed upon the roadway by proper
authority for the repair or construction thereof.
   (c)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (a) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4511.74)
§ 412.02 ZONES OF QUIET.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person
operating a vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning
device of the vehicle except in an emergency.
§ 412.03 PLAY STREETS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that any street or part
thereof is a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street
or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose
residences are within the closed area and then the drivers shall exercise the
greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
§ 412.04 TOY VEHICLES ON ROADWAY.
   No person riding upon any coaster, roller skates, sled, toy vehicle or other
similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a
crosswalk, and when so crossing the person shall be granted all of the rights
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This
section shall not apply to any street set aside as a play street.
§ 412.05 FREEWAY USE PROHIBITED BY PEDESTRIANS, BICYCLES AND ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, shall:
      (1)   As a pedestrian, occupy any space within the limits of the right-
of-way of a freeway, except: in a rest area; on a facility that is separated
from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately
marked for pedestrian use; in the performance of public works or official
duties; as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a
motor vehicle; or to obtain assistance.
      (2)   Occupy any space within the limits of the right-of-way of a
freeway, with: an animal-drawn vehicle; a ridden or led animal; herded animals;
a pushcart; a bicycle, except on a facility that is separated from the roadway
and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately marked for
bicycle use; an electric bicycle; a bicycle with motor attached; a motor-driven
cycle with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower; an
agricultural tractor; farm machinery; except in the performance of public works
or official duties.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.051)
§ 412.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 414
Traffic-Control Devices
414.01   Obedience to traffic-control devices.
414.02   Through streets; stop and yield right-of- way signs.
414.03   Traffic-control signal terms and lights.
414.04   Signal to control lane direction of travel.
414.05   Pedestrian control signals.
414.06   Unauthorized signs and signals, hiding from view, advertising.
414.07   Alteration, injury, removal of traffic- control devices.
414.08   Unauthorized possession or sale of devices.
414.09   Signal preemption devices; prohibitions.
414.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Designation of through streets or stop intersections, see R.C. §§ 4511.07,
4511.65
   Traffic law photo-monitoring devices, state regulations, see R.C. §§
4511.092 et seq.
   Placing and maintaining local traffic-control devices, see R.C. §§ 4511.10,
4511.11
   Uniform system of traffic-control devices, see R.C. §§ 4511.09, 4511.11
   Authority and considerations for placing of devices, see §
406.01
   Criminal mischief (tampering), see §
642.09
   Intersections at which traffic-control signals fail or malfunction, see §
432.16
   Posting of signs and signals required, see §
406.04
   Traffic-control devices defined, see §
402.01
   Uniform system of traffic-control devices, see §
406.02
§ 414.01 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (a)   (1)   No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
instructions of any traffic- control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code, unless at the time otherwise directed by a
police officer.
      (2)   No provision of this traffic code for which signs are required
shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the
alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular
section of this traffic code does not state that signs are required, that
section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place.
(R.C. § 4511.12(A))
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (c) of this section, any operator
of a commercial motor vehicle, upon approaching a scale location established
for the purpose of determining the weight of the vehicle and its load, shall
comply with any traffic-control device or the order of a peace officer
directing the vehicle to proceed to be weighed or otherwise inspected.
      (2)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle, upon bypassing a scale
location in accordance with division (c) of this section, shall comply with an
order of a peace officer to stop the vehicle to verify the use and operation of
an electronic clearance device.
   (c)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle that is equipped with an
electronic clearance device authorized by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol under R.C. § 4549.081 may bypass a scale location, regardless of
the instruction of a traffic-control device to enter the scale facility, if
either of the following apply:
      (1)   The in-cab transponder displays a green light or other affirmative
visual signal and also sounds an affirmative audible signal;
      (2)   Any other criterion established by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol is met.
   (d)   Any peace officer may order the operator of a commercial motor vehicle
that bypasses a scale location to stop the vehicle to verify the use and
operation of an electronic clearance device.
   (e)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE means any
combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating or an actual gross
vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds if the vehicle is used in interstate
or intrastate commerce to transport property and also means any vehicle that is
transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is required pursuant to
49 C.F.R. Parts 100 to 180.
(R.C. § 4511.121(A) - (C), (E))
   (f)   No person shall use an electronic clearance device if the device or
its use is not in compliance with rules of the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol.
(R.C. § 4549.081(B))
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. If
the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting activity
is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the offender is
subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.12(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (b) of this
section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (b)
of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender commits the offense while
distracted and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the
commission of the offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine
established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.121(D))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (f) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.081(C))
§ 414.02 THROUGH STREETS; STOP AND YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY SIGNS.
   (a)   All state routes are hereby designated as through highways, provided
that stop signs, yield signs or traffic-control signals shall be erected at all
intersections with such through highways by the Department of Transportation as
to highways under its jurisdiction and by local authorities as to highways
under their jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section. Where
two or more state routes that are through highways intersect, and no traffic-
control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at
one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local authorities having
jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section. Whenever the
Director of Transportation determines on the basis of an engineering and
traffic investigation that stop signs are necessary to stop traffic on a
through highway for safe and efficient operation, nothing in this section shall
be construed to prevent the installations. When circumstances warrant, the
Director also may omit stop signs on roadways intersecting through highways
under his or her jurisdiction. Before the Director either installs or removes a
stop sign under this division, he or she shall give notice, in writing, of that
proposed action to the affected local authority at least 30 days before
installing or removing the stop sign.
   (b)   Other streets or highways, or portions thereof, are hereby designated
as through highways if they are within the municipality, if they have a
continuous length of more than one mile between the limits of the street or
highway or portion thereof, and if they have stop or yield signs or traffic-
control signals at the entrances of the majority of intersecting streets or
highways. For purposes of this section, the limits of the street or highway, or
portion thereof, shall be the municipal corporation line, the physical terminus
of the street or highway, or any point on the streets or highway at which
vehicular traffic thereon is required by regulatory signs to stop or yield to
traffic on the intersecting street, provided, that in residence districts, the
municipality may by ordinance designate the street or highway, or portion
thereof, not to be a through highway and thereafter the affected residence
district shall be indicated by official traffic-control devices. Where two or
more through highways designated under this division intersect and no traffic-
control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at
one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local authorities having
jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (c)   The Department or local authorities having jurisdiction need not erect
stop signs at intersections they find to be so constructed as to permit traffic
to safely enter a through highway without coming to a stop. Signs shall be
erected at such intersections indicating that the operator of a vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way to or merge with all traffic proceeding on the through
highway.
   (d)   Local authorities, with reference to highways under their
jurisdiction, may designate additional through highways, and shall erect stop
signs, yield signs or traffic-control signals at all streets and highways
intersecting the through highways, or may designate any intersection as a stop
or yield intersection, and shall erect like signs at one or more entrances to
the intersection.
(R.C. § 4511.65)
§ 414.03 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL TERMS AND LIGHTS.
   Highway traffic signal indications for vehicles and pedestrians shall have
the following meanings:
   (a)   Steady Green Signal Indication.
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal indication
are permitted to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by a lane-use sign, turn
prohibition sign, lane marking, roadway design, separate turn signal
indication, or other traffic control device. Such vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the
right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
movement to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching
from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the
intersection.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal indication, displayed
alone or in combination with another signal indication, are permitted to
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications displayed at
the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left
or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the
following:
         A.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
         B.   Other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (3)   A.   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication,
as provided in R.C. § 4511.14, pedestrians facing a circular green signal
indication are permitted to proceed across the roadway within any marked or
unmarked associated crosswalk. The pedestrian shall yield the right- of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection or so close as to create an immediate
hazard at the time that the green signal indication is first displayed.
         B.   Pedestrians facing a green arrow signal indication, unless
otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control
device, shall not cross the roadway.
   (b)   Steady Yellow Signal Indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow signal indication
are thereby warned that the related green movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated or that a steady red signal indication will
be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection. The provisions governing vehicular operation under the movement
being terminated shall continue to apply while the steady circular yellow
signal indication is displayed.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow arrow signal indication is
thereby warned that the related green arrow movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated. The provisions governing vehicular
operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while the
steady yellow arrow signal indication is displayed.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal
indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device, shall not start to
cross the roadway.
   (c)   Steady Red Signal Indication.
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal
indication, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted
by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, traffic shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before
entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication
to proceed is displayed except as provided in divisions (c)(1), (c)(2), and (c)
(3) of this section.
         B.   Except when a traffic control device is in place prohibiting a
turn on red or a steady red arrow signal indication is displayed, vehicular
traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication is permitted, after
stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-
way street into a one-way street. The right to proceed with the turn shall be
subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a stop
sign.
      (2)   A.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication
shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow
and, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted by
another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before entering the
intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication or other
traffic control device permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is
displayed.
         B.   When a traffic control device is in place permitting a turn on a
steady red arrow signal indication, vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow
indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to turn
right, or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street. The right
to proceed with the turn shall be limited to the direction indicated by the
arrow and shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a
stop at a stop sign.
      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device, pedestrians facing
a steady circular red or steady red arrow signal indication shall not enter the
roadway.
      (4)   Local authorities by ordinance, or the Director of Transportation
on state highways, may prohibit a right or a left turn against a steady red
signal at any intersection, which shall be effective when signs giving notice
thereof are posted at the intersection.
   (d)   Flashing Green Signal Indication. A flashing green signal indication
has no meaning and shall not be used.
   (e)   Flashing Yellow Signal Indication.
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular yellow signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter
the intersection to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by lane- use signs, turn
prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway design, separate turn signal
indications, or other traffic control devices. Such vehicular traffic,
including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall
yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn to
the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (2)   A.   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing yellow arrow signal indication, displayed alone or in combination with
another signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the intersection
only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or other such movement as is
permitted by other signal indications displayed at the same time. Such
vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn,
shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn to
the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing any flashing yellow signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.
      (4)   When a flashing circular yellow signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory or warning requirements of the other traffic
control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently
applicable.
   (f)   Flashing Red Signal Indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular red signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. The right to proceed
shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing any flashing red signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing red signal indication is first displayed.
      (3)   When a flashing circular red signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory requirements of the other traffic control
device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently applicable.
Use of this signal indication shall be limited to supplementing stop, do not
enter, or wrong way signs, and to applications where compliance with the
supplemented traffic control device requires a stop at a designated point.
   (g)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature
can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
   (h)   This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by
R.C. §§ 4511.61 and 4511.62.
(R.C. § 4511.13)
§ 414.04 SIGNAL TO CONTROL LANE DIRECTION OF TRAVEL.
   The meanings of lane-use control signal indications are as follows:
   (a)   A Steady Downward Green Arrow. A road user is permitted to drive in
the lane over which the arrow signal indication is located.
   (b)   A Steady Yellow “X”. A road user is to prepare to vacate the lane over
which the signal indication is located because a lane control change is being
made to a steady red “X” signal indication.
   (c)   A Steady White Two-Way Left-Turn Arrow. A road user is permitted to
use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, but not
for through travel, with the understanding that common use of the lane by
oncoming road users for left turns also is permitted.
   (d)   A Steady White One-Way Left-Turn Arrow. A road user is permitted to
use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, without
opposing turns in the same lane, but not for through travel.
   (e)   A Steady Red “X”. A road user is not permitted to use the lane over
which the signal indication is located and that this signal indication shall
modify accordingly the meaning of other traffic controls present.
(R.C. § 4511.131)
§ 414.05 PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “walk” or
“don’t walk”, or the symbol of a walking person or an upraised palm are in
place, these signals shall indicate the following instructions:
   (a)   A steady walking person signal indication, which symbolizes “walk”,
means that a pedestrian facing the signal indication is permitted to start to
cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication, possibly in
conflict with turning vehicles. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the walking person
signal indication is first shown.
   (b)   A flashing upraised hand signal indication, which symbolizes “don’t
walk”, means that a pedestrian shall not start to cross the roadway in the
direction of the signal indication, but that any pedestrian who has already
started to cross on a steady walking person signal indication shall proceed to
the far side of the traveled way of the street or highway, unless otherwise
directed by a traffic control device to proceed only to the median of a divided
highway or only to some other island or pedestrian refuge area.
   (c)   A steady upraised hand signal indication means that a pedestrian shall
not enter the roadway in the direction of the signal indication.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the continued
use of pedestrian control signals utilizing the word “wait” if those signals
were installed prior to March 28, 1985.
   (e)   A flashing walking person signal indication has no meaning and shall
not be used.
(R.C. § 4511.14)
§ 414.06 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS, HIDING FROM VIEW, ADVERTISING.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of
any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to
be, is an imitation of or resembles a traffic-control device or railroad sign
or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or hides from
view or interferes with the effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal; and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any
public authority permit, upon any highway, any traffic sign or signal bearing
thereon any commercial advertising. This section does not prohibit either the
erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful
directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for traffic-
control devices, or the erection upon private property of traffic-control
devices by the owner of real property in accordance with R.C. §§ 4511.211 and
4511.432.
      (2)   Every prohibited sign, signal, marking or device is a public
nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway may remove the
same or cause it to be removed.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.16)
§ 414.07 ALTERATION, INJURY, REMOVAL OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (a)   No person, without lawful authority, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly
tamper with any traffic-control device, any railroad sign or signal, or any
inscription, shield or insignia on the device, sign or signal, or any part of
the device, sign or signal;
      (2)   Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied pavement marking
material on the surface of a roadway while the marking material is in an
undried condition, and is marked by flags, markers, signs or other devices
intended to protect it;
      (3)   Knowingly move, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly tamper with
a manhole cover.
   (b)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a)(1) or (a)(3) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
third degree. If a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(3) of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(3) of
this section causes serious physical harm to property that is owned, leased, or
controlled by a state or local authority, the offender is guilty of a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.17)
§ 414.08 UNAUTHORIZED POSSESSION OR SALE OF DEVICES.
   (a)   As used in this section, TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE means any sign,
traffic-control signal or other device conforming to and placed or erected in
accordance with the manual adopted under R.C. § 4511.09 by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic, including signs denoting the names of streets and
highways, but does not mean any pavement marking.
   (b)   No individual shall buy or otherwise possess, or sell, a traffic-
control device, except when one of the following applies:
      (1)   In the course of the individual’s employment by the state or a
local authority for the express or implied purpose of manufacturing, providing,
erecting, moving or removing such a traffic-control device;
      (2)   In the course of the individual’s employment by any manufacturer of
traffic- control devices other than a state or local authority;
      (3)   For the purpose of demonstrating the design and function of a
traffic-control device to state or local officials;
      (4)   When the traffic-control device has been purchased from the state
or a local authority at a sale of property that is no longer needed or is unfit
for use; or
      (5)   When the traffic-control device has been properly purchased from a
manufacturer for use on private property and the person possessing the device
has a sales receipt for the device or other acknowledgment of sale issued by
the manufacturer.
   (c)   This section does not preclude, and shall not be construed as
precluding, prosecution for theft in violation of R.C. § 2913.02, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or for receiving stolen property
in violation of R.C. § 2913.51, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.18)
§ 414.09 SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICES; PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall possess a portable signal preemption device.
      (2)   No person shall use a portable signal preemption device to affect
the operation of a traffic-control device.
   (b)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the following
persons and division (a)(2) of this section does not apply to any of the
following persons when responding to an emergency call:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 109.71(A)(1), (A)(12), (A)
(14) or (A)(19);
      (2)   A State Highway Patrol officer;
      (3)   A person while occupying a public safety vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 4511.01(E)(1), (E)(3) or (E)(4).
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   As used in this section, PORTABLE SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICE means a
device that, if activated by a person, is capable of changing a traffic-control
signal to green out of sequence.
(R.C. § 4511.031)
§ 414.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 416
Pedestrians
416.01   Duties of pedestrians and drivers at crosswalks.
416.02   Right-of-way of blind person.
416.03   Right-of-way yielded by pedestrian; crossing roadways.
416.04   Moving in crosswalks.
416.05   Walking on sidewalks and streets.
416.06   Soliciting rides or business; riding on outside of vehicle or in cargo
storage area.
416.07   Passing through bridge signals or railroad barriers.
416.08   Right-of-way of public safety vehicles.
416.09   Right-of-way on sidewalks.
416.10   Intoxication.
416.11   Motorized wheelchair operators.
416.12   Operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices.
416.13   Operation of personal delivery device on sidewalks and crosswalks.
416.14   Low-speed micromobility devices.
416.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Obedience to traffic-control devices, see §
414.01
   Opening doors on side available to traffic, see §
452.08
   Pedestrian control signals, see §
414.05
   Pedestrians prohibited on freeways, see §
412.05
§ 416.01 DUTIES OF PEDESTRIANS AND DRIVERS AT CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   When traffic-control signals are not in place, not in operation or are
not clearly assigning the right-of-way, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the
right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, or if required
by R.C. § 4511.132, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to a
pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon
the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the
pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as
to be in danger.
   (b)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
   (c)   Division (a) of this section does not apply under the conditions
stated in R.C. § 4511.48(B), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (f)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.46)
§ 416.02 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF BLIND PERSON.
   (a)   (1)   As used in this section BLIND PERSON or BLIND PEDESTRIAN means a
person having not more than 20/200 visual acuity in the better eye with
correcting lenses, or visual acuity greater than 20/200, but with a limitation
in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field
subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees.
      (2)   The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to every
blind pedestrian guided by a guide dog, or carrying a cane which is
predominantly white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip.
   (b)   No person, other than a blind person, while on any public highway,
street, alley or other public thoroughfare, shall carry a white or metallic
cane, with or without a red tip.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.47)
§ 416.03 RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED BY PEDESTRIAN; CROSSING ROADWAYS.
   (a)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (b)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all traffic upon the roadway.
   (c)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (d)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic-control devices; and when authorized to cross
diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official
traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
   (e)   This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle from
exercising due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway.
   (f)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.48)
§ 416.04 MOVING IN CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.49)
§ 416.05 WALKING ON SIDEWALKS AND STREETS.
   (a)   Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be
unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (b)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the
edge of the roadway.
   (c)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian
walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an
outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two- way roadway, shall walk only on
the left side of the roadway.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. §§ 4511.13 and 4511.46, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, any pedestrian upon a roadway
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.50)
§ 416.06 SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS; RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE OR IN CARGO
STORAGE AREA.
   (a)   No person while on a roadway outside a safety zone shall solicit a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, no person
shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting employment, business or
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.
      (2)   The Council, by ordinance, may authorize the issuance of a permit
to a charitable organization to allow a person acting on behalf of the
organization to solicit charitable contributions from the occupant of a vehicle
by standing on a highway, other than a freeway as provided in R.C. § 4511.051
(A), that is under the jurisdiction of the municipality. The permit shall be
valid for only one period of time, which shall be specified in the permit, in
any calendar year. The Council also may specify the locations where
contributions may be solicited and may impose any other restrictions on or
requirements regarding the manner in which the solicitations are to be
conducted that the Council considers advisable.
      (3)   As used in division (b)(2) of this section, CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION
means an organization that has received from the Internal Revenue Service a
currently valid ruling or determination letter recognizing the tax-exempt
status of the organization pursuant to IRC 501(c)(3).
   (c)   No person shall hang onto or ride on the outside of any motor vehicle
while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making
repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or street
maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency.
   (d)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto or ride on
the outside of any motor vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except
mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers
performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under
authority of a public agency.
   (e)   No driver of a truck, trailer or semitrailer shall knowingly permit
any person who has not attained the age of 16 years to ride in the unenclosed
or unroofed cargo storage area of the driver’s vehicle if the vehicle is
traveling faster than 25 miles per hour, unless either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a properly
secured seat to which is attached a seat safety belt that is in compliance with
federal standards for an occupant restraining device as defined in R.C. §
4513.263(A)(2), the seat and seat safety belt were installed at the time the
vehicle was originally assembled, and the person riding in the cargo storage
area is in the seat and is wearing the seat safety belt; or
      (2)   An emergency exists that threatens the life of the driver or the
person being transported in the cargo storage area of the truck, trailer or
semitrailer.
   (f)   No driver of a truck, trailer or semitrailer shall permit any person,
except for those workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance
or construction under authority of a public agency, to ride in the cargo
storage area or on a tailgate of the driver’s vehicle while the tailgate is
unlatched.
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
any provision of divisions (a) to (d) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates any provision of divisions (a) to (d) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any provision of divisions
(a) to (d) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (e) or (f) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.51)
§ 416.07 PASSING THROUGH BRIDGE SIGNALS OR RAILROAD BARRIERS.
   (a)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate or barrier after a bridge operation
signal indication has been given.
   (b)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.511)
§ 416.08 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (a)   Upon the immediate approach of a public safety vehicle, as stated in
R.C. § 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, every
pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the public safety vehicle.
   (b)   This section shall not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle
from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.452)
§ 416.09 RIGHT-OF-WAY ON SIDEWALKS.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
on a sidewalk.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.441)
§ 416.10 INTOXICATION.
   (a)   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol, any drug of abuse,
or any combination of them, to a degree that renders the pedestrian a hazard
shall not walk or be upon a highway.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.481)
§ 416.11 MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR OPERATORS.
   Every person operating a motorized wheelchair shall have all of the rights
and duties applicable to a pedestrian that are contained in this chapter,
except those provisions which by their nature can have no application.
(R.C. § 4511.491)
§ 416.12 OPERATION OF ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.
   (a)   (1)   Electric personal assistive mobility devices may be operated on
the public streets, highways, sidewalks and paths and portions of roadways set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this traffic code that by their nature are applicable to an electric personal
assistive mobility device apply to the device and the person operating it
whenever it is operated upon any public street, highway, sidewalk or path or
upon any portion of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
      (3)   The municipality may regulate or prohibit the operation of electric
personal assistive mobility devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks and
paths, or portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
under its jurisdiction.
   (b)   No operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and human-powered
vehicles at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         A.   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet;
         B.   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle;
      (4)   Operate the device on any portion of a street or highway that has
an established speed limit of 55 miles per hour or more;
      (5)   Operate the device upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of
pedestrians or other specialized use when an appropriate sign giving notice of
the specialized use is posted on the path;
      (6)   If under 18 years of age, operate the device unless wearing a
protective helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened;
      (7)   If under 16 years of age, operate the device unless, during the
operation, the person is under the direct visual and audible supervision of
another person who is 18 years of age or older and is responsible for the
immediate care of the person under 16 years of age.
   (c)   No person who is under 14 years of age shall operate an electric
personal assistive mobility device.
   (d)   No person shall distribute or sell an electric personal assistive
mobility device unless the device is accompanied by a written statement that is
substantially equivalent to the following: “WARNING: TO REDUCE THE RISK OF
SERIOUS INJURY, USE ONLY WHILE WEARING FULL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT – HELMET,
WRIST GUARDS, ELBOW PADS AND KNEE PADS.”
   (e)   Nothing in this section affects or shall be construed to affect any
rule of the Director of Natural Resources or a Board of Park District
Commissioners governing the operation of vehicles on lands under the control of
the Director or Board, as applicable.
   (f)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (b) or (c) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows:
         A.   The offender shall be fined $10;
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (b) or (c) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to imposing the fine required under division (f)(1)A. of this section,
shall do one of the following:
            1.   Order the impoundment for not less than one day but no more
than 30 days of the electric personal assistive mobility device that was
involved in the current violation of that division. The court shall order the
device to be impounded at a safe indoor location designated by the court and
may assess storage fees of not more than $5 per day; provided the total
storage, processing and release fees assessed against the offender or the
device in connection with the device’s impoundment or subsequent release shall
not exceed $50.
            2.   If the court does not issue an impoundment order pursuant to
division (f)(1)B.1. of this section, issue an order prohibiting the offender
from operating any electric personal assistive mobility device on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks and paths and portions of roadways set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles for not less than one day but not more than 30
days.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.512)
   (g)   As used in this code, ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE
means a self-balancing two non-tandem wheeled device that is designed to
transport only one person, has an electric propulsion system of an average of
750 watts, and when ridden on a paved level surface by an operator who weighs
170 pounds has a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour.
(R.C. § 4501.01(TT))
§ 416.13 OPERATION OF PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE ON SIDEWALKS AND CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   ELIGIBLE ENTITY. Means a corporation, partnership, association,
firm, sole proprietorship, or other entity engaged in business.
      (2)   PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE. Means an electrically powered device to
which all of the following apply:
         A.   The device is intended primarily to transport property and cargo
on sidewalks and crosswalks.
         B.   The device weighs less than 250 pounds excluding any property or
cargo being carried in the device.
         C.   The device has a maximum speed of ten miles per hour.
         D.   The device is equipped with technology that enables the operation
of the device with active control or monitoring by a person, without active
control or monitoring by a person, or both with or without active control or
monitoring by a person.
      (3)   PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE OPERATOR. Means an agent of an eligible
entity who exercises direct physical control over, or monitoring of, the
navigation and operation of a personal delivery device. The phrase does not
include, with respect to a delivery or other service rendered by a personal
delivery device, the person who requests the delivery or service. The phrase
also does not include a person who only arranges for and dispatches a personal
delivery device for a delivery or other service.
   (b)   An eligible entity may operate a personal delivery device on sidewalks
and crosswalks so long as all of the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The personal delivery device is operated in accordance with all
regulations, if any, established by each local authority within which the
personal delivery device is operated.
      (2)   A personal delivery device operator is actively controlling or
monitoring the navigation and operation of the personal delivery device.
      (3)   The eligible entity maintains an insurance policy that includes
general liability coverage of not less than $100,000 for damages arising from
the operation of the personal delivery device by the eligible entity and any
agent of the eligible entity.
      (4)   The device is equipped with all of the following:
         A.   A marker that clearly identifies the name and contact information
of the eligible entity operating the personal delivery device and a unique
identification number;
         B.   A braking system that enables the personal delivery device to
come to a controlled stop;
         C.   If the personal delivery device is being operated between sunset
and sunrise, a light on both the front and rear of the personal delivery device
that is visible in clear weather from a distance of at least 500 feet to the
front and rear of the personal delivery device when directly in front of low
beams of headlights on a motor vehicle.
   (c)   No personal delivery device operator shall allow a personal delivery
device to do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with traffic or pedestrian control devices and
signals;
      (2)   Unreasonably interfere with pedestrians or traffic;
      (3)   Transport any hazardous material that would require a permit issued
by the Public Utilities Commission;
      (4)   Operate on a street or highway, except when crossing the street or
highway within a crosswalk.
   (d)   A personal delivery device has all of the rights and obligations
applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances, except that a personal
delivery device shall yield the right-of-way to human pedestrians on sidewalks
and crosswalks.
   (e)   (1)   No person shall operate a personal delivery device unless the
person is authorized to do so under this section and complies with the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   An eligible entity is responsible for both of the following:
         A.   Any violation of this section that is committed by a personal
delivery device operator; and
         B.   Any other circumstance, including a technological malfunction, in
which a personal delivery device operates in a manner prohibited by divisions
(c)(1) to (c)(4) of this section.
(R.C. § 4511.513)
§ 416.14 LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICES.
   (a)   (1)   A low-speed micromobility device may be operated on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks, and shared-use paths, and may be operated on any
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance
with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this title that by their nature could apply to a low-speed micromobility device
do apply to the device and the person operating it whenever it is operated upon
any public street, highway, sidewalk, or shared-use path, or upon any portion
of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (b)   No operator of a low-speed micromobility device shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         A.   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet;
         B.   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
   (c)   (1)   No person who is under 16 years of age shall rent a low-speed
micromobility device.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly rent a low-speed micromobility device to
a person who is under 16 years of age.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly rent a low-speed micromobility device on
behalf of a person who is under 16 years of age.
   (d)   No person shall operate a low-speed micromobility device at a speed
greater than 20 miles per hour.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Unless a mens rea is otherwise specified in this section, an
offense established under this section is a strict liability offense and R.C. §
2901.20 does not apply. The designation of that offense as a strict liability
offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for which there
is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
   (f)   Notwithstanding division (a)(1) of this section, the municipality,
county, township, metropolitan park district, township park district,
recreation district, or any division of the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources if the division has the approval of the Ohio Director of Natural
Resources may do any of the following:
      (1)   Regulate or prohibit the operation of low-speed micromobility
devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks, and shared-use paths, and
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, under its
jurisdiction;
      (2)   Include low-speed micromobility devices that are adapted to expand
access for people with various physical limitations into a shared bicycle,
shared electric bicycle, or similar vehicle sharing program, under its
jurisdiction;
      (3)   Require the owner or operator of a low-speed micromobility device
rental service or low-speed micromobility device sharing program to maintain
commercial general liability insurance related to the operation of the devices,
with limits of up to $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 per aggregate.
(R.C. § 4511.514)
§ 416.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
TITLE SIX – Operation and Vehicles
            
Chap. 432.   Operation Generally.
            
Chap. 434.   O.V.I.; Reckless Operation; Speed.
            
Chap. 436.   Licensing; Accidents.
            
Chap. 438.   Safety and Equipment.
            
Chap. 440.   Commercial and Heavy Vehicles.
            
Chap. 442.   Drivers of Commercial Vehicles.
            
Chap. 444.   Bicycles, Skateboards and Motorcycles Generally.
            
Chap. 446.   Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles and All-Purpose Vehicles.
            
Chap. 448.   Watercraft.
CHAPTER 432
Operation Generally
432.01   Driving upon right side of roadway; exceptions.
432.02   Passing to right when proceeding in opposite directions.
432.03   Overtaking, passing to left; driver’s duties.
432.04   Overtaking, passing to right of vehicle.
432.05   Overtaking, passing to left of centerline.
432.06   Driving upon left side of roadway.
432.07   Hazardous or no passing zones.
432.08   Driving within lanes or continuous lines of traffic.
432.09   Following too closely.
432.10   Turning at intersections.
432.11   “U” turns restricted.
432.12   Starting and backing vehicles.
432.13   Signals before changing course, turning or stopping.
432.14   Hand and arm signals.
432.15   Right-of-way at intersections.
432.16   Intersections at which traffic-control signals fail or malfunction.
432.17   Right-of-way when turning left.
432.18   Operation of vehicle at stop and yield signs.
432.19   Emergency or public safety vehicles at stop signals or signs.
432.20   Right-of-way of public safety or coroner’s vehicle.
432.21   Driving while approaching stationary public safety vehicle and certain
other vehicles with caution.
432.22   Right-of-way at private driveway, alley or building.
432.23   Stop signs on private roads and driveways.
432.24   Right-of-way of funeral procession.
432.25   Driving upon sidewalks, tree lawns or curbs.
432.26   Driver’s view and control to be unobstructed by load or persons.
432.27   Driving upon street posted as closed for repair.
432.28   Following and parking near emergency or safety vehicles.
432.29   Driving over fire hose.
432.30   Driving through safety zone.
432.31   One-way streets and rotary traffic islands.
432.32   Driving upon divided roadways.
432.33   Stopping for school bus; actuating visual signals; discharging
children.
432.34   Driving across grade crossings.
432.35   Stopping at grade crossings.
432.36   Slow-moving vehicles or equipment at grade crossings.
432.37   Obstructing intersections, crosswalks or grade crossings.
432.38   “Peeling”; cracking exhaust noises.
432.39   Shortcutting across private property.
432.40   Entering and exiting controlled-access highway.
432.41   Weaving; full time and attention.
432.42   Operation on paths set aside for bicycles.
432.43   Littering from motor vehicles.
432.44   Use of earphones while driving.
432.45   Texting while driving prohibited.
432.46   Use of electronic wireless communication devices by minors or
probationary drivers while driving prohibited.
432.47   Sound amplification systems in motor vehicles.
432.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Obedience to traffic-control devices, see §
414.01
   Operation of bicycles and motorcycles generally, see §§
414.01 et seq.
   Operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles and all-purpose vehicles,
see §§
446.03,
446.04
   Yielding right-of-way to pedestrians on sidewalks, see §
416.09
§ 432.01 DRIVING UPON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction, or when making a left turn under the rules governing those
movements;
      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      (3)   When driving upon a roadway divided into three or more marked lanes
for traffic under the rules applicable thereon;
      (4)   When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for
one-way traffic;
      (5)   When otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic-control
device.
   (b)   (1)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the
prevailing and lawful speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall be driven in the right- hand lane then available
for traffic, and far enough to the right to allow passing by faster vehicles if
the passing is safe and reasonable, except under any of the following
circumstances:
         A.   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction;
         B.   When preparing for a left turn;
         C.   When the driver must necessarily drive in a lane other than the
right-hand lane to continue on the driver’s intended route.
      (2)   Nothing in division (b)(1) of this section requires a driver of a
slower vehicle to compromise the driver’s safety to allow overtaking by a
faster vehicle.
   (c)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and
providing for two- way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the
left of the centerline of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left of the center of
the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the lanes, or
except as permitted under division (a)(2) of this section. This division shall
not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the centerline in making a left
turn into or from an alley, private road or driveway.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (e)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.25)
§ 432.02 PASSING TO RIGHT WHEN PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   (a)   Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass
each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one
line of traffic in each direction, each operator shall give to the other one-
half of the main traveled portion of the roadway or as nearly one-half as is
reasonably possible.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.26)
§ 432.03 OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT; DRIVER’S DUTIES.
   (a)   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction:
      (1)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction shall, except as provided in division (a)(3) of this
section, signal to the vehicle to be overtaken, shall pass to the left thereof
at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway
until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. When a motor vehicle overtakes and
passes a bicycle or electric bicycle, three feet or greater is considered a
safe passing distance.
      (2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
operator of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle at the latter’s audible signal, and the operator shall not
increase the speed of the operator’s vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle.
      (3)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction on a divided highway as defined in R.C. §
4511.35, a limited access highway as defined in R.C. § 5511.02, or a highway
with four or more traffic lanes is not required to signal audibly to the
vehicle being overtaken and passed.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.27)
§ 432.04 OVERTAKING, PASSING TO RIGHT OF VEHICLE.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass on the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
or
      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for
two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled
by the overtaking vehicle.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle only
under conditions permitting the movement in safety. The movement shall not be
made by driving off the roadway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.28)
§ 432.05 OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT OF CENTERLINE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing traffic proceeding in the same direction, unless the
left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic approaching from the
opposite direction or any traffic overtaken. In every event, the overtaking
vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable, and
in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for the
traffic approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet
of any approaching vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.29)
§ 432.06 DRIVING UPON LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be driven upon the left side of the roadway under the
following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway, where the operator’s view is obstructed within such a distance as to
create a hazard in the event traffic might approach from the opposite
direction;
      (2)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any
bridge, viaduct or tunnel; or
      (3)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad grade crossing.
   (b)   This section does not apply to vehicles upon a one-way roadway, upon a
roadway where traffic is lawfully directed to be driven to the left side, or
under the conditions described in R.C. § 4511.25(A)(2) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.30)
§ 432.07 HAZARDOUS OR NO PASSING ZONES.
   (a)   The Department of Transportation may determine those portions of any
state highway where overtaking and passing other traffic or driving to the left
of the center or centerline of the roadway would be especially hazardous, and
may, by appropriate signs or markings on the highway, indicate the beginning
and end of the zones. When signs or markings are in place and clearly visible,
every operator of a vehicle shall obey the directions of the signs or markings,
notwithstanding the distances set out in R.C. § 4511.30.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply when all of the following
apply:
      (1)   The slower vehicle is proceeding at less than half the speed of the
speed limit applicable to that location.
      (2)   The faster vehicle is capable of overtaking and passing the slower
vehicle without exceeding the speed limit.
      (3)   There is sufficient clear sight distance to the left of the center
or centerline of the roadway to meet the overtaking and passing provisions of
R.C. § 4511.29, considering the speed of the slower vehicle.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.31)
§ 432.08 DRIVING WITHIN LANES OR CONTINUOUS LINES OF TRAFFIC.
   (a)   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, or wherever within the municipality traffic is lawfully
moving in two or more substantially continuous lines in the same direction, the
following rules apply:
      (1)   A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as is practicable, entirely
within a single lane or line of traffic and shall not be moved from the lane or
line until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with
safety.
      (2)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for
the two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center
lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is
clearly visible and the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance,
or when preparing for a left turn, or where the center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is
proceeding, and is posted with signs to give notice of that allocation.
      (3)   Official signs may be erected directing specified traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction, regardless of the center of the roadway, or restricting
the use of a particular lane to only buses during certain hours or during all
hours, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of the signs.
      (4)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey
the directions of every such device.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.33)
§ 432.09 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   (a)   (1)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle
more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of
the vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
      (2)   The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle,
when traveling upon a roadway outside a business or residence district, shall
maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions permit, between the vehicle
and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor vehicle may enter and occupy
the space without danger. This division (a) does not prevent overtaking and
passing nor does it apply to any lane specially designated for use by trucks.
      (3)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business
or residence district in a caravan or motorcade shall maintain a sufficient
space between the vehicles so an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy the
space without danger. This division shall not apply to funeral processions.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.34)
§ 432.10 TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall be
governed by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
centerline thereof and by passing to the right of the centerline where it
enters the intersection, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn
shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of
the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in
that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection.
      (3)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on
one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at
any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of the
vehicle, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so
as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left hand lane
of the roadway being entered lawfully available to traffic moving in that lane.
   (b)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities may cause
markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections, and
thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this
section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when markers,
buttons or signs are so placed, no operator of a vehicle shall turn the vehicle
at an intersection other than as directed and required by the markers, buttons
or signs.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.36)
§ 432.11 “U” TURNS RESTRICTED.
   (a)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.13 and division (b) of this section,
no vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any
curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, if the vehicle
cannot be seen within 500 feet by the driver of any other vehicle approaching
from either direction.
   (b)   The driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, may turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction. This division applies only when the emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle, and when the driver of the vehicle is giving an audible signal by
siren, exhaust whistle or bell. This division does not relieve the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.37)
§ 432.12 STARTING AND BACKING VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or
parked until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.
      (2)   Before backing, operators of vehicles shall give ample warning, and
while backing they shall exercise vigilance not to injure person or property on
the street or highway.
      (3)   No person shall back a motor vehicle on a freeway, except:
         A.   In a rest area;
         B.   In the performance of public works or official duties;
         C.   As a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of
a motor vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.38)
§ 432.13 SIGNALS BEFORE CHANGING COURSE, TURNING OR STOPPING.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall turn a vehicle or move right or left upon a
highway unless and until the person has exercised due care to ascertain that
the movement can be made with reasonable safety, nor without giving an
appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided.
      (2)   When required, a signal of intention to turn or move right or left
shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by
the vehicle before turning, except that in the case of a person operating a
bicycle or electric bicycle, the signal shall be made not less than one time
but is not required to be continuous. A bicycle or electric bicycle operator is
not required to make a signal if the bicycle is in a designated turn lane, and
a signal shall not be given when the operator’s hands are needed for the safe
operation of the bicycle or electric bicycle.
      (3)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to
give a signal.
      (4)   Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given
either by means of the hand and arm, or by signal lights that clearly indicate
to both approaching and following traffic the intention to turn or move right
or left, except that any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped
with, and the required signal shall be given by, signal lights when the
distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside
limit of the body, cab or load of the motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when
the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit
of the body or load thereof exceeds 14 feet, whether a single vehicle or a
combination of vehicles.
      (5)   The signal lights required by this section shall not be flashed on
one side only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or “do pass” signal
to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear, nor be flashed on one
side only of a parked vehicle except as may be necessary for compliance with
this section.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.39)
§ 432.14 HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, all signals
required by the provisions of this traffic code, when given by hand and arm,
shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and
the signals shall indicate as follows:
      (1)   Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally;
      (2)   Right turn, hand and arm extended upward;
      (3)   Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward.
   (b)   As an alternative to division (a)(2) of this section, a person
operating a bicycle or electric bicycle may give a right turn signal by
extending the right hand and arm horizontally and to the right side of the
bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.40)
§ 432.15 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different
streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle
on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (b)   The right-of-way rule declared in division (a) of this section is
modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this traffic code or
R.C. Chapter 4511.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.41)
§ 432.16 INTERSECTIONS AT WHICH TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS FAIL OR MALFUNCTION.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle who approaches an intersection where traffic
is controlled by traffic control signals shall do all of the following if the
signal facing the driver exhibits no colored lights or colored lighted arrows,
exhibits a combination of such lights or arrows that fails to clearly indicate
the assignment of right-of-way, or, if the vehicle is a bicycle or an electric
bicycle, the signals are otherwise malfunctioning due to the failure of a
vehicle detector to detect the presence of the bicycle or electric bicycle:
      (1)   Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, stop
before entering the intersection;
      (2)   Yield the right-of-way to all vehicles in the intersection or
approaching on an intersecting road, if the vehicles will constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways;
      (3)   Exercise ordinary care while proceeding through the intersection.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.132)
§ 432.17 RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT.
   (a)   The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an
intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-
of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within
the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.42)
§ 432.18 OPERATION OF VEHICLE AT STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.
   (a)   Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer, every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-
way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so
closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is
moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a
speed reasonable for the existing conditions, and if required for safety to
stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After
slowing, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways. Whenever a driver is involved in a
collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways, after
driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision shall be prima facie
evidence of the driver’s failure to yield the right-of-way.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.43)
§ 432.19 EMERGENCY OR PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES AT STOP SIGNALS OR SIGNS.
   (a)   The driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any
stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety to traffic, but may proceed
cautiously past the red or stop sign or signal with due regard for the safety
of all persons using the street or highway.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.03)
§ 432.20 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY OR CORONER’S VEHICLE.
   (a)   Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner’s vehicle,
equipped with at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible
under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of
the vehicle, and the driver is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust
whistle or bell, no driver of any other vehicle shall fail to yield the right-
of-way, immediately drive, if practical, to a position parallel to, and as
close as possible to, the right edge or curb of the highway clear of any
intersection, and stop and remain in that position until the public safety
vehicle or coroner’s vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle or
coroner’s vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   This section applies to a coroner’s vehicle only when the vehicle is
operated in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. As used in this section, CORONER’S VEHICLE means a vehicle
used by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator  that is equipped
with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and a siren, exhaust
whistle or bell capable of giving an audible signal.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (e), whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a
first offense. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 4511.45)
   (e)   (1)   When the failure of a motor vehicle operator to yield the right-
of-way to a public safety vehicle as required by division (a) of this section
impedes the ability of the public safety vehicle to respond to an emergency,
any emergency personnel in the public safety vehicle may report the license
plate number and a general description of the vehicle and the operator of the
vehicle to the law enforcement agency exercising jurisdiction over the area
where the alleged violation occurred.
      (2)   A.   Upon receipt of a report under division (e)(1) of this
section, the law enforcement agency may conduct an investigation to attempt to
determine or confirm the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation.
         B.   If the identity of the operator at the time of an alleged
violation of division (a) of this section is established, the law enforcement
agency has probable cause to issue either a written warning or a citation for
that violation, and the agency shall issue a written warning or a citation to
the operator.
         C.   If the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the
alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement agency may issue a
written warning to the person who owned the vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation. However, in the case of a leased or rented vehicle, the law
enforcement agency shall issue the written warning to the person who leased or
rented the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation.
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (a) of this section based on a
report filed under division (e)(1) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined $150.
         B.   If a person who is issued a citation for a violation of division
(a) of this section based on a report filed under division (e)(1) of this
section does not enter a written plea of guilty and does not waive the person’s
right to contest the citation but instead appears in person in the proper court
to answer the charge, the trier of fact cannot find beyond a reasonable doubt
that the person committed that violation unless the emergency personnel who
filed the report appears in person in the court and testifies.
      (4)   As used in this division (e):
         A.   LICENSE PLATE. Includes any temporary motor vehicle license
registration issued under R.C. § 4503.182 or similar law of another
jurisdiction.
         B.   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Does not include an unmarked public safety
vehicle or a vehicle used by a public law enforcement officer or other person
sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state or a vehicle used
by the motor carrier enforcement unit for the enforcement of orders and rules
of the public utilities commission.
(R.C. § 4511.454)
§ 432.21 DRIVING WHILE APPROACHING STATIONARY PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE AND CERTAIN
OTHER VEHICLES WITH CAUTION.
   (a)   The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary public
safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection
vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor
vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a
highway maintenance vehicle that is displaying the appropriate visual signals
by means of flashing, oscillating, or rotating lights, as prescribed in R.C. §
4513.17, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   If the driver of the motor vehicle is traveling on a highway that
consists of at least two lanes that carry traffic in the same direction of
travel as that of the driver’s motor vehicle, the driver shall proceed with due
caution and, if possible and with due regard to the road, weather and traffic
conditions, shall change lanes into a lane this is not adjacent to that of the
stationary public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle,
waste collection vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to
conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and
4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle.
      (2)   If the driver is not traveling on a highway of a type described in
division (a)(1) of this section, or if the driver is traveling on a highway of
that type but it is not possible to change lanes or if to do so would be
unsafe, the driver shall proceed with due caution, reduce the speed of the
motor vehicle, and maintain a safe speed for the road, weather and traffic
conditions.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle,
emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection vehicle, vehicle used
by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in
accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle
from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and
property upon the highway.
   (c)   No person shall fail to drive a motor vehicle in compliance with
divisions (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section when so required by division (a) of
this section.
   (d)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding § 698.02 or R.C. § 2929.28, upon a finding that a
person operated a motor vehicle in violation of division (c) of this section,
the court, in addition to all other penalties provided by law, shall impose a
fine of two times the usual amount imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
   (e)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
(R.C. § 4511.213)
§ 432.22 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT PRIVATE DRIVEWAY, ALLEY OR BUILDING.
   (a)   (1)   The operator of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from
any place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all
traffic approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.44)
   (b)   (1)   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building,
private road or driveway within a business or residence district shall stop the
vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area
extending across the alley, building entrance, road or driveway, or in the
event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street to
be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.431)
   (c)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn into a private road or
driveway, alley or building from a public street or highway shall be governed
by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   Upon a roadway where traffic is proceeding in opposite directions,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made from that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof.
      (3)   Upon a roadway where traffic is restricted to one direction,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable
to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (d)   It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle entering a private
road or driveway, alley or building to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
lawfully using the sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across the private road
or driveway, alley or building.
§ 432.23 STOP SIGNS ON PRIVATE ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   (a)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may erect stop signs at
places where the road or driveway intersects with another private road or
driveway in the residential area, in compliance with all of the following
requirements:
      (1)   The stop sign is sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily
observant person and meets the specifications of and is placed in accordance
with the Manual adopted by the Department of Transportation pursuant to R.C. §
4511.09.
      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road or
driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road or
driveway that they are entering private property, stop signs have been posted
and must be obeyed, and the signs are enforceable by law enforcement officers
under state law. The sign required by this division, where appropriate, may be
incorporated with the sign required by R.C. § 4511.211(A)(2), or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (b)   R.C. §§ 4511.43(A) and 4511.46, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, shall be deemed to apply to the driver of a vehicle on a
private road or driveway where a stop sign is placed in accordance with
division (a) of this section and to a pedestrian crossing such a road or
driveway at an intersection where a stop sign is in place.
   (c)   When a stop sign is placed in accordance with division (a) of this
section, any law enforcement officer may apprehend a person found violating the
stop sign and may stop and charge the person with violating the stop sign.
   (d)   As used in this section, and for the purpose of applying R.C. §§
4511.43(A) and 4511.46, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to
conduct under this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   INTERSECTION.
         A.   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two private roads or driveways which join one another at, or
approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling
upon different private roads or driveways joining at any other angle may come
in conflict.
         B.   Where a private road or driveway includes two roadways 30 feet or
more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of the private roads or
driveways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
      (2)   OWNER and PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING
UNITS. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4511.211.
      (3)   ROADWAY. That portion of a private road or driveway improved,
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder.
If a private road or driveway includes two or more separate roadways, the term
“roadway” means any such roadway separately but not all such roadways
collectively.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.432)
§ 432.24 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF FUNERAL PROCESSION.
   (a)   As used in this section, FUNERAL PROCESSION means two or more vehicles
accompanying the cremated remains or the body of a deceased person in the
daytime when each of the vehicles has its  headlights lighted and is displaying
a purple and white or an orange and white pennant attached to each vehicle in
such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from any
direction.
   (b)   Excepting public safety vehicles proceeding in accordance with R.C. §
4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or when directed
otherwise by a police officer, pedestrians and the operators of all vehicles
shall yield the right-of-way to each vehicle that is a part of a funeral
procession. Whenever the lead vehicle in a funeral procession lawfully enters
an intersection, the remainder of the vehicles in the procession may continue
to follow the lead vehicle through the intersection, notwithstanding any
traffic-control devices or right-of-way provisions of the Revised Code,
provided that the operator of each vehicle exercises due care to avoid
colliding with any other vehicle or pedestrian.
   (c)   No person shall operate any vehicle as a part of a funeral procession
without having the headlights of the vehicle lighted and without displaying a
purple and white or an orange and white pennant in such a manner as to be
clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (e)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.451)
§ 432.25 DRIVING UPON SIDEWALKS, TREE LAWNS OR CURBS.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall drive any vehicle, other than a bicycle or an
electric bicycle if the motor is not engaged, upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area,
except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.
      (2)   This prohibition does not apply to a law enforcement officer, or
other person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state, using
an electric bicycle with the motor engaged while in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting local
authorities from regulating the operation of bicycles or electric bicycles,
except that no local authority may require that bicycles or electric bicycles
be operated on sidewalks.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.711)
   (d)   No person shall drive a vehicle on a tree lawn area or the curb of a
street, except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway or when
otherwise lawfully authorized.
§ 432.26 DRIVER’S VIEW AND CONTROL TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED BY LOAD OR PERSONS.
   (a)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the
driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (b)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in a position as to interfere
with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (c)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic; nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.70)
§ 432.27 DRIVING UPON STREET POSTED AS CLOSED FOR REPAIR.
   (a)   No person shall drive upon, along or across a street or highway, or
any part of a street or highway that has been closed in the process of its
construction, reconstruction or repair, and posted with appropriate signs by
the authority having jurisdiction to close the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.71(A))
   (b)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on or onto a public street or
highway that is temporarily covered by a rise in water level, including
groundwater or an overflow of water, and that is clearly marked by a sign that
specifies that the road is closed due to the rise in water level and that any
person who uses the closed portion of the road may be fined up to $2,000.
      (2)   A person who is issued a citation for a violation of division (b)
(1) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty and
waive the person’s right to contest the citation in court, but instead must
appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.
(R.C. § 4511.714(A), (B))
   (c)   (1)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
         B.   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.71(B))
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
         B.   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required
under R.C. § 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required under
any provision of law, the court imposing the sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (b) of this section
shall order the offender to reimburse one or more rescuers for the cost any
such rescuer incurred in rescuing the person, excluding any cost of
transporting the rescued person to a hospital or other facility for treatment
of injuries, up to a cumulative maximum of $2,000. If more than one rescuer was
involved in the emergency response, the court shall allocate the reimbursement
proportionately, according to the cost each rescuer incurred. A financial
sanction imposed under this section is a judgment in favor of the rescuer and,
subject to a determination of indigency under R.C. § 2929.28(B), a rescuer may
collect the financial sanction in the same manner as provided in R.C. §
2929.28.
(R.C. § 4511.714(C))
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Has the same meanings as in
R.C. § 9.60.
      (2)   FIREFIGHTING AGENCY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.
      (3)   PRIVATE FIRE COMPANY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.
      (4)   RESCUER. Means a state agency, political subdivision, firefighting
agency, private fire company, or emergency medical service organization.
(R.C. § 4511.714(D))
§ 432.28 FOLLOWING AND PARKING NEAR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (a)   The driver of any vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle on official business, shall not follow any emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle traveling in response to an alarm closer than 500 feet,
or drive into or park the vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus has
stopped in answer to a fire alarm, unless directed to do so by a police officer
or a firefighter.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.72)
§ 432.29 DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall, without the consent of the Fire Department official
in command, be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department that is
laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of
fire.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.73)
§ 432.30 DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety
zone.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.60)
§ 432.31 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (a)   (1)   Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way
traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
      (2)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven
only to the right of the rotary traffic island.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.32)
§ 432.32 DRIVING UPON DIVIDED ROADWAYS.
   (a)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by an
intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or a clearly indicated dividing
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over,
across or within any dividing space, barrier or section, except through an
opening, crossover or intersection established by public authority. This
section does not prohibit the occupancy of the dividing space, barrier or
section for the purpose of an emergency stop, or in compliance with an order of
a police officer.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.35)
§ 432.33 STOPPING FOR SCHOOL BUS; ACTUATING VISUAL SIGNALS; DISCHARGING
CHILDREN.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle, upon meeting or overtaking from either
direction any school bus stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging
any school child, person attending programs offered by community boards of
mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child
attending a program offered by a head start agency, shall stop at least ten
feet from the front or rear of the school bus and shall not proceed until the
school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by the school bus driver to
proceed. It is no defense to a charge under this division that the school bus
involved failed to display or be equipped with an automatically extended stop
warning sign as required by division (b) of this section.
   (b)   Every school bus shall be equipped with amber and red visual signals
meeting the requirements of R.C. § 4511.771 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type
approved by the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce, which shall be
actuated by the driver of the bus whenever but only whenever the bus is stopped
or stopping on the roadway for the purpose of receiving or discharging school
children, persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental
health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or children attending
programs offered by head start agencies. A school bus driver shall not actuate
the visual signals or the stop warning sign in designated school bus loading
areas where the bus is entirely off the roadway or at school buildings when
children or persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental
health and county boards of developmental disabilities are loading or unloading
at curbside or at buildings when children attending programs offered by head
start agencies are loading or unloading at curbside. The visual signals and
stop warning sign shall be synchronized or otherwise operated as required by
the Ohio Administrative Code.
   (c)   Where a highway has been divided into four or more traffic lanes, a
driver of a vehicle need not stop for a school bus approaching from the
opposite direction which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school child, persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or
children attending programs offered by head start agencies. The driver of any
vehicle overtaking the school bus shall comply with division (a) above.
   (d)   School buses operating on divided highways or on highways with four or
more traffic lanes shall receive and discharge all school children, persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of developmental disabilities, and children attending programs offered
by head start agencies on their residence side of the highway.
   (e)   No school bus driver shall start the driver’s bus until after any
child, person attending programs offered by community boards of mental health
and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending a program
offered by a head start agency who may have alighted therefrom has reached a
place of safety on the child’s or person’s residence side of the road.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section may be fined an
amount not to exceed $500. A person who is issued a citation for a violation of
division (a) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty
and waive the person’s right to contest the citation in a trial but instead
must appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.
      (2)   In addition to and independent of any other penalty provided by
law, the court or Mayor may impose upon an offender who violates this section a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7). When a
license is suspended under this section, the court or Mayor shall cause the
offender to deliver the license to the court, and the court or Clerk of the
Court immediately shall forward the license to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles,
together with notice of the court’s action.
   (g)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   HEAD START AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3301.32.
      (2)   SCHOOL BUS. As used in relation to children who attend a program
offered by a head start agency, means a bus that is owned and operated by a
head start agency, is equipped with an automatically extended stop warning sign
of a type approved by the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce, is
painted the color and displays the markings described in R.C. § 4511.77, and is
equipped with amber and red visual signals meeting the requirements of R.C. §
4511.771, irrespective of whether or not the bus has 15 or more children aboard
at any time. The term does not include a van owned and operated by a head start
agency, irrespective of its color, lights or markings.
(R.C. § 4511.75)
§ 432.34 DRIVING ACROSS GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad
grade crossing, the person shall stop within 50 feet, but not less than 15 feet
from the nearest rail of the railroad if any of the following circumstances
exist at the crossing:
         A.   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a train or other on-track equipment.
         B.   A crossing gate is lowered.
         C.   A flagperson gives or continues to give a signal of the approach
or passage of a train or other on-track equipment.
         D.   There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians, or railroad trains,
notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed.
         E.   An approaching train is emitting an audible signal or is plainly
visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.
         F.   There is insufficient undercarriage clearance to safely negotiate
the crossing.
         G.   There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without
obstructing the passage of other on-track equipment.
         H.   Approaching on-track equipment is emitting an audible signal or
is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.
      (2)   A.   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a
railroad grade crossing shall not proceed as long as any of the circumstances
described in divisions (a)(1)A. to (a)(1)F. of this section exist at the
crossing.
         B.   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a railroad
grade crossing shall not recklessly proceed as long as any of the circumstances
described in division (a)(1)G. or (a)(1)H. of this section exist at the
crossing.
   (b)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed unless the person is signaled by a law
enforcement officer or flagperson that it is permissible to do so.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
      (2)   In lieu of a fine or jail term for a violation of this section, a
court may instead order the offender to attend and successfully complete a
remedial safety training or presentation regarding rail safety that is offered
by an authorized and qualified organization that is selected by the court. The
offender shall complete the presentation within a time frame determined by the
court, not to exceed 180 days after the court issues the order. The offender
shall notify the court of the successful completion of the presentation. When
the offender notifies the court of the successful completion of the
presentation, the court shall waive any fine or jail term that it otherwise
would have imposed for a violation of this section.
(R.C. § 4511.62)
§ 432.35 STOPPING AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, the
operator of any bus, any school vehicle, or any vehicle transporting a material
or materials required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. Parts 100 through 185,
before crossing at grade any track of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle and,
while so stopped, shall listen through an open door or open window and look in
both directions along the track for any approaching train or other on-track
equipment, and for signals indicating the approach of a train or other on-track
equipment, and shall proceed only upon exercising due care after stopping,
looking, and listening as required by this section. Upon proceeding, the
operator of such a vehicle shall cross only in a gear that will ensure there
will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing the crossing and shall
not shift gears while crossing the tracks.
      (2)   Division (a) of this section does not apply at grade crossings when
any local authority has filed an application with the Public Utilities
Commission requesting the approval of an exempt crossing, and the Public
Utilities Commission has authorized and approved an exempt crossing as provided
in R.C. § 4511.63(B).
      (3)   As used in division (a) of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         A.   BUS. Any vehicle originally designed by its manufacturer to
transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver, or carries 16 or more
passengers, including the driver.
         B.   EXEMPT CROSSING. A highway rail grade crossing authorized and
approved by the Public Utilities Commission under R.C. § 4511.63(B) at which
vehicles may cross without making the stop otherwise required by this section.
         C.   SCHOOL VEHICLE. Any vehicle used for the transportation of pupils
to and from a school or school-related function if the vehicle is owned or
operated by, or operated under contract with, a public or nonpublic school.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of
division (a) of this section or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762,
4511.764, 4511.77 or 4511.79, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates division (a) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.63)
   (b)   (1)   As used in this section, ACTIVE GRADE CROSSING WARNING DEVICE
means signs, signals, gates, or other protective devices erected or installed
at a public highway-railway crossing at common grade and activated by an
electrical circuit.
      (2)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities, with the
approval of the Department, may designate dangerous highway crossings over
railroad tracks and erect stop signs thereat.
      (3)   A.   The Department and local authorities shall erect stop signs at
a railroad highway grade crossing in either of the following circumstances:
            1.   New warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning
devices are being installed at the grade crossing, and railroad crossbucks were
the only warning devices at the grade crossing prior to the installation of the
new warning devices.
            2.   The grade crossing is constructed after July 1, 2013, and only
warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning devices are
installed at the grade crossing.
         B.   Division (b)(3)A. of this section does not apply to a railroad
highway grade crossing that the Director of Transportation has exempted from
that division because of traffic flow or other considerations or factors.
      (4)   When stop signs are erected pursuant to division (b)(2) or (b)(3)
of this section, the operator of any vehicle shall stop within 50, but not less
than 15, feet from the nearest rail of the railroad tracks and shall exercise
due care before proceeding across such grade crossing.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (6)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.61)
§ 432.36 SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES OR EQUIPMENT AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor, steam
shovel, derrick, roller or any equipment or structure having a normal operating
speed of six or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load clearance of
less than nine inches above the level surface of a roadway, upon or across any
tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying with divisions (a)
(1) and (a)(2) of this section.
      (1)   Before making any such crossing, the person operating or moving any
such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same, and while stopped the
person shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any
approaching train or other on-track equipment and for signals indicating the
approach of a train or other on-track equipment, and shall proceed only upon
exercising due care.
      (2)   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic
signal or crossing gates or a flagperson or otherwise of the immediate approach
of a railroad train or car or other on-track equipment.
   (b)   If the normal sustained speed of the vehicle, equipment or structure
is not more than three miles per hour, the person owning, operating or moving
the same shall also give notice of the intended crossing to a station agent or
superintendent of the railroad, and a reasonable time shall be given to the
railroad to provide proper protection for the crossing. Where the vehicles or
equipment are being used in constructing or repairing a section of highway
lying on both sides of a railroad grade crossing, and in this construction or
repair it is necessary to repeatedly move the vehicles or equipment over the
crossing, one daily notice specifying when the work will start and stating the
hours during which it will be prosecuted is sufficient.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.64)
§ 432.37 OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTIONS, CROSSWALKS OR GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk, or drive
onto any railroad grade crossing, unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection, crosswalk or grade crossing to accommodate the
vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles, pedestrians or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.712)
§ 432.38 “PEELING”; CRACKING EXHAUST NOISES.
   No person shall operate any motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe
operation, or in compliance with law, in such a manner that the vehicle is so
rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position, or in the shifting of
gears while in motion, that the exhaust system emits a loud, cracking or
chattering noise unusual to its normal operation, or that the rubber tires of
the vehicle squeal or leave tire marks on the roadway, commonly known as
“peeling”.
§ 432.39 SHORTCUTTING ACROSS PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No operator of a motor vehicle shall enter upon private property for the
sole purpose of driving across that property, between abutting streets or other
public ways thereof. The failure to stop on the property in connection with or
in furtherance of the enterprise or activities being conducted on the property
shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation.
§ 432.40 ENTERING AND EXITING CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access highway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
§ 432.41 WEAVING; FULL TIME AND ATTENTION.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon any street
or highway in a weaving or zigzag course unless the irregular course is
necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle without giving
his or her full time and attention to the operation of the vehicle.
§ 432.42 OPERATION ON PATHS SET ASIDE FOR BICYCLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, snowmobile or all-
purpose vehicle upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, when
an appropriate sign giving notice of that use is posted on the path.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any rule of
the Director of Natural Resources governing the operation of motor vehicles,
snowmobiles, all-purpose vehicles and bicycles on lands under the Director’s
jurisdiction.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.713)
§ 432.43 LITTERING FROM MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless of
intent, throw, drop, discard or deposit litter from any motor vehicle in
operation upon any street, road or highway, except into a litter receptacle in
a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (b)   No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road or
highway shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded or deposited from
the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents
its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (c)   As used in this section, LITTER means garbage, trash, waste, rubbish,
ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts, furniture,
glass or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.82)
§ 432.44 USE OF EARPHONES WHILE DRIVING.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   EARPHONES. Any device that covers all or a portion of both ears and
that does either of the following:
         A.   Through either a physical connection to another device or a
wireless connection, provides the listener with radio programs, music, or other
information;
         B.   Provides hearing protection.
         EARPHONES does not include speakers or other listening devices that
are built into protective headgear.
      (2)   EARPLUGS. Any device that can be inserted into one or both ears and
that does either of the following:
         A.   Through either a physical connection to another device or a
wireless connection, provides the listener with radio programs, music, or other
information;
         B.   Provides hearing protection.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing earphones over,
or earplugs in, both ears.
   (c)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Any person wearing a hearing aid;
      (2)   Law enforcement personnel while on duty;
      (3)   Fire Department personnel and emergency medical service personnel
while on duty;
      (4)   Any person engaged in the operation of equipment for use in the
maintenance or repair of any highway;
      (5)   Any person engaged in the operation of refuse collection equipment;
      (6)   Any person wearing earphones or earplugs for hearing protection
while operating a motorcycle.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.84)
§ 432.45 TEXTING WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or
property open to the public for vehicular traffic while using, holding, or
physically supporting with any part of the person’s body an electronic wireless
communications device.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device to make
contact, for emergency purposes, with a law enforcement agency, hospital or
health care provider, fire department, or other similar emergency agency or
entity;
      (2)   A person driving a public safety vehicle while using an electronic
wireless communications device in the course of the person’s duties;
      (3)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device when
the person’s motor vehicle is in a stationary position and is outside a lane of
travel, at a traffic control signal that is currently directing traffic to
stop, or parked on a road or highway due to an emergency or road closure;
      (4)   A person using and holding an electronic wireless communications
device directly near the person’s ear for the purpose of making, receiving, or
conducting a telephone call, provided that the person does not manually enter
letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
      (5)   A person receiving wireless messages on an electronic wireless
communications device regarding the operation or navigation of a motor vehicle;
safety-related information, including emergency, traffic, or weather alerts; or
data used primarily by the motor vehicle, provided that the person does not
hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (6)   A person using the speaker phone function of the electronic
wireless communications device, provided that the person does not hold or
support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (7)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
navigation purposes, provided that the person does not do either of the
following during the use:
         A.   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         B.   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (8)   A person using a feature or function of the electronic wireless
communications device with a single touch or single swipe, provided that the
person does not do either of the following during the use:
         A.   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         B.   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (9)   A person operating a commercial truck while using a mobile data
terminal that transmits and receives data;
      (10)   A person operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or
on behalf of a utility, if the person is acting in response to an emergency,
power outage, or circumstance that affects the health or safety of individuals;
      (11)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device in
conjunction with a voice-operated or hands-free feature or function of the
vehicle or of the device without the use of either hand except to activate,
deactivate, or initiate the feature or function with a single touch or swipe,
provided the person does not hold or support the device with any part of the
person’s body;
      (12)   A person using technology that physically or electronically
integrates the device into the motor vehicle, provided that the person does not
do either of the following during the use:
         A.   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         B.   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body.
      (13)   A person storing an electronic wireless communications device in a
holster, harness, or article of clothing on the person’s body.
   (c)   If a law enforcement officer issues an offender a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of division (a) of this section, the officer shall do
both of the following:
      (1)   Report the issuance of the ticket, citation, or summons to the
officer’s law enforcement agency;
      (2)   Ensure that such report indicates the offender’s race.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of operating a
motor vehicle while using an electronic wireless communication device, an
unclassified misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in divisions (d)(1)
to (d)(5) of this section.
      (1)   The offender shall be fined, and is subject to a suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege, as follows:
         A.   Except as provided in divisions (d)(1)B., (d)(1)C., (d)(1)D., and
(d)(2) of this section, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine of not
more than $150.
         B.   If, within two years of the violation, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one prior violation of this section, R.C. §
4511.204, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court shall
impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $250.
         C.   If, within two years of the violation, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more prior violations of this section,
R.C. § 4511.204, or a substantially equivalent or municipal ordinance, the
court shall impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $500. The court
also may impose a suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege for 90 days.
         D.   Notwithstanding divisions (d)(1)A. to (d)(1)C. of this section,
if the offender was operating the motor vehicle at the time of the violation in
a construction zone where a sign was posted in accordance with R.C. § 4511.98,
the court, in addition to all other penalties provided by law, shall impose
upon the offender a fine of two times the amount imposed for the violation
under division (d)(1)A., (d)(1)B., or (d)(1)C. of this section, as applicable.
      (2)   If the offender is in the category of offenders to whom division
(d)(1)A. of this section applies, in lieu of payment of the fine of $150 under
division (d)(1)A. of this section and the assessment of points under division
(d)(4) of this section, the offender instead may elect to attend the distracted
driving safety course, as described in R.C. § 4511.991. If the offender attends
and successfully completes the course, the offender shall be issued written
evidence that the offender successfully completed the course. The offender
shall not be required to pay the fine and shall not have the points assessed
against that offender’s driver’s license if the offender submits the written
evidence to the court within 90 days of the violation of division (a) of this
section. However, successful completion of the course does not result in a
dismissal of the charges for the violation, and the violation is a prior
offense under divisions (d)(1)B. and (d)(1)C. of this section if the offender
commits a subsequent violation or violations of division (a) of this section
within two years of the offense for which the course was completed. This
division does not apply with respect to any offender in the category of
offenders to whom division (d)(1)B., (d)(1)C., or (d)(1)D. of this section
applies.
      (3)   The court may impose any other penalty authorized under R.C. §§
2929.21 to 2929.28. However, the court shall not impose a fine or a suspension
not otherwise specified in division (d)(1) of this section. The court also
shall not impose a jail term or community residential sanction.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (d)(2) of this section, points shall
be assessed for a violation of division (a) of this section in accordance with
R.C. § 4510.036.
      (5)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
   (e)   A prosecution for an offense in violation of this section does not
preclude a prosecution for an offense in violation of R.C. § 4511.204 based on
the same conduct. However, the two offenses are allied offenses of similar
import under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (f)   (1)   A law enforcement officer does not have probable cause and shall
not stop the operator of a motor vehicle for purposes of enforcing this section
unless the officer visually observes the operator using, holding, or physically
supporting with any part of the person’s body the electronic wireless
communications device.
      (2)   A law enforcement officer who stops the operator of a motor vehicle
for a violation of division (a) of this section shall inform the operator that
the operator may decline a search of the operator’s electronic wireless
communications device. The officer shall not do any of the following:
         A.   Access the device without a warrant, unless the operator
voluntarily and unequivocally gives consent for the officer to access the
device;
         B.   Confiscate the device while awaiting the issuance of a warrant to
access the device;
         C.   Obtain consent from the operator to access the device through
coercion or any other improper means. Any consent by the operator to access the
device shall be voluntary and unequivocal before the officer may access the
device without a warrant.
   (g)   As used in this section:
      (1)   ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE.
         A.   Includes any of the following:
            1.   A wireless telephone;
            2.   A text-messaging device;
            3.   A personal digital assistant;
            4.   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
            5.   Any device capable of displaying a video, movie, broadcast
television image, or visual image;
            6.   Any other substantially similar wireless device that is
designed or used to communicate text, initiate or receive communication, or
exchange information or data.
         B.   An ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE does not include a
two-way radio transmitter or receiver used by a person who is licensed by the
federal communications commission to participate in the amateur radio service.
      (2)   UTILITY. An entity specified in R.C. § 4905.03(A), (C), (D), (E),
or (G).
      (3)   UTILITY SERVICE VEHICLE. A vehicle owned or operated by a utility.
      (4)   VOICE-OPERATED OR HANDS-FREE FEATURE OR FUNCTION. A feature or
function that allows a person to use an electronic wireless communications
device without the use of either hand, except to activate, deactivate, or
initiate the feature or function with a single touch or single swipe.
(R.C. § 4511.204)
Statutory reference:
   No preemption for local regulations imposing greater penalties, see R.C. §
4511.204(E)
§ 432.46 USE OF ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICES BY MINORS OR
PROBATIONARY DRIVERS WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit who has not attained the
age of 18 years and no holder of a probationary driver’s license shall drive a
motor vehicle on any street, highway, or property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking while using in any manner an
electronic wireless communications device.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to either of the
following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law enforcement
agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or other similar
emergency agency or entity;
      (2)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device whose
motor vehicle is in a stationary position and the motor vehicle is outside a
lane of travel;
      (3)   A person using a navigation device in a voice-operated or hands-
free manner who does not manipulate the device while driving.
   (c)   (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (a) of this section shall be fined $150. In addition, the
court shall impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license
or permit for a definite period of 60 days.
      (2)   If the person previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or
a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section, whoever violates
this section shall be fined $300. In addition, the court shall impose a class
seven suspension of the person’s driver’s license or permit for a definite
period of one year.
   (d)   The filing of a sworn complaint against a person for a violation of
this section does not preclude the filing of a sworn complaint for a violation
of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same conduct. However, if a person is adjudicated a
delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section
and is also adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a
violation of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same conduct, the two offenses are allied
offenses of similar import under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (e)   As used in this section, ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE
includes any of the following:
      (1)   A wireless telephone;
      (2)   A personal digital assistant;
      (3)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
      (4)   A text-messaging device;
      (5)   Any other substantially similar electronic wireless device that is
designed or used to communicate via voice, image, or written word.
(R.C. § 4511.205)
§ 432.47 SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   No operator or passenger of a motor vehicle shall operate or permit
the operation of any sound amplification system which can be heard outside the
vehicle from 50 or more feet when the vehicle is being operated or parked upon
a street, highway or private property normally available for public parking.
   (b)   SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM shall include any radio, tape player,
compact disc player, loudspeaker, or other electronic device used nor the
amplification of the human voice, music, or any other noise or sound.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
operator was not otherwise prohibited by law from operating the sound
amplification system, and that any of the following apply:
      (1)   The system was being operated to request medical or vehicular
assistance or to warn of a hazardous road condition;
      (2)   The vehicle was an emergency or public safety vehicle;
      (3)   The vehicle was owned and operated by the Village of Commercial
Point or a gas, electric, communications, refuse or water utility company; or
      (4)   The vehicle was being used in a parade and the person or
organization conducting the parade has obtained a parade permit from the
appropriate village agency;
(Ord. 01-12, passed 10-1-2001)
§ 432.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 434
O.V.I.; Reckless Operation; Speed
434.01   Driving or physical control of vehicle while under the influence of
alcohol or drugs.
434.02   Immobilizing or disabling device violation.
434.03   Reckless operation on streets, public or private property.
434.04   Maximum speed limits; assured clear distance ahead.
434.05   Speed limits on private roads and driveways.
434.06   Slow speed; posted minimum speeds.
434.07   Speed limitations over bridges.
434.08   Speed exceptions for emergency or safety vehicles.
434.09   Reasonable control.
434.10   Street racing, stunt driving and street takeovers prohibited.
434.11   Vehicular homicide; vehicular manslaughter; vehicular assault.
434.12   Under-speed vehicles, including golf carts.
434.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Alcohol defined, see R.C. § 4301.01
   Alteration of prima facie speed limits, see R.C. §§ 4511.21, 4511.22,
4511.23
   Drug of abuse defined, see R.C. § 3719.011
   Criminal offenses by drivers of commercial vehicles, see §§
442.05,
442.08
   Driving upon sidewalks, tree lawns or curbs, see §
432.25
   Intoxicated pedestrians, see §
416.10
   “Peeling”, see §
432.38
   Liquor consumption in motor vehicle, see §
612.04
   Weaving; full time and attention, see §
432.41
§ 434.01 DRIVING OR PHYSICAL CONTROL OF VEHICLE WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF
ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.
   (a)   Driving under the influence.
      (1)   No person shall operate any vehicle within this municipality, if,
at the time of the operation, any of the following apply:
         A.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them.
         B.   The person has a concentration of 0.08% or more but less than
0.17% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         C.   The person has a concentration of 0.096% or more but less than
0.204% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma.
         D.   The person has a concentration of 0.08 grams or more but less
than 0.17 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
         E.   The person has a concentration of 0.11 grams or more but less
than 0.238 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s
urine.
         F.   The person has a concentration of 0.17% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         G.   The person has a concentration of 0.204% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
         H   The person has a concentration of 0.17 grams or more by weight of
alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
         I.   The person has a concentration of 0.238 grams or more by weight
of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
         J.   Except as provided in division (k) of this section, the person
has a concentration of any of the following controlled substances or
metabolites of a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds any of the following:
            1.   The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s
urine of at least 500 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            2.   The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s
urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s urine
or has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            3.   The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of
cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            4.   The person has a concentration of heroin in the person’s urine
of at least 2,000 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s urine or
has a concentration of heroin in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            5.   The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-
monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s urine of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s urine or has
a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma.
            6.   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s urine
of at least 25 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s urine or a
concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of
at least ten nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma.
            7.   The person has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s
urine of at least ten nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least two nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            8.   Either of the following applies:
               a.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or a combination of them, and the person has a concentration of
marihuana metabolite in the person’s urine of at least 15 nanograms of
marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a
concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least five nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
               b.   The person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in
the person’s urine of at least 35 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite
in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms
of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma.
            9.   The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the
person’s urine of at least 500 nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of
the person’s urine or has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of
methamphetamine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            10.   The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the
person’s urine of at least 25 nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of phencyclidine per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            11.   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a rule pursuant to
R.C. § 4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia divinorum and the amount of
salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of salvia divinorum and salvinorin
A in a person’s urine, in a person’s whole blood, or in a person’s blood serum
or plasma at or above which the person is impaired for purposes of operating
any vehicle within this state, the rule is in effect, and the person has a
concentration of salvia divinorum or salvinorin A of at least that amount so
specified by rule in the person’s urine, in the person’s whole blood, or in the
person’s blood serum or plasma.
      (2)   No person who, within 20 years of the conduct described in division
(a)(2)A. of this section, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
a violation of this division or a substantially equivalent State law or
municipal ordinance, division (a)(1) of this section or a substantially
equivalent State law or municipal ordinance, or shall do both of the following:
         A.   Operate any vehicle within this municipality while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         B.   Subsequent to being arrested for operating the vehicle as
described in division (a)(2)A. of this section, being asked by a law
enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and being advised by the
officer in accordance with R.C. § 4511.192 or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance of the consequences of the person’s refusal or submission
to the test or tests, refuse to submit to the test or tests.
   (b)   Underage alcohol consumption. No person under 21 years of age shall
operate any vehicle within this municipality if, at the time of the operation,
any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02% but less than
0.08% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood;
      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.03% but less than
0.096% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma;
      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02 grams but less than
0.08 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath;
      (4)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.028 grams but less
than 0.11 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
   (c)   Prosecution; limitation on convictions. In any proceeding arising out
of one incident, a person may be charged with a violation of division (a)(1)A.
or (a)(2) and a violation of division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section,
but the person may not be convicted of more than one violation of these
divisions.
   (d)   Evidence; tests.
      (1)   A.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a)(1)A. of this section or for an equivalent offense
that is vehicle-related, the result of any test of any blood, oral fluid, or
urine withdrawn and analyzed at any health care provider, as defined in R.C. §
2317.02, may be admitted with expert testimony to be considered with any other
relevant and competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the
defendant.
         B.   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of division (a) or
(b) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, the
court may admit evidence on the presence and concentration of alcohol, drugs of
abuse, controlled substances, metabolites of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them in the defendant’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, urine, oral fluid, or other bodily substance at the time of the alleged
violation as shown by chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn within three
hours of the time of the alleged violation. The three-hour time limit specified
in this division regarding the admission of evidence does not extend or affect
the two-hour time limit specified in R.C. § 4511.192(A) as the maximum period
of time during which a person may consent to a chemical test or tests as
described in that section. The court may admit evidence on the presence and
concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse, or a combination of them as described
in this division when a person submits to a blood, breath, urine, oral fluid,
or other bodily substance test at the request of a law enforcement officer
under R.C. § 4511.191 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a
blood or urine sample is obtained pursuant to a search warrant. Only a
physician, a registered nurse, an emergency medical technician-intermediate, an
emergency medical technician-paramedic, or a qualified technician, chemist, or
phlebotomist shall withdraw a blood sample for the purpose of determining the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma. This
limitation does not apply to the taking of breath, oral fluid, or urine
specimens. A person authorized to withdraw blood under this division may refuse
to withdraw blood under this division, if in that person’s opinion, the
physical welfare of the person would be endangered by the withdrawing of blood.
The bodily substance withdrawn under this division (d)(1)B. shall be analyzed
in accordance with methods approved by the Director of Health by an individual
possessing a valid permit issued by the Director pursuant to R.C. § 3701.143.
         C.   As used in division (d)(1)B. of this section, EMERGENCY MEDICAL
TECHNICIAN-INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.
      (2)   In a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (a) of this
section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, if there was at
the time the bodily substance was withdrawn a concentration of less than the
applicable concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (a)(1)B., (a)(1)C.,
(a)(1)D. and (a)(1)E. of this section or less than the applicable concentration
of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled
substance specified for a violation of division (a)(1)J. of this section, that
fact may be considered with other competent evidence in determining the guilt
or innocence of the defendant. This division does not limit or affect a
criminal prosecution for a violation of division (b) of this section.
      (3)   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of the
chemical test shall be made available to the person or the person’s attorney,
immediately upon the completion of the chemical test analysis. If the chemical
test was obtained pursuant to division (d)(1)B. of this section, the person
tested may have a physician, a registered nurse or a qualified technician,
chemist or phlebotomist of the person’s own choosing administer a chemical test
or tests, at the person’s expense, in addition to any administered at the
request of a law enforcement officer. If the person was under arrest as
described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the arresting officer shall advise the
person at the time of the arrest that the person may have an independent
chemical test taken at the person’s own expense. If the person was under arrest
other than described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the form to be read to the
person to be tested, as required under division (g) of this section, shall
state that the person may have an independent test performed at the person’s
expense. The failure or inability to obtain an additional chemical test by a
person shall not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the chemical
test or tests taken at the request of a law enforcement officer.
      (4)   A.   As used in division (d)(4)B. and (d)(4)C. of this section,
“National Highway Traffic Safety Administration” means the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration established as an administration of the United
States Department of Transportation under 96 Stat. 2415 (1983), 49 U.S.C. 105.
         B.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a) or (b) of this section, of a municipal ordinance
relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse, or of a municipal ordinance relating to
operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine, if a law enforcement officer has
administered a field sobriety test to the operator of the vehicle involved in
the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible, and generally accepted field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including
but not limited to any testing standards then in effect that were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (d)(4)B.1. or (d)(4)B.2. of this section and if the testimony or
evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the
testimony or evidence and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the
trier of fact considers to be appropriate.
         C.   Division (d)(4)B. of this section does not limit or preclude a
court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (d)(4)B. of this section.
   (e)   Laboratory report.
      (1)   Subject to division (e)(3) of this section, in any criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division (a)(1)B.,
(a)(1)C., (a)(1)D., (a)(1)E., (a)(1)F., (a)(1)G., (a)(1)H., (a)(1)I. or (a)
(1)J. or (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3) or (b)(4) of this section or for an equivalent
offense that is substantially equivalent to any of those divisions, a
laboratory report from any laboratory personnel issued a permit by the
Department of Health authorizing an analysis as described in this division that
contains an analysis of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine
or other bodily substance tested and that contains all of the information
specified in this division shall be admitted as prima facie evidence of the
information and statements that the report contains. The laboratory report
shall contain all of the following:
         A.   The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the
analysis;
         B.   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them that was found;
         C.   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director or a
designee of the director that contains the name of each certified analyst or
test performer involved with the report, the analyst’s or test performer’s
employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a
notation that performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the
analyst’s or test performer’s regular duties;
         D.   An outline of the analyst’s or test performer’s education,
training and experience in performing the type of analysis involved and a
certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate quality control
standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the
Department of Health.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission
of evidence, a report of the type described in division (e)(1) of this section
is not admissible against the defendant to whom it pertains in any proceeding,
other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless the
prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant’s attorney or, if
the defendant has no attorney, on the defendant.
      (3)   A report of the type described in division (e)(1) of this section
shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity or amount of any
substance if, within seven days after the defendant to whom the report pertains
or the defendant’s attorney receives a copy of the report, the defendant or the
defendant’s attorney demands the testimony of the person who signed the report.
The judge in the case may extend the seven-day time limit in the interest of
justice.
   (f)   Limitation of liability.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, any physician,
registered nurse, emergency medical technician-intermediate, emergency medical
technician-paramedic, or qualified technician, chemist or phlebotomist who
withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.192, and any hospital, first-aid station or clinic at which
blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.192, is immune from criminal liability and civil liability
based upon a claim of assault and battery or any other claim that is not a
claim of malpractice, for any act performed in withdrawing blood from the
person. The immunity provided in this division also extends to an emergency
medical service organization that employs an emergency medical technician-
intermediate or emergency medical technician-paramedic who withdraws blood
under this section. The immunity provided in this division is not available to
a person who withdraws blood if the person engages in willful or wanton
misconduct.
      (2)   As used in division (f)(1), EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-
INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have the same meanings
as in R.C. § 4765.01.
(R.C. § 4511.19(A) - (F))
   (g)   Implied consent.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division (g), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   ALCOHOL MONITORING DEVICE. Any device that provides for
continuous alcohol monitoring, any ignition interlock device, any immobilizing
or disabling device other than an ignition interlock device that is constantly
available to monitor the concentration of alcohol in a person’s system, or any
other device that provides for the automatic testing and periodic reporting of
alcohol consumption by a person and that a court orders a person to use as a
sanction imposed as a result of the person’s conviction of or plea of guilty to
an offense.
         B.   COMMUNITY ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 5119.01.
         C.   PHYSICAL CONTROL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.194.
      (2)   Implied consent to chemical tests. Any person who operates a
vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for
vehicular travel or parking within this municipality or who is in physical
control of a vehicle shall be deemed to have given consent to a chemical test
or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral
fluid, or urine to determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance,
metabolite of a controlled substance, or combination content of the person’s
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine if arrested
for a violation of division (a), (b) or (o) of this section, R.C. § 4511.19(A)
or (B), 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or any other
municipal O.V.I. ordinance.
      (3)   Tests at request of law enforcement agent. The chemical test or
tests under division (g)(2) of this section shall be administered at the
request of a law enforcement officer having reasonable grounds to believe the
person was operating or in physical control of a vehicle in violation of a
division, section or ordinance identified in division (g)(2) of this section.
The law enforcement agency by which the officer is employed shall designate
which of the tests shall be administered.
      (4)   Effect of death or unconsciousness. Any person who is dead or
unconscious, or who otherwise is in a condition rendering the person incapable
of refusal, shall be deemed to have consented as provided in division (g)(2) of
this section and the test or tests may be administered, subject to R.C. §§
313.12 to 313.16.
      (5)   Chemical tests.
         A.   If a law enforcement officer arrests a person for a violation of
R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or a municipal O.V.I. ordinance and if the person if convicted would
be required to be sentenced under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c), (G)(1)(d) or (G)(1)
(e), the law enforcement officer shall request the person to submit, and the
person shall submit, to a chemical test or tests of the person’s whole blood,
blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine for the purpose of
determining the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a
controlled substance, or combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine. A law enforcement officer who
makes a request pursuant to this division that a person submit to a chemical
test or tests is not required to advise the person of the consequences of
submitting to, or refusing to submit to, the test or tests and is not required
to give the person the form described in division (g)(7) of this section, but
the officer shall advise the person at the time of the arrest that if the
person refuses to take a chemical test the officer may employ whatever
reasonable means are necessary to ensure that the person submits to a chemical
test of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma. The officer shall
also advise the person at the time of the arrest that the person may have an
independent chemical test taken at the person’s own expense. Divisions (g)(3)
and (g)(4) of this section apply to the administration of a chemical test or
tests pursuant to this division.
         B.   If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test upon a request
made pursuant to division (g)(5)A. of this section, the law enforcement officer
who made the request may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary to
ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma. A law enforcement officer who acts pursuant to this
division to ensure that a person submits to a chemical test of the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma is immune from criminal and civil
liability based upon a claim for assault and battery or any other claim for the
acts, unless the officer so acted with malicious purpose, in bad faith, or in a
wanton or reckless manner.
(R.C. § 4511.191(A))
      (6)   Advice required. Except as provided in division (g)(5) of this
section, the arresting law enforcement officer shall give advice in accordance
with this division to any person under arrest for a violation of division (a),
(b) or (o) of this section, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other municipal O.V.I.
ordinance. The officer shall give that advice in a written form that contains
the information described in division (g)(7) of this section and shall read the
advice to the person. The form shall contain a statement that the form was
shown to the person under arrest and read to the person by the arresting
officer. One or more persons shall witness the arresting officer’s reading of
the form, and the witnesses shall certify to this fact by signing the form. The
person must submit to the chemical test or tests, subsequent to the request of
the arresting officer, within two hours of the time of the alleged violation
and, if the person does not submit to the test or tests within that two-hour
time limit, the failure to submit automatically constitutes a refusal to submit
to the test or tests.
      (7)   Certification of arrest. Except as provided in division (g)(5) of
this section, if a person is under arrest as described in division (g)(6) of
this section, before the person may be requested to submit to a chemical test
or tests to determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance,
metabolite of a controlled substance or combination content of the person’s
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine, the arresting
officer shall read the following form to the person:
            “You now are under arrest for (specifically state the offense under
state law or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for which the
person was arrested – operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, a
drug, or a combination of them; operating a vehicle while under the influence
of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled
substance; operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption; or having
physical control of a vehicle while under the influence).
            “If you refuse to take any chemical test required by law, your Ohio
driving privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay a
fee to have the privileges reinstated. If you have a prior conviction of O.V.I.
or operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed controlled
substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance under state or
municipal law within the preceding 20 years, you are now under arrest for state
O.V.I., and, if you refuse to take a chemical test, you will face increased
penalties if you subsequently are convicted of the state O.V.I. (Read this part
unless the person is under arrest for solely having physical control of a
vehicle while under the influence.) “If you take any chemical test required by
law and are found to be at or over the prohibited amount of alcohol, a
controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in your whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as set by law, your Ohio driving
privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay a fee to
have the privileges reinstated.
            “If you take a chemical test, you may have an independent chemical
test taken at your own expense.”
      (8)   Actions required by arresting officer. If the arresting law
enforcement officer does not ask a person under arrest as described in division
(g)(5) of this section or division (g)(6) of this section to submit to a
chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this section, the arresting
officer shall seize the Ohio or out-of-state driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit of the person and immediately forward it to the court in
which the arrested person is to appear on the charge. If the arrested person is
not in possession of the person’s license or permit or it is not in the
person’s vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it to the law
enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after the arrest,
and, upon the surrender, the agency immediately shall forward the license or
permit to the court in which the person is to appear on the charge. Upon
receipt of the license or permit, the court shall retain it pending the
arrested person’s initial appearance and any action taken under R.C. §
4511.196.
      (9)   Duties of officer.
         A.   If a law enforcement officer asks a person under arrest as
described in division (g)(5) of this section to submit to a chemical test or
tests under that division and the test results indicate a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense, or if a law enforcement
officer asks a person under arrest as described in division (g)(6) of this
section to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this
section, if the officer advises the person in accordance with this section of
the consequences of the person’s refusal or submission, and if either the
person refuses to submit to the test or tests or, unless the arrest was for a
violation of division (o) of this section, R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the person submits to the test or tests and the
test results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine at the time of the alleged
offense, the arresting officer shall do all of the following:
            1.   On behalf of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, notify the
person that, independent of any penalties or sanctions imposed upon the person,
the person’s Ohio driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege is suspended immediately, that the suspension
will last at least until the person’s initial appearance on the charge, which
will be held within five days after the date of the person’s arrest or the
issuance of a citation to the person, and that the person may appeal the
suspension at the initial appearance or during the period of time ending 30
days after that initial appearance;
            2.   Seize the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit of
the person and immediately forward it to the Registrar. If the arrested person
is not in possession of the person’s license or permit or it is not in the
person’s vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it to the law
enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after the person is
given notice of the suspension, and, upon the surrender, the officer’s
employing agency immediately shall forward the license or permit to the
Registrar;
            3.   Verify the person’s current residence and, if it differs from
that on the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, notify
the Registrar of the change;
            4.   Send to the Registrar, within 48 hours after the arrest of the
person, a sworn report that includes all of the following statements:
               a.   That the officer had reasonable grounds to believe that, at
the time of the arrest, the arrested person was operating a vehicle in
violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or a municipal O.V.I. ordinance or for
being in physical control of a stationary vehicle in violation of R.C. §
4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
               b.   That the person was arrested and charged with a violation
of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or a municipal O.V.I. ordinance;
               c.   Unless division (g)(9)A.4.e. of this section applies, that
the officer asked the person to take the designated chemical test or tests,
advised the person in accordance with this section of the consequences of
submitting to, or refusing to take, the test or tests, and gave the person the
form described in division (g)(7) of this section;
               d.   Unless division (g)(9)A.4.e. of this section applies, that
either the person refused to submit to the chemical test or tests or, unless
the arrest was for a violation of R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the person submitted to the chemical test or tests and the
test results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine at the time of the alleged
offense;
               e.   If the person was under arrest as described in division (g)
(5) of this section and the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance
with that division, that the person was under arrest as described in that
division, that the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance with
that division, and that test results indicated a prohibited concentration of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the time
of the alleged offense.
         B.   Division (g)(9)A. of this section does not apply to a person who
is arrested for a violation of division (o) of this section, R.C. § 4511.194 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, who is asked by a law enforcement officer to
submit to a chemical test or tests under this section, and who submits to the
test or tests, regardless of the amount of alcohol, a controlled substance, or
a metabolite of a controlled substance that the test results indicate is
present in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid,
or urine.
      (10)   Sworn report of arresting officer.
         A.   The arresting officer shall give the officer’s sworn report that
is completed under this section to the arrested person at the time of the
arrest, or the Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall send the report to the person
by regular first-class mail as soon as possible after receipt of the report,
but not later than 14 days after receipt of it. An arresting officer may give
an unsworn report to the arrested person at the time of the arrest, provided
the report is complete when given to the arrested person and subsequently is
sworn to by the arresting officer. As soon as possible, but not later than 48
hours after the arrest of the person, the arresting officer shall send a copy
of the sworn report to the court in which the arrested person is to appear on
the charge for which the person was arrested.
         B.   The sworn report of an arresting officer completed under this
section is prima facie proof of the information and statements that it
contains. It shall be admitted and considered as prima facie proof of the
information and statements that it contains in any appeal under R.C. § 4511.197
relative to any suspension of a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit or nonresident operating privilege that results from the
arrest covered by the report.
(R.C. § 4511.192)
      (11)   Suspension effective immediately. A suspension of a person’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege under this section for the time described in R.C. § 4511.191(B) or
(C) is effective immediately from the time at which the arresting officer
serves the notice of suspension upon the arrested person. Any subsequent
finding that the person is not guilty of the charge that resulted in the
person’s being requested to take the chemical test or tests under division (g)
(1) through (g)(5) of this section does not affect the suspension.
      (12)   Initial appearance. If a person arrested for operating a vehicle
in violation of division (a) or (b) of this section, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B),
or any other municipal O.V.I. ordinance, or for being in physical control of a
vehicle in violation of division (o) of this section or R.C. § 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, regardless of whether the
person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege is or is not suspended under R.C. § 4511.191(B) or (C) or
R.C. Chapter 4510, the person’s initial appearance on the charge resulting from
the arrest shall be held within five days of the person’s arrest or the
issuance of the citation to him or her, subject to any continuance granted by
the court pursuant to R.C. § 4511.197 regarding the issues specified in that
section.
(R.C. § 4511.191(D))
   (h)   Penalty for driving under the influence.
      (1)   Whoever violates any provisions of divisions (a)(1)A. through (a)
(1)I. or (a)(2) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them. Whoever
violates division (a)(1)J. of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle
while under the influence of a listed controlled substance or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance. The court shall sentence the offender for
either offense under R.C. Chapter 2929, except as otherwise authorized or
required by divisions (h)(1)A. through (h)(1)E. of this section:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)B., (h)(1)C., (h)
(1)D. or (h)(1)E. of this section, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree and the court shall sentence the offender to all of the
penalties and sanctions provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a)(i) to (G)(1)(a)
(iv).
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of division (a) of this
section, or one other equivalent offense is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and
sanctions provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) to (G)(1)(b)(v).
         C.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division (a) of this
section or other equivalent offenses is guilty of a misdemeanor. The court
shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions provided in
R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c)(i) to (G)(1)(c)(vi).
         D.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of division (a) of
this section or other equivalent offenses or an offender who, within 20 years
of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to five or
more violations of that nature, or an offender who previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a specification of the type described in R.C.
§ 2941.1413, is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
         E.   An offender who previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) that was a felony, regardless of
when the violation and the conviction or guilty plea occurred, is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   An offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (a) of this section and who subsequently seeks reinstatement of the
driver’s or occupational driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege suspended under this section or R.C. § 4511.19 as a result of the
conviction or guilty plea shall pay a reinstatement fee as provided in R.C. §
4511.191(F)(2).
      (3)   A.   If an offender is sentenced to a jail term under R.C. §
4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) or (G)(1)(b)(ii) or (G)(1)(c)(i) or (G)(1)(c)(ii) and if,
within 60 days of sentencing of the offender, the court issues a written
finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail
where the offender is required to serve the term, the offender will not be able
to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following the date of
sentencing, the court may impose an alternative sentence as specified in R.C. §
4511.19(G)(3) that includes a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring,
with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and
continuous alcohol monitoring.
         B.   As an alternative to the mandatory jail terms as required by R.C.
§ 4511.19(G)(1), the court may sentence the offender as provided in R.C. §
4511.19(G)(3).
      (4)   If an offender’s driver’s or occupational driver’s license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under division (h) of
this section or R.C. § 4511.19(G) and if R.C. § 4510.13 permits the court to
grant limited driving privileges, the court may grant the limited driving
privileges in accordance with that section. If division (A)(7) of that section
requires the court impose as a condition of the privileges that the offender
must display on the vehicle that is driven subject to the privileges restricted
license plates that are issued under R.C. § 4503.231, except as provided in
division (B) of that section, the court shall impose that condition as one of
the conditions of the limited driving privileges granted to the offender,
except as provided in R.C. § 4503.231(B).
      (5)   Fines imposed under this section for a violation of division (a) of
this section shall be distributed as provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(5).
      (6)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order of criminal
forfeiture under division (h)(1)C., (h)(1)D. or (h)(1)E. of this section is
assigned or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in
addition to or independent of any other penalty established by law, the court
may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of
the National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds of any fine so
imposed shall be distributed in accordance with division (C)(2) of that
section.
      (7)   In all cases in which an offender is sentenced under division (h)
of this section, the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, the court, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(f) or R.C. § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for
any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under division
(h) of this section.
      (8)   A court may order an offender to reimburse a law enforcement agency
for any costs incurred by the agency with respect to a chemical test or tests
administered to the offender if all of the following apply:
         A.   The offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (a) of this section.
         B.   The test or tests were of the offender’s whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, oral fluid, or urine.
         C.   The test or tests indicated that the offender had one of the
following at the time of the offense:
            1.   A prohibited concentration of a controlled substance or a
metabolite of a controlled substance in the offender’s whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine;
            2.   A drug of abuse or a metabolite of a drug of abuse in the
offender’s oral fluid.
      (9)   A court may warn any person who is convicted of or who pleads
guilty to a violation of division (a) of this section or an equivalent offense
that a subsequent violation of this section or an equivalent offense that
results in the death of another or the unlawful termination of another’s
pregnancy may result in the person being guilty of aggravated vehicular
homicide under R.C. § 2903.06. The court may warn the person of the applicable
penalties for that violation under R.C. §§ 2903.06 and 2929.142.
      (10)   As used in division (h) of this section, ELECTRONIC MONITORING has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   (i)   Penalty for operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption.
Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of operating a motor
vehicle after underage alcohol consumption and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (i)(2) of this section,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. In addition to
any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class six
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6). The court may grant
limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under R.C. §§ 4510.021
and 4510.13. The court may grant unlimited driving privileges with an ignition
interlock device relative to the suspension and may reduce the period of
suspension as authorized under R.C. § 4510.022. If the court grants unlimited
driving privileges under R.C. § 4510.022, the court shall suspend any jail term
imposed under division (i)(1) of this section as required under that section.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of division (a)
of this section or other equivalent offense or offenses, the offender is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition to any other sanction imposed
for the offense, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4). The court may grant limited driving
privileges relative to the suspension under R.C. §§ 4510.021 and 4510.13.
      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to § 698.02
(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing
the violation of division (b) of this section.
   (j)   Treatment programs.
      (1)   No court shall sentence an offender to an alcohol treatment program
under this section unless the treatment program complies with the minimum
standards for alcohol treatment programs adopted under R.C. Chapter 5119 by the
Director of Mental Health and Addiction Services.
      (2)   An offender who stays in a drivers’ intervention program or in an
alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this section shall pay
the cost of the stay in the program. However, if the court determines that an
offender who stays in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under
this section is unable to pay the cost of the stay in the program, the court
may order that the cost be paid from the court’s Indigent Drivers’ Alcohol
Treatment Fund.
   (k)   Appeal; effect on suspension. If a person whose driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended
under this section or R.C. § 4511.19 files an appeal regarding any aspect of
the person’s trial or sentence, the appeal itself does not stay the operation
of the suspension.
   (l)   Exception; direction of health professional. Division (a)(1)J. of this
section does not apply to a person who operates a vehicle while the person has
a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds the amount specified in that division, if both of
the following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   The person injected, ingested or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
   (m)   Applicability to R.C. § 2923.16(D). The prohibited concentrations of a
controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance listed in
division (a)(1)J. of this section also apply in a prosecution of a violation of
R.C. § 2923.16(D) in the same manner as if the offender is being prosecuted for
a prohibited concentration of alcohol.
   (n)   Applicability of terms. All terms defined in R.C. § 4510.01 apply to
this section. If the meaning of a term defined in R.C. § 4510.01 conflicts with
the meaning of the same term as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or 4511.01, the term
as defined in R.C. § 4510.01 applies to this section.
(R.C. § 4511.19(G) - (M))
   (o)   Physical control of vehicle while under the influence.
      (1)   Definition. As used in this division (o), PHYSICAL CONTROL means
being in the driver’s position of the front seat of a vehicle and having
possession of the vehicle’s ignition key or other ignition device.
      (2)   Generally. No person shall be in physical control of a vehicle if,
at the time of the physical control, any of the following apply:
         A.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them.
         B.   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine
contains at least the concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (a)(1)B.,
(a)(1)C., (a)(1)D. or (a)(1)E. of this section.
         C.   Except as provided in division (o)(5) of this section, the person
has a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of
a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds the concentration specified in division (a)(1)J.
of this section.
      (3)   Field sobriety test.
         A.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of this section, if a law enforcement officer has administered a
field sobriety test to the person in physical control of the vehicle involved
in the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible and generally acceptable field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including
but not limited to any testing standards then in effect that were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (o)(3)A.1. or (o)(3)A.2. of this section and if the testimony or
evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the
testimony or evidence, and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the
trier of fact considers to be appropriate.
         B.   Division (o)(3)A. of this section does not limit or preclude a
court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (o)(3)A. of this section.
      (4)   Penalty. Whoever violates this division (o) is guilty of having
physical control of a vehicle while under the influence, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. In addition to other sanctions imposed, the court may impose on
the offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license
or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(7).
      (5)   Exception. Division (o)(2)C. of this section does not apply to a
person who is in physical control of a vehicle while the person has a
concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds the amount specified in division (a)(1)J. of this
section if both of the following apply:
         A.   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
         B.   The person injected, ingested or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
(R.C. § 4511.194)
   (p)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL SANCTION, CONTINUOUS ALCOHOL MONITORING,
JAIL, MANDATORY PRISON TERM, MANDATORY TERM OF LOCAL INCARCERATION, PRISON TERM
and SANCTION. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      (2)   DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.01.
      (3)   EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Any of the following:
         A.   A violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A);
         B.   A violation of a municipal O.V.I. ordinance;
         C.   A violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in a case in which the offender was
subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that section;
         D.   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(1) or 2903.08 or a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to either of those divisions;
         E.   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(2), (A)(3) or (A)(4), 2903.08(A)
(2), or former R.C. § 2903.07, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those divisions or that former section, in a case in which
a judge or jury as the trier of fact found that the offender was under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         F.   A violation of R.C. § 1547.11(A);
         G.   A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from
operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or from
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar device on the waters of this
state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of
any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar
device on the waters of this state with a prohibited concentration of alcohol,
a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine;
         H.   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
R.C. § 4511.19(A) or 1547.11(A);
         I.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or 1547.11(A).
      (4)   EQUIVALENT OFFENSE THAT IS VEHICLE-RELATED. An equivalent offense
that is any of the following:
         A.   A violation described in division A., B., C., D. or E. of the
definition for “equivalent offense” provided in this division (p);
         B.   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
R.C. § 4511.19(A);
         C.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A).
      (5)   MANDATORY JAIL TERM. The mandatory term in jail of three, six, ten,
20, 30 or 60 days that must be imposed under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a), (G)(1)
(b), or (G)(1)(c) upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (A) of
that section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         A.   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. § 4511.19, the term
must be served in a jail.
         B.   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. § 4511.19, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced or otherwise modified pursuant to R.C. §§ 2929.21
through 2929.28 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (6)   MUNICIPAL O.V.I. ORDINANCE and MUNICIPAL O.V.I. OFFENSE. Any
municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or
prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration
of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance
in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine.
(R.C. § 4511.181)
Statutory reference:
   Continuous alcohol monitoring, see R.C. § 4511.198
   Disposition of fines, immobilization of vehicle and impoundment of license
plates, criminal forfeiture for municipal ordinance conviction, see R.C. §
4511.193
   Effect of refusal to submit to test, seizure of license, suspension periods,
appeal procedures, occupational driving privileges, and Indigent Drivers’
Alcohol Treatment Funds, see R.C. § 4511.191
   Judicial pretrial suspension, initial appearance, see R.C. § 4511.196
   Mayor’s Court to suspend driver’s license, see R.C. § 1905.201
   Seizure of vehicles upon arrest, see R.C. § 4511.195
   Trial judge to suspend driver’s license, see R.C. § 4510.05
§ 434.02 IMMOBILIZING OR DISABLING DEVICE VIOLATION.
   (a)   (1)   No offender who has been granted limited or unlimited driving
privileges, during any period that the offender is required to operate only a
motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, shall request
or permit any other person to breathe into the device if it is an ignition
interlock device or another type of device that monitors the concentration of
alcohol in a person’s breath or to otherwise start the motor vehicle equipped
with the device, for the purpose of providing the offender with an operable
motor vehicle.
      (2)   No person shall breathe into an immobilizing or disabling device
that is an ignition interlock device or another type of device that monitors
the concentration of alcohol in a person’s breath or otherwise start a motor
vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, for the purpose of
providing an operable motor vehicle to another person who has been granted
limited or unlimited driving privileges under the condition that the person
operate only a motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device.
      (3)   No unauthorized person shall tamper with or circumvent the
operation of an immobilizing or disabling device.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an immobilizing or
disabling device violation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4510.44)
§ 434.03 RECKLESS OPERATION ON STREETS, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway in willful
or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or private
property other than streets or highways in willful or wanton disregard of the
safety of persons or property.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to the competitive
operation of vehicles on public or private property when the owner of the
property knowingly permits such operation thereon.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. §§ 4511.20, 4511.201)
§ 434.04 MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS; ASSURED CLEAR DISTANCE AHEAD.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater or less
than is reasonable or proper, having due regard for the traffic, surface and
width of the street or highway and any other conditions, and no person shall
drive any motor vehicle in and upon any street or highway at a greater speed
than will permit him or her to bring it to a stop within the assured clear
distance ahead.
   (b)   It is prima facie lawful, in the absence of a lower limit declared or
established pursuant to this section by the Director of Transportation or local
authorities, for the operator of a motor vehicle to operate the same at a speed
not exceeding the following:
      (1)   A.   Twenty miles per hour in school zones during school recess and
while children are going to or leaving school during the opening or closing
hours, and when 20 miles per hour school speed limit signs are erected, except
that on controlled-access highways and expressways, if the right-of-way line
fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed
by division (b)(4) of this section, and on freeways, if the right-of-way line
fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed
by divisions (b)(10) and (b)(11) of this section. The end of every school zone
may be marked by a sign indicating the end of the zone. Nothing in this section
or in the Manual and Specifications for a Uniform System of Traffic-Control
Devices shall be construed to require school zones to be indicated by signs
equipped with flashing or other lights, or giving other special notice of the
hours in which the school zone speed limit is in effect.
         B.   As used in this section, SCHOOL means all of the following:
            1.   Any school chartered under R.C. § 3301.16;
            2.   Any nonchartered school that during the preceding year filed
with the Department of Education in compliance with O.A.C. 3301-35-08, a copy
of the school’s report for the parents of the school’s pupils certifying that
the school meets state minimum standards for nonchartered, nontax-supported
schools and presents evidence of this filing to the jurisdiction from which it
is requesting the establishment of a school zone;
            3.   Any special elementary school that in writing requests the
County Engineer to create a school zone at the location of the school. Upon
receipt of the written request, the County Engineer shall create a school zone
at that location by erecting appropriate signs;
            4.   Any preschool education program operated by an educational
service center that is located on a street or highway with a speed limit of 45
miles per hour or more, when the educational service center in writing requests
that the County Engineer create a school zone at the location of that program.
Upon receipt of such a written request, the County Engineer shall create a
school zone at that location by erecting the appropriate signs.
         C.   As used in this section, SCHOOL ZONE means that portion of a
street or highway passing a school fronting upon the street or highway that is
encompassed by projecting the school property lines to the fronting street or
highway, and also includes that portion of a state highway. Upon request from
local authorities for streets and highways under their jurisdiction and that
portion of a state highway under the jurisdiction of the Director of
Transportation or a request from a County Engineer in the case of a school zone
for a special elementary school, the Director may extend the traditional school
zone boundaries. The distances in divisions (b)(1)C.1. through (b)(1)C.3. below
shall not exceed 300 feet per approach per direction, and are bounded by
whichever of the following distances or combination thereof the Director
approves as most appropriate:
            1.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school building
lines normal to the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            2.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school property
lines intersecting the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            3.   The distance encompassed by the special marking of the
pavement for a principal school pupil crosswalk plus a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction of the highway.
         D.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the
Director’s initial action on August 9, 1976, establishing all school zones at
the traditional school zone boundaries defined by projecting school property
lines, except when those boundaries are extended as provided in divisions (b)
(1)A. and (b)(1)C. of this section.
         E.   As used in this division, CROSSWALK has the meaning given that
term in R.C. § 4511.01(LL)(2).
         F.   The Director may, upon request by resolution of the legislative
authority and upon submission by the municipality of such engineering, traffic
and other information as the Director considers necessary, designate a school
zone on any portion of a state route lying within the municipality that
includes a crosswalk customarily used by children going to or leaving a school
during recess and opening and closing hours, whenever the distance, as measured
in a straight line, from the school property line nearest the crosswalk to the
nearest point of a crosswalk is no more than 1,320 feet. Such a school zone
shall include the distance encompassed by the crosswalk and extending 300 feet
in each appropriate direction of the state route.
         G.   As used in this section, SPECIAL ELEMENTARY SCHOOL means a school
that meets all of the following:
            1.   It is not chartered and does not receive tax revenue from any
source.
            2.   It does not educate children beyond the eighth grade.
            3.   It is located outside the limits of a municipal corporation.
            4.   A majority of the total number of students enrolled at the
school are not related by blood.
            5.   The principal or other person in charge of the special
elementary school annually sends a report to the superintendent of the school
district in which the special elementary school is located indicating the total
number of students enrolled at the school, but otherwise the principal or other
person in charge does not report any other information or data to the
superintendent.
      (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour in all other portions of the
municipality, except on state routes outside business districts, through
highways outside business districts and alleys;
      (3)   Thirty-five miles per hour on all state routes or through highways
within the municipality outside business districts, except as provided in
divisions (b)(4) and (b)(6) of this section;
      (4)   Fifty miles per hour on controlled-access highways and expressways
within the municipality, except as provided in divisions (b)(12), (b)(13), (b)
(14), (b)(15), and (b)(16) of this section;
      (5)   Fifty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality,
other than highways within island jurisdictions as provided in division (b)(8)
of this section, highways as provided in divisions (b)(9) and (b)(10) of this
section, and highways, expressways and freeways as provided in divisions (b)
(12), (b)(13), (b)(14), and (b)(16) of this section;
      (6)   Fifty miles per hour on state routes within the municipality
outside urban districts unless a lower prima facie speed is established as
further provided in this section;
      (7)   Fifteen miles per hour on all alleys within the municipality;
      (8)   Thirty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality
that are within an island jurisdiction;
      (9)   Thirty-five miles per hour on through highways, except state
routes, that are outside municipal corporations and that are within a national
park with boundaries extending through two or more counties;
      (10)   Sixty miles per hour on two-lane state routes outside municipal
corporations as established by the Director under R.C. § 4511.21(H)(2);
      (11)   Fifty-five miles per hour on freeways with paved shoulders inside
the municipality, other than freeways as provided in divisions (b)(14) and (b)
(16) of this section;
      (12)   Sixty miles per hour on rural expressways with traffic control
signals and on all portions of rural divided highways, except as provided in
divisions (b)(13) and (b)(14) of this section;
      (13)   Sixty-five miles per hour on all rural expressways without traffic
control signals;
      (14)   Seventy miles per hour on all rural freeways;
      (15)   Fifty-five miles per hour on all portions of freeways or
expressways in congested areas as determined by the Director and that are
located within a municipal corporation or within an interstate freeway
outerbelt, except as provided in division (b)(16) of this section;
      (16)   Sixty-five miles per hour on all portions of freeways or
expressways without traffic control signals in urbanized areas.
   (c)   It is prima facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed
limitations in divisions (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7), (b)
(8) and (b)(9) of this section or any declared or established pursuant to this
section by the Director or local authorities and it is unlawful for any person
to exceed any of the speed limitations in division (d) of this section. No
person shall be convicted of more than one violation of this section for the
same conduct, although violations of more than one provision of this section
may be charged in the alternative in a single affidavit.
   (d)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or highway as
follows:
      (1)   At a speed exceeding 55 miles per hour, except upon a two-lane
state route as provided in division (b)(10) of this section and upon a highway,
expressway or freeway as provided in divisions (b)(12), (b)(13), (b)(14), and
(b)(16) of this section;
      (2)   At a speed exceeding 60 miles per hour upon a two-lane state route
as provided in division (b)(10) of this section and upon a highway as provided
in division (b)(12) of this section;
      (3)   At a speed exceeding 65 miles per hour upon an expressway as
provided in division (b)(13) of this section or upon a freeway as provided in
division (b)(16) of this section, except upon a freeway as provided in division
(b)(14) of this section;
      (4)   At a speed exceeding 70 miles per hour upon a freeway as provided
in division (b)(14) of this section;
      (5)   At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a highway,
expressway or freeway for which the Director has determined and declared a
speed limit pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(I)(2) or (L)(2).
   (e)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(E), in every charge of violating this
section, the affidavit and warrant shall specify the time, place and speed at
which the defendant is alleged to have driven, and in charges made in reliance
upon division (c) of this section also the speed which division (b)(1)A., (b)
(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7), (b)(8) or (b)(9) of, or a limit declared
or established pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21 declares is prima
facie lawful at the time and place of the alleged violation, except that in
affidavits where a person is alleged to have driven at a greater speed than
will permit the person to bring the vehicle to stop within the assured clear
distance ahead, the affidavit and warrant need not specify the speed at which
the defendant is alleged to have driven.
   (f)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(F), when a speed in excess of both a prima
facie limitation and a limitation in division (d) of this section is alleged,
the defendant shall be charged in a single affidavit, alleging a single act,
with a violation indicated of both division (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4),
(b)(6), (b)(7), (b)(8) or (b)(9) of this section, or of a limit declared or
established pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.21 by the Director or local
authorities, and of the limitation in division (d) of this section. If the
court finds a violation of division (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6),
(b)(7), (b)(8) or (b)(9) of, or a limit declared or established pursuant to,
this section or R.C. § 4511.21 has occurred, it shall enter a judgment of
conviction under that division and dismiss the charge under division (d) of
this section. If it finds no violation of division (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3),
(b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7), (b)(8) or (b)(9) of, or a limit declared or established
pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21, it shall then consider whether the
evidence supports a conviction under division (d) of this section.
   (g)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(G), points shall be assessed for a
violation of a limitation under division (d) of this section in accordance with
R.C. § 4510.036.
(R.C. § 4511.21(A) - (G))
   (h)   Whenever, in accordance with R.C. § 4511.21(H) through (N), the
maximum prima facie speed limitations as established herein have been altered,
either higher or lower, and the appropriate signs giving notice have been
erected as required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by the speed
limitations set forth on those signs. It is prima facie unlawful for any person
to exceed the speed limits posted upon the signs.
   (i)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   COMMERCIAL BUS. A motor vehicle designed for carrying more than
nine passengers and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
      (2)   DIVIDED. Means a roadway having two or more travel lanes for
vehicles moving in opposite directions and that is separated by a median of
more than four feet, excluding turn lanes.
      (3)   INTERSTATE SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. 101.
      (4)   NONCOMMERCIAL BUS. Includes but is not limited to a school bus, or
a motor vehicle operated solely for the transportation of persons associated
with a charitable or nonprofit organization.
      (5)   OUTERBELT. A portion of a freeway that is part of the interstate
system and is located in the outer vicinity of a major municipal corporation or
group of municipal corporations, as designated by the Director.
      (6)   RURAL. Means an area outside urbanized areas and outside of a
business or urban district, and areas that extend within urbanized areas where
the roadway characteristics remain mostly unchanged from those outside the
urbanized areas.
      (7)   URBANIZED AREA. Has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. § 101.
(R.C. § 4511.21(O))
   (j)   Penalty.
      (1)   A violation of any provision of this section is one of the
following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (j)(1)B., (j)(1)C., and
(j)(2) and (j)(3) of this section, a minor misdemeanor;
         B.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of any provision of this
section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any provision of any other municipal ordinance that
is substantially equivalent to any provision of that section, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree;
         C.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of any
provision of this section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any provision of any other
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any provision of that
section, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   If the offender operated a motor vehicle faster than 35 miles an
hour in a business district of the municipality, faster than 50 miles an hour
in other portions of the municipality, or faster than 35 miles an hour in a
school zone during recess or while children are going to or leaving school
during the school’s opening or closing hours, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. This division does not apply if penalties may be imposed under division
(j)(1)B. or (j)(1)C. of this section.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (j)(1) of this section, if the offender
operated a motor vehicle in a construction zone where a sign was then posted in
accordance with R.C. § 4511.98, the court, in addition to all other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a fine of two times the usual
amount imposed for the violation. No court shall impose a fine of two times the
usual amount imposed for the violation upon an offender if the offender
alleges, in an affidavit filed with the court prior to the offender’s
sentencing, that the offender is indigent and is unable to pay the fine imposed
pursuant to this division and if the court determines that the offender is an
indigent person and unable to pay the fine.
      (4)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.21(P))
§ 434.05 SPEED LIMITS ON PRIVATE ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   (a)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may establish a speed
limit on the road or driveway by complying with all of the following
requirements:
      (1)   The speed limit is not less than 25 miles per hour and is indicated
by a sign that is in a proper position, is sufficiently legible to be seen by
an ordinarily observant person, and meets the specifications for the basic
speed limit sign included in the Manual adopted by the Department of
Transportation pursuant to R.C. § 4511.09;
      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road or
driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road or
driveway that they are entering private property, a speed limit has been
established for the road or driveway, and the speed limit is enforceable by law
enforcement officers under state law.
   (b)   No person shall operate a vehicle upon a private road or driveway as
provided in division (a) of this section at a speed exceeding any speed limit
established and posted pursuant to division (a).
   (c)   When a speed limit is established and posted in accordance with
division (a) of this section, a law enforcement officer may apprehend a person
violating the speed limit of the residential area by utilizing any of the means
described in R.C. § 4511.091 or by any other accepted method of determining the
speed of a motor vehicle and may stop and charge the person with exceeding the
speed limit.
   (d)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.211(D), points shall be assessed for violation
of a speed limit established and posted in accordance with division (a) of this
section in accordance with R.C. § 4510.036.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   OWNER. Includes but is not limited to a person who holds title to
the real property in fee simple, a condominium owners’ association, a property
owners’ association, a board of directors or trustees of a private community,
and a nonprofit corporation governing a private community.
      (2)   PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING UNITS. Does
not include a Chautauqua assembly as defined in R.C. § 4511.90.
   (f)   Penalty.
      (1)   A violation of division (b) of this section is one of the
following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (f)(1)B. and (f)(1)C.
of this section, a minor misdemeanor;
         B.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, R.C. §
4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent
to that division, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
         C.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this
section, R.C. § 4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to that division, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.211)
§ 434.06 SLOW SPEED; POSTED MINIMUM SPEEDS.
   (a)   No person shall stop or operate a vehicle at such an unreasonably slow
speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic,
except when stopping or reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or to
comply with law.
   (b)   Whenever the Director of Transportation or local authorities determine
on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on
any part of a controlled-access highway, expressway or freeway consistently
impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the Director or local
authority may declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall operate
a motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with
the law. No minimum speed limit established hereunder shall be less than 30
miles per hour, greater than 50 miles per hour, nor effective until the
provisions of R.C. § 4511.21 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
relating to appropriate signs, have been fulfilled and local authorities have
obtained the approval of the Director.
   (c)   In a case involving a violation of this section, the trier of fact, in
determining whether the vehicle was being operated at an unreasonably slow
speed, shall consider the capabilities of the vehicle and its operator.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (e)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.22)
§ 434.07 SPEED LIMITATIONS OVER BRIDGES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle over any bridge or other
elevated structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is greater
than the maximum speed that can be maintained with safety to the bridge or
structure, when the structure is posted with signs as provided in this section.
      (2)   The Department of Transportation upon request from any local
authority shall, or upon its own initiative may, conduct an investigation of
any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part of a highway, and if
it finds that the structure cannot with safety withstand traffic traveling at
the speed otherwise permissible under this traffic code, the Department shall
determine and declare the maximum speed of traffic which the structure can
withstand, and shall cause or permit suitable signs stating the maximum speed
to be erected and maintained at a distance of a least 100 feet before each end
of the structure.
      (3)   Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this
section, proof of such determination of the maximum speed by the Department and
the existence of the signs shall constitute prima facie evidence of the maximum
speed which can be maintained with safety to the bridge or structure.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.23)
§ 434.08 SPEED EXCEPTIONS FOR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES.
   The prima facie speed limitations set forth in R.C. § 4511.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance do not apply to emergency vehicles
or public safety vehicles when they are responding to emergency calls and are
equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet
to the front of the vehicle, and when the drivers thereof sound audible signals
by bell, siren or exhaust whistle. This section does not relieve the driver of
an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons using the street or highway.
(R.C. § 4511.24)
§ 434.09 REASONABLE CONTROL.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, agricultural tractor or
agricultural tractor that is towing, pulling or otherwise drawing a unit of
farm machinery on any street, highway or property open to the public for
vehicular traffic without being in reasonable control of the vehicle,
agricultural tractor or unit of farm machinery.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or agricultural tractor without being in control of it, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.202)
§ 434.10 STREET RACING, STUNT DRIVING AND STREET TAKEOVERS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   BURNOUT. A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby the
vehicle is kept in a stationary position, but the wheels of the vehicle are
spun, which may cause the tires of the vehicle to become heated and emit smoke
from the friction.
      (2)   DOUGHNUT. A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby
the front or rear of the vehicle is rotated around the opposite set of wheels
in a continuous motion, which may cause  a circular skid-mark pattern of rubber
on the driving surface, or the tires of the vehicle to become heated and emit
smoke from the friction, or both.
      (3)   DRIFTING. A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby
the vehicle is driven in a manner that causes a controlled, sideways skid
during a turn, with the front wheels pointing in a direction that is the
opposite of the direction of the turn.
      (4)   STREET RACING. The operation of two or more vehicles from a point
side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to out-distance
each other or the operation of one or more vehicles over a common selected
course, from the same point to the same point, wherein timing is made of the
participating vehicles involving competitive accelerations or speeds. The
operation of two or more vehicles side by side either at speeds in excess of
prima-facie lawful speeds established by R.C. § 4511.21(B)(1)(a) to (B)(9) or
rapidly accelerating from a common starting point to a speed in excess of such
prima-facie lawful speeds shall be prima-facie evidence of street racing.
      (5)   STREET TAKEOVER. Blocking or impeding the regular flow of vehicle
or pedestrian traffic on a public road, street, or highway or on private
property that is open to the general public for the purpose of street racing or
stunt driving.
      (6)   STUNT DRIVING. Performing or engaging in burnouts, doughnuts,
drifting, or wheelies, or allowing a passenger to ride either partially or
fully outside of the vehicle while operating that vehicle.
      (7)   WHEELIE. A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby the
front wheel or wheels of the vehicle are raised off of the ground or whereby
two wheels that are on the same side of the vehicle are raised off of the
ground.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly participate in street racing, stunt driving,
or street takeover upon any public road, street, or highway, or on private
property that is open to the general public.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of street racing, stunt
driving, or street takeover, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to
any other sanctions, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege for not less than 30 days or more
than three years. No judge shall suspend the first 30 days of any suspension of
an offender’s license, permit, or privilege imposed under this division.
   (d)   Persons rendering assistance in any manner to street racing, stunt
driving, or street takeover shall be equally charged as the participants.
   (e)   This section does not apply to the competitive operation of vehicles
on public or private property when the political subdivision with jurisdiction
of the location or owner of the property knowingly permits such operation
thereon.
(R.C. § 4511.251)
§ 434.11 VEHICULAR HOMICIDE; VEHICULAR MANSLAUGHTER; VEHICULAR ASSAULT.
   (a)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, utility vehicle, mini-truck, snowmobile, locomotive,
watercraft, or aircraft, shall cause the death of another or the unlawful
termination of another’s pregnancy in any of the following ways:
      (1)   As the proximate result of committing an OVI offense.
      (2)   In one of the following ways:
         A.   Recklessly;
         B.   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck,
or motorcycle in a construction zone, a reckless operation offense, provided
that this division applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose
pregnancy is unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of
the offender’s commission of the reckless operation offense in the construction
zone and does not apply as described in division (d) of this section.
      (3)   In one of the following ways:
         A.   Negligently;
         B.   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck,
or motorcycle in a construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this
division applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is
unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the offender’s
commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and does not apply
as described in division (d) of this section.
      (4)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of any provision
of any section contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor or of a
municipal ordinance that, regardless of the penalty set by ordinance for the
violation, is substantially equivalent to any provision of any section
contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is
guilty of aggravated vehicular homicide, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(3) of this section is guilty of
vehicular homicide. Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
homicide is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular homicide committed in
violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving
under a suspension or cancellation imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other
provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or
motorcycle, did not have a valid driver's license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the offender's driver's license
or commercial driver's license without examination under R.C. § 4507.10 or if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault
offense.
         B.   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class four suspension of
the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(4) of this section is guilty of
vehicular manslaughter. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the second degree. Vehicular
manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the first degree if, at the time of the
offense, the offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation imposed
under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Revised Code or was
operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license
or nonresident operating privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the
offender’s driver’s license or commercial driver’s license without examination
under R.C. § 4507.10 or if the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-related homicide,
manslaughter or assault offense.
         B.   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class six suspension of
the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6); or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this
section, any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter or assault offense, or a
traffic-related murder, felonious assault or attempted murder offense, a class
four suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
   (c)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least 15 days on an
offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation of
division (a)(3)B. of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer
jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.
   (d)   Divisions (a)(2)B. and (a)(3)B. of this section do not apply in a
particular construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C. §
2903.081 are erected in that construction zone in accordance with the
guidelines and design specifications established by the Director of
Transportation under R.C. § 5501.27. The failure to erect signs of the type
described in R.C. § 2903.081 in a particular construction zone in accordance
with those guidelines and design specifications does not limit or affect the
application of division (a)(1), (a)(2)A., (a)(3)A. or (a)(4) of this section in
that construction zone or the prosecution of any person who violates any of
those divisions in that construction zone.
   (e)   (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   CONSTRUCTION ZONE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5501.27.
         B.   MANDATORY PRISON TERM and MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         C.   MOTOR VEHICLE, MINI-TRUCK, and UTILITY VEHICLE. Have the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
         D.   OVI OFFENSE. Means a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), a violation
R.C. § 1547.11(A), a violation of R.C. § 4561.15(A)(3), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
         E.   RECKLESS OPERATION OFFENSE. A violation of R.C. § 4511.20 or a
municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.20.
         F.   SPEEDING OFFENSE. A violation of R.C. § 4511.21 or a municipal
ordinance pertaining to speed.
         G.   TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MANSLAUGHTER OR ASSAULT OFFENSE. A
violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in circumstances in which division (D) of that
section applies, a violation of R.C. § 2903.06 or 2903.08, or a violation of
R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.07 or 2903.08 as they existed prior to March 23, 2000.
         H.   TRAFFIC-RELATED MURDER, FELONIOUS ASSAULT OR ATTEMPTED MURDER
OFFENSE. A violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or 2903.02 in circumstances in which the
offender used a motor vehicle as the means to commit the violation, a violation
of R.C. § 2903.11(A)(2) in circumstances in which the deadly weapon used in the
commission of the violation is a motor vehicle, or an attempt to commit
aggravated murder or murder in violation of R.C. § 2923.02 in circumstances in
which the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to attempt to commit the
aggravated murder or murder.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or suspension is
enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a prior
or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the specified
law or the specified offense includes any violation of any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or current or former
law of this or another state or the United States.
(R.C. § 2903.06)
   (f)   Vehicular assault.
      (1)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, utility vehicle, or mini-truck, shall cause serious
physical harm to another person or another's unborn as the proximate result of
committing, while operating or participating in the operation of a motor
vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck, or motorcycle in a construction zone, a
speeding offense, provided that this division applies only if the person to
whom the serious physical harm is caused or to whose unborn the serious
physical harm is caused is in the construction zone at the time of the
offender’s commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and does
not apply as described in division (f)(4) of this section.
      (2)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
assault committed in violation of division (f)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular assault committed in violation of
division (f)(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving under a
suspension imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio
Revised Code or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (f)(1) of this section, R.C. § 2903.08, or
any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.
         B.   In addition to any other sanctions imposed, the court shall
impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender’s driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least seven days
on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation
of division (f)(1) of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer
jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.
      (4)   Division (f)(1) of this section does not apply in a particular
construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C. § 2903.081 are
erected in that construction zone in accordance with the guidelines and design
specifications established by the Director of Transportation under R.C. §
5501.27.
      (5)   As used in this division (f):
         A.   CONSTRUCTION ZONE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5501.27.
         B.   MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         C.   SPEEDING OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.06.
         D.   TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MANSLAUGHTER, OR ASSAULT OFFENSE. Has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.06.
      (6)   For the purposes of this division (f), when a penalty or suspension
is enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a
prior or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the
specified law or the specified offense includes any violation of any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or
current or former law of another state or the United States.
(R.C. § 2903.08(A)(3), (C)(3), (D)(3), (E) - (G))
Statutory reference:
   Trial court to suspend driver’s license, see R.C. §§ 4510.05, 4510.10
   Vehicular assault and aggravated vehicular assault, felony offenses, see
R.C. § 2903.08
§ 434.12 UNDER-SPEED VEHICLES, INCLUDING GOLF CARTS.
   (a)   Definitions.
      (1)   GOLF CART or UNDER-SPEED VEHICLE or USV is a motor vehicle as that
term is defined under R.C. § 4501.01(B)
      (2)   OPERATOR has the same meaning as set forth in R.C. § 4501.01(X).
      (3)   VEHICLE has the same meaning as set forth in R.C. § 4501.01(A)
      (4)   LOW-SPEED VEHICLE or LSV is a motor vehicle as that term is defined
under R.C. § 4501.01(B)
      (5)   Any term not defined in this section shall have the same meaning as
defined in the Ohio Revised Code.
   (b)   Inspection. Equipment required for a golf cart to be operated within
the village corporation limits shall comply with the inspection requirements
set forth by the Village of Commercial Point Police Department to obtain a
certificate of inspection in addition to requirements pursuant to the Ohio
Administrative Code and the Ohio Revised Code governing the equipment and
operation of motor vehicles and under speed vehicles. If the Commercial Point
Police Department deem the vehicle has passed all inspections, a certificate of
inspection will be issued to the owner of the vehicle. Inspections of the golf
carts will be done by appointment. All golf carts must be inspected, titled,
insured and registered in order to operate on a public street or property.
   (c)   Operation.
      (1)   No person under the age of 18 shall operate an under speed vehicle
including golf carts. Each operator must hold a valid Ohio Driver's license.
      (2)   No person shall operate a golf cart upon any public roadway in the
village where the posted speed limit is greater than 35 miles per hour;
      (3)   No person shall operate a golf cart on a sidewalk or designated
walkpath;
      (4)   No person shall operate a golf cart at a speed that impedes or
blocks the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when stopping or
reducing speed is necessary for safe operation or to comply with the law;
      (5)   No person shall operate a golf cart within the Village of
Commercial Point corporation limits without obtaining a certificate of
inspection issued by the Village of Commercial Point Police Department;
      (6)   Golf carts crossing village streets between holes at Foxfire Golf
Course, shall be permitted regardless of compliance with division(c)(3) through
(c)(6) of this section;
      (7)   The owner of the golf cart shall be responsible for any actions of
an operator of the owner's golf cart.
      (8)   An owner of a golf cart shall ensure compliance, by an operator of
the owner's golf cart, with this section and the Ohio Revised Code.
      (9)   Notwithstanding the definition of golf cart in this chapter, a
motorized all-terrain utility vehicle, golf cart, or other USV may be operated
within the village by any employee of the village or Scioto Township for
official village or Scioto Township business, or by any official volunteer of a
village recognized event.
   (d)   Compliance. Compliance with this chapter shall be in addition to,
rather than in lieu of, any applicable provisions of state law relative to the
operation of motor vehicles and under speed vehicles.
   (e)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates this chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Violation of this chapter or any traffic violations under the Ohio
Revised Code may result in an operator's permit issued under this chapter being
revoked and may result in the vehicle being impounded in accordance with the
Ohio Revised Code.
(Ord. 2019-16, passed 10-21-2019)
§ 434.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 436
Licensing; Accidents
436.01   Driver’s or commercial driver’s license required.
436.02   Possession of more than one license prohibited.
436.03   Driving with temporary instruction permit.
436.04   Driving with probationary license.
436.05   Certain acts prohibited.
436.06   Owner or operator allowing another to drive.
436.07   Display of license.
436.08   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction.
436.09   Operating motor vehicle or motorcycle without valid license.
436.10   Driving under O.V.I. suspension.
436.11   Driving under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation;
driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension.
436.12   Failure to reinstate license.
436.13   Operation or sale without certificate of title.
436.14   Display of license plates; registration; obstructions.
436.15   Use of illegal license plates.
436.16   Failure to stop after accident.
436.17   Stopping after accident on other than public roads or highways.
436.18   Vehicle accident resulting in damage to realty.
436.19   Removal of vehicles after accidents.
436.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Driver’s license law, see R.C. Ch. 4507
   Employment of a minor to operate a taxicab prohibited, see R.C. § 4507.321
   Motor vehicle licensing law, see R.C. Ch. 4503
   Power of trial court of record to suspend license for certain violations,
see R.C. §§ 4510.05, 4510.15
   State accident reports, see R.C. §§ 4509.01, 4509.06, 4509.74, 5502.11
   State point system suspension, see R.C. § 4507.021
   Glass removal from street after accident, see §
412.01
   Licensing requirements of snowmobile, off-highway and all-purpose vehicle
operator, see §
446.05
   Snowmobile, off-highway and all-purpose vehicle accident reports, see §
446.06
   Suspension of driver’s license, see §§
408.03,
698.06
§ 436.01 DRIVER’S OR COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall permit the operation of a motor vehicle upon any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, knowing the operator does not have a valid driver’s license issued
to the operator by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy registrar under
R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid commercial driver’s license issued under R.C.
Chapter 4506. Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this division is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an
unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03, R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case. If, within three years of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.02(A)(1))
   (b)   (1)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving or propelling a road roller or road machinery upon a street or highway.
      (2)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving or propelling any agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a
street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
      (3)   No person shall drive, operate, draw, move or propel any
agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a street or highway at a
speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the person has a current, valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (4)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate a
motorcycle having three wheels with a motor of not more than 50 cubic
centimeters piston displacement.
      (5)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate an
autocycle or a cab-enclosed motorcycle.
      (6)   Every person on active duty in the military or naval forces of the
United States, when furnished with a driver’s permit and when operating an
official motor vehicle in connection with that duty, is exempt from the license
requirements of R.C. Chapters 4506 and 4507. Every person on active duty in the
military or naval forces of the United States or in service with the Peace
Corps, Volunteers in Service to America or the foreign service of the United
States is exempt from the license requirements of such sections for the period
of the person’s active duty or service and for six months thereafter, provided
the person was a licensee under such sections at the time the person commenced
the person’s active duty or service. This section does not prevent such a
person or the person’s spouse or dependent from making an application, as
provided in R.C. § 4507.10(C), for the renewal of a driver’s license or
motorcycle operator’s endorsement or as provided in R.C. § 4506.14 for the
renewal of a commercial driver’s license during the period of the person’s
active duty or service.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (b)(3) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.03)
   (c)   Nonresidents, permitted to drive upon the highways of their own state,
may operate any motor vehicle upon any highway in this state without
examination or license under R.C. §§ 4507.01 to 4507.39, inclusive, upon
condition that the nonresident may be required at any time or place to prove
lawful possession or their right to operate the motor vehicle, and to establish
proper identity.
(R.C. § 4507.04)
   (d)   Surrender of driver’s license from another state.
      (1)   Any person who becomes a resident of this state, within 30 days of
becoming a resident, shall surrender any driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card issued by another state to the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy registrar. If such a person intends to
operate a motor vehicle upon the public roads or highways, the person shall
apply for a temporary instruction permit or driver’s license in this state. If
the person fails to apply for a driver’s license or temporary instruction
permit or within 30 days of becoming a resident, the person shall not operate
any motor vehicle in this state under a license or permit issued by another
state.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (d)(1) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   The offense established under division (d)(2)A. of this section
is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
      (3)   For purposes of division (d)(1) of this section, RESIDENT means any
person to whom any of the following applies:
         A.   The person maintains their principal residence in this state and
does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States armed forces.
         B.   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to be
a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under R.C. §
4507.01.
(R.C. § 4507.213)
§ 436.02 POSSESSION OF MORE THAN ONE LICENSE PROHIBITED.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall receive a driver’s license, or a motorcycle
operator’s endorsement of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card unless and until the person
surrenders to the Registrar or a deputy registrar all valid licenses, temporary
instruction permits, and identification cards issued to the person by another
jurisdiction recognized by this state.
      (2)   The Registrar shall report the cancellation of a license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card to the issuing authority, together
with information that the license, temporary instruction permit, or
identification card is now issued in this state. The Registrar or a deputy
registrar shall destroy any such license, temporary instruction permit, or
identification card that is not returned to the issuing authority.
      (3)   No person shall possess more than one valid license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card at any time.
(R.C. § 4507.02(A)(2))
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4507.99)
§ 436.03 DRIVING WITH TEMPORARY INSTRUCTION PERMIT.
   (a)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under R.C. §
4507.05(A) shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
in violation of the conditions established under R.C. § 4507.05(A).
   (b)   Except as provided in division (c) of this section, no holder of a
temporary instruction permit that is issued under R.C. § 4507.05(A) and that is
issued on or after July 1, 1998, and who has not attained the age of 18 years,
shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.
   (c)   The holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under R.C. §
4507.05(A) on or after July 1, 1998, who has not attained the age of 18 years,
may operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. if, at the time of the operation, the holder is
accompanied by the holder’s parent, guardian or custodian, and the parent,
guardian or custodian holds a current valid driver’s or commercial driver’s
license issued by this state, is actually occupying a seat beside the permit
holder, and does not have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as provided in R.C. § 4511.19
(A).
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4507.05(F), (I))
§ 436.04 DRIVING WITH PROBATIONARY LICENSE.
   (a)   (1)   A.   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held
the license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a
highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. unless
the holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
         B.   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for 12 months or longer shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless the
holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
      (2)   A.   Subject to division (c)(1) of this section, division (a)(1)A.
of this section does not apply to the holder of a probationary driver’s license
who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of midnight and 6:
00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided
that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written documentation
from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
         B.   Division (a)(1)B. of this section does not apply to the holder of
a probationary driver’s license who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.,
provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written
documentation from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
      (3)   An employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event is not liable in damages in a civil action for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises from, or is related
to, the fact that the employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event provided the holder of a probationary driver’s license with the
written documentation described in division (a)(2) of this section. The
Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall make available at no cost a form to serve as
the written documentation described in division (a)(2) of this section, and
employers, school officials, officials affiliated with religious events, and
holders of probationary driver’s licenses may utilize that form or may choose
to utilize any other written documentation to meet the requirements of that
division.
      (4)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking with more than one person who is not a family member
occupying the vehicle unless the probationary license holder is accompanied by
the probationary license holder’s parent, guardian, or custodian.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of division (a)(1)A. or
(a)(1)B. of this section if, at the time of the violation, an emergency existed
that required the holder of the probationary driver’s license to operate a
motor vehicle in violation of division (a)(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this section or
the holder was an emancipated minor.
   (c)   (1)   If a person is issued a probationary driver’s license prior to
attaining the age of 17 years and the person pleads guilty to, is convicted of,
or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a moving violation
during the six-month period commencing on the date on which the person is
issued the probationary driver’s license, the court with jurisdiction over the
violation may order that the holder must be accompanied by the holder’s parent
or guardian whenever the holder is operating a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking for a period not to exceed six months or the date the holder
attains the age of 17 years, whichever occurs first.
      (2)   Any person who is subject to the operating restrictions established
under division (c)(1) of this section as a result of a first moving violation
may petition the court for driving privileges without being accompanied by the
holder’s parent or guardian during the period of time determined by the court
under that division. In granting the driving privileges, the court shall
specify the purposes of the privileges and shall issue the person appropriate
forms setting forth the privileges granted. If a person is convicted of, pleads
guilty to, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a second or
subsequent moving violation, the court with jurisdiction over the violation may
terminate any driving privileges previously granted under this division.
      (3)   No person shall violate any operating restriction imposed under
division (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section.
   (d)   No holder of a probationary license shall operate a motor vehicle upon
a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking unless the total number of occupants of the vehicle
does not exceed the total number of occupant restraining devices originally
installed in the motor vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the
vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device.
   (e)   A restricted license may be issued to a person who is 14 or 15 years
of age under proof of hardship satisfactory to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
   (f)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether each occupant of the motor vehicle is wearing all of the
available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device as
required by division (d) of this section, or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons if that requirement has been or is being violated,
or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a
violation of that requirement.
   (g)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (a)(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this
section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons for such a violation or for causing the arrest or
commencing a prosecution of a person for such a violation.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   FAMILY MEMBER of a probationary license holder. Includes any of the
following:
         A.   A spouse;
         B.   A child or stepchild;
         C.   A parent, stepparent, grandparent or parent-in-law;
         D.   An aunt or uncle;
         E.   A sibling, whether of the whole or half blood or by adoption, a
brother- in-law or a sister-in-law;
         F.   A son or daughter of the probationary license holder’s stepparent
if the stepparent has not adopted the probationary license holder;
         G.   An eligible adult, as defined in R.C. § 4507.05.
      (2)   MOVING VIOLATION. Any violation of any statute or ordinance that
regulates the operation of vehicles on the highways or streets. “Moving
violation” does not include a violation of R.C. § 4513.263 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of any statute or ordinance
regulating pedestrians or the parking of vehicles, vehicle size or load
limitations, vehicle fitness requirements or vehicle registration.
      (3)   OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4513.263.
   (i)   Whoever violates divisions (a)(1), (a)(4), (c)(3), or (d) of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4507.071(B) - (J))
§ 436.05 CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Display or cause or permit to be displayed, or possess any
identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit
knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled, suspended or
altered;
      (2)   Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly permit a person
not entitled thereto to use any identification card, driver’s or commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver’s license
temporary instruction permit issued to the person so lending or permitting the
use thereof;
      (3)   Display, or represent as one’s own, any identification card,
driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or
commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit not issued to the
person so displaying the same;
      (4)   Fail to surrender to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, upon the
Registrar’s demand, any identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit that has been suspended or canceled;
      (5)   In any application for an identification card, driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit or any renewal, reprint, or
duplicate thereof, knowingly conceal a material fact or present any statement
required under R.C. § 4507.08 or 4507.081 when knowing the same to be false or
fictitious.
   (b)   Whoever violates any division of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.30)
§ 436.06 OWNER OR OPERATOR ALLOWING ANOTHER TO DRIVE.
   (a)   No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or under
the person’s control to be driven by another if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person does not have a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or valid nonresident driving privileges.
      (2)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privileges have been suspended or canceled under R.C. Chapter 4510 or
any other provision of the Revised Code.
      (3)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving the motor vehicle would violate any prohibition
contained in R.C. Chapter 4509.
      (4)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving would violate R.C. § 4511.19 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (5)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
vehicle is the subject of an immobilization waiver order issued under R.C.
4503.235 and the other person is prohibited from operating the vehicle under
that order.
   (b)   Without limiting or precluding the consideration of any other evidence
in determining whether a violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4)
or (a)(5) of this section has occurred, it shall be prima facie evidence that
the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator of the
motor vehicle owned by the offender or under the offender’s control is in a
category described in division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this
section if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (a)(1), (a)(3) or (a)(5) of this section, the offender and the
operator of the motor vehicle reside in the same household and are related by
consanguinity or affinity.
      (2)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (a)(2) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle reside in the same household, and the offender knows or has reasonable
cause to believe that the operator has been charged with or convicted of any
violation of law or ordinance, or has committed any other act or omission, that
would or could result in the suspension or cancellation of the operator’s
license, permit, or privilege.
      (3)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (a)(4) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the offense.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful entrustment of a
motor vehicle, and shall be punished as provided in divisions (c) to (h) of
this section.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) of this section is guilty of an
unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the
offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to § 698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding
§
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   A.   If, within three years of a violation of division (a)(1), (a)
(2), or (a)(3) of this section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to
or been convicted of two or more violations of division (a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)
(3) of this section, R.C. § 4511.203(A)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   Whoever violates division (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   For any violation of this section, in addition to the penalties
imposed under this Code or R.C. Chapter 2929, the court may impose a class
seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7), and, if
the vehicle involved in the offense is registered in the name of the offender,
the court may order one of the following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3)B. or (c)(3)C. of
this section, the court may order, for 30 days, the immobilization of the
vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license
plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §
4503.233.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order, for 60 days, the
immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of
that vehicle’s license plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and
enforced under R.C. § 4503.233.
         C.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order the criminal
forfeiture to the state of the vehicle involved in the offense. If issued, the
order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234.
      (4)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for
criminal forfeiture under division (c)(3)C. of this section is assigned or
transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in addition to or
independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the
offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National
Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine imposed under this
division shall be distributed in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).
   (d)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(c)(3)A. or (c)(3)B. of this section, the court shall not release the vehicle
from the immobilization before the termination of the period of immobilization
ordered unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
   (e)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(c)(3)C. of this section, upon receipt of the order from the court, neither the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor any deputy registrar shall accept any
application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor
vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the order. The period of denial
shall be five years after the date the order is issued, unless, during that
five-year period, the court with jurisdiction of the offense that resulted in
the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the
termination. If the court terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar,
the Registrar shall take all necessary measures to permit the person to
register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer the
registration of the vehicle.
   (f)   This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or motor
vehicle leasing dealers, as defined in R.C. § 4549.65.
   (g)   Evidence of a conviction of, plea of guilty to, or adjudication as a
delinquent child for a violation of this section shall not be admissible as
evidence in any civil action that involves the offender or delinquent child who
is the subject of the conviction, plea or adjudication and that arises from the
wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle.
   (h)   For purposes of this section, a vehicle is owned by a person if, at
the time of a violation of this section, the vehicle is registered in the
person’s name.
(R.C. § 4511.203)
§ 436.07 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   (a)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall display the operator’s driver’s
license, or furnish satisfactory proof that the operator has a driver’s
license, upon demand of any peace officer or of any person damaged or injured
in any collision in which the licensee may be involved. When a demand is
properly made, and the operator has the operator’s driver’s license on or about
the operator’s person, the operator shall not refuse to display the license. A
person’s failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that the person is licensed
under R.C. Chapter 4507 when the person does not have the person’s license on
or about the person’s person shall be prima facie evidence of the person’s not
having obtained a driver’s license.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section,
R.C. § 4507.35, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.35)
§ 436.08 DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE RESTRICTION.
   (a)   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, division (b)
of this section, §
436.11 and in R.C. §§ 4510.111 and 4510.16, no person whose driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended under any provision of the Revised Code, other than R.C. Chapter
4509, or under any applicable law in any other jurisdiction in which the
person’s license or permit was issued shall operate any motor vehicle upon the
public roads and highways or upon any public or private property used by the
public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking within this municipality
during the period of suspension unless the person is granted limited driving
privileges and is operating the vehicle in accordance with the terms of the
limited driving privileges.
      (2)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality in violation of any restriction of the person’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit imposed under R.C. § 4506.10
(D) or § 4507.14.
      (3)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (a)(1) of this
section or the person operated a motor vehicle in violation of a restriction at
the time of the alleged violation of division (a)(2) of this section. The
person charged with a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (4)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court may impose upon the
offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(7).
         B.   1.   Except as provided in division (a)(4)B.2. or (a)(4)B.3. of
this section, the court, in addition to any other penalty that it imposes on
the offender and if the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111
or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to or independent of any other sentence that it imposes upon the
offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense
for 30 days and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates for 30 days in
accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
            2.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, or any combination of
two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to any
other sentence that it imposes on the offender, may order the immobilization of
the vehicle involved in the offense for 60 days and the impoundment of that
vehicle’s license plates for 60 days in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
            3.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, or any
combination of three or more violations of this section or R.C. § 4510.11,
4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the
court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on the offender, may
order the criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the offense to the
state.
      (5)   Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this section
shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §§ 4503.233 and 4507.02, as applicable.
The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered under this
section unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
      (6)   Any order of criminal forfeiture under this section shall be issued
and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234. Upon receipt of the copy of the order from
the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a deputy registrar shall
accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any
motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the declaration of
forfeiture. The period of registration denial shall be five years after the
date of the order, unless, during that period, the court having jurisdiction of
the offense that led to the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the
registrar of the termination. The registrar then shall take necessary measures
to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to
transfer registration of the vehicle.
      (7)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.11)
   (b)   Driving under suspension in violation of other provisions.
      (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license
has been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2151.354, 2935.27, 3123.58, 4301.99,
4510.032, 4510.22, or 4510.33, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
      (2)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (b)(1) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under suspension at the
time of the alleged violation of division (b)(1) of this section. The person
charged with a violation of division (b)(1) of this section may offer evidence
to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (b)(1) of this section is guilty of
driving under suspension and shall be punished as provided in division (b)(3)A.
or division (b)(3)B. of this section.
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(3)B. of this
section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. The offender shall be
sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
         B.   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously
was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (b)(1)
of this section, or any combination of two or more violations of division (b)
(1) of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree, and the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in
an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident
or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s
operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for
which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.111)
   (c)   Repeat traffic offender; point system suspension. Any person whose
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privileges are suspended as a repeat traffic offender under R.C. § 4510.037 and
who, during the suspension, operates any motor vehicle upon any public roads
and highways is guilty of driving under a 12-point suspension, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to a minimum term of
three days in jail. No court shall suspend the first three days of jail time
imposed pursuant to this division.
(R.C. § 4510.037(J))
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
§ 436.09 OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE OR MOTORCYCLE WITHOUT VALID LICENSE.
   (a)   (1)   No person, except those expressly exempted under R.C. §§
4507.03, 4507.04 and 4507.05, shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public
road or highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person
has a valid driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a commercial
driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506.
      (2)   No person, except a person expressly exempted under R.C. §§
4507.03, 4507.04 and 4507.05, shall operate any motorcycle upon a public road
or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person has a valid
license as a motorcycle operator that was issued upon application by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. Chapter 4507. The license shall be in
the form of an endorsement, as determined by the Registrar, upon a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, if the person has a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle, or in the form of a restricted
license as provided in R.C. § 4507.14, if the person does not have a valid
license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle.
   (b)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the person did not have either a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license at the time of the alleged violation of
division (a)(1) of this section or a valid license as a motorcycle operator
either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or a restricted license at the time of the alleged violation of
division (a)(2) of this section. The person charged with a violation of
division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this
prima facie evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or motorcycle without a valid license and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   If the trier of fact finds that the offender never has held a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license issued by this state or any other
jurisdiction, or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the
offender, if the offender has never held a valid license as a motorcycle
operator, either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or in the form of a restricted license, except as otherwise
provided in this division, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of this section or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the offender, the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license bearing the motorcycle
endorsement or the offender’s restricted license was expired at the time of the
offense, except as otherwise provided in this division, the offense is a minor
misdemeanor. If within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (d)   The court shall not impose a license suspension for a first violation
of this section or if more than three years have passed since the offender’s
last violation of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (e)   If the offender is sentenced under division (c)(2) of this section, if
within three years of the offense the offender previously was convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one or more violations of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance within the past three years, and
if the offender’s license was expired for more than six months at the time of
the offense, the court may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s
driver license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
(R.C. § 4510.12)
§ 436.10 DRIVING UNDER O.V.I. SUSPENSION.
   (a)   No person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.196 or under R.C. § 4510.07 for a conviction of a violation of
a municipal O.V.I. ordinance shall operate any motor vehicle upon the public
roads or highways within this municipality during the period of the suspension.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under O.V.I.
suspension. The court shall sentence the offender under R.C. Chapter 2929,
subject to the differences authorized or required by this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this
section, driving under O.V.I. suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of three consecutive days. The three-day
term shall be imposed, unless, subject to division (c) of this section, the
court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 30 consecutive days of house
arrest with electronic monitoring. A period of house arrest with electronic
monitoring imposed under this division shall not exceed six months. If the
court imposes a mandatory three-day jail term under this division, the court
may impose a jail term in addition to that term, provided that in no case shall
the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed six months;
         B.   A fine of not less than $250 and not more than $1,000;
         C.   A license suspension under division (e) of this section;
         D.   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, immobilization for 30 days of the
offender’s vehicle and impoundment for 30 days of the identification license
plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment shall be
issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
      (2)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section or one
equivalent offense, driving under O.V.I. suspension is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of ten consecutive days. Notwithstanding
the jail terms provided in R.C. § 2929.21 to 2929.28, the court may sentence
the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The ten-day
mandatory jail term shall be imposed unless, subject to division (c) of this
section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 90 consecutive
days of house arrest with electronic monitoring. The period of house arrest
with electronic monitoring shall not exceed one year;
         B.   Notwithstanding the fines provided for in R.C. Chapter 2929, a
fine of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;
         C.   A license suspension under division (e) of this section;
         D.   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, immobilization of the offender’s
vehicle for 60 days and the impoundment for 60 days of the identification
license plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment
shall be issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
      (3)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or two or more equivalent offenses, driving under O.V.I. suspension is a
misdemeanor. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of 30 consecutive days. Notwithstanding the
jail terms provided in R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, the court may sentence the
offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The court shall not
sentence the offender to a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring in
lieu of the mandatory portion of the jail term;
         B.   Notwithstanding the fines set forth in R.C. Chapter 2929, a fine
of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;
         C.   A license suspension under division (e) of this section;
         D.   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, criminal forfeiture to the state
of the offender’s vehicle. The order of criminal forfeiture shall be issued and
enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234. If title to a motor vehicle that
is subject to an order for criminal forfeiture under this division is assigned
or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, the court may fine
the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the
National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine so imposed
shall be distributed in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).
   (c)   (1)   No court shall impose an alternative sentence of house arrest
with electronic monitoring under division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section
unless, within 60 days of the date of sentencing, the court issues a written
finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail
where the offender is required to serve the jail term imposed, the offender
will not be able to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following
the date of sentencing.
      (2)   An offender sentenced under this section to a period of house
arrest with electronic monitoring shall be permitted work release during that
period.
   (d)   Fifty percent of any fine imposed by a court under division (b)(1),
(b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section shall be deposited into the Municipal Indigent
Drivers’ Alcohol Treatment Fund under the control of that court, as created by
the municipality pursuant to R.C. § 4511.191(H).
   (e)   In addition to or independent of all other penalties provided by law
or ordinance, the trial judge of any court of record or the Mayor of a Mayor’s
Court shall impose on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this section a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
      (1)   When permitted as specified in R.C. § 4510.021, if the court grants
limited driving privileges during a suspension imposed under this section, the
privileges shall be granted on the additional condition that the offender must
display restricted license plates, issued under R.C. § 4503.231, on the vehicle
driven subject to the privileges, except as provided in R.C. § 4503.231(B).
      (2)   A suspension of a commercial driver’s license under this section
shall be concurrent with any period of suspension or disqualification under
R.C. § 3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from holding
a commercial driver’s license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a driver’s
license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the commercial
driver’s license was suspended under this section, and no person whose
commercial driver’s license is suspended under this section shall be issued a
driver’s license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the suspension.
   (f)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to § 698.02
(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing
the offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree under this section for
which the offender is sentenced.
   (g)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ELECTRONIC MONITORING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      (2)   EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Any of the following:
         A.   A violation of a municipal ordinance, law of another state, or
law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to division (a) of
this section;
         B.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to division (a) of this section.
      (3)   JAIL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      (4)   MANDATORY JAIL TERM. The mandatory term in jail of three, ten or 30
consecutive days that must be imposed under division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3)
of this section upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (a) of
this section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         A.   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
must be served in a jail.
         B.   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to any provision
of the Ohio Revised Code.
(R.C. § 4510.14)
   (h)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161
§ 436.11 DRIVING UNDER FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW SUSPENSION OR CANCELLATION;
DRIVING UNDER A NONPAYMENT OF JUDGMENT SUSPENSION.
   (a)   No person, whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or temporary
instruction permit or nonresident’s operating privilege has been suspended or
canceled pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4509, shall operate any motor vehicle within
this municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to
be operated by another person in the municipality, during the period of the
suspension or cancellation, except as specifically authorized by R.C. Chapter
4509.
   (b)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public
or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking in this municipality if the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 4509.37 or 4509.40 for nonpayment of a
judgment.
   (c)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a) or (b) of this section may be admitted into evidence
as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under either a
financial responsibility law suspension at the time of the alleged violation of
division (a) of this section or a nonpayment of judgment suspension at the time
of the alleged violation of division (b) of this section. The person charged
with a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section may offer evidence to
rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of driving
under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation and shall be
punished as provided in division (d)(1) to (d)(3) of this section. Whoever
violates division (b) of this section is guilty of driving under a nonpayment
of judgment suspension and shall be punished as provided in division (d)(1) to
(d)(3) of this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (d)(2) of this
section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an
unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously was
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, or
any combination of two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or
4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in
an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident
or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s
operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for
which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.16)
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161
§ 436.12 FAILURE TO REINSTATE LICENSE.
   (a)   No person whose driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit or nonresident’s operating privilege has been
suspended shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public road or highway or any
public or private property after the suspension has expired unless the person
has complied with all license reinstatement requirements imposed by the court,
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles or another provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (b)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person had not been reinstated by
the person at the time of the alleged violation of division (a) of this
section. The person charged with a violation of division (a) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to reinstate a
license, and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of a violation of division (a) of this
section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two
or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   In all cases, the court may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
(R.C. § 4510.21)
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
§ 436.13 OPERATION OR SALE WITHOUT CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this municipality a motor vehicle for which a
certificate of title is required without having that certificate in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 4505 or, if a physical certificate of title has not been
issued for a motor vehicle, operate the motor vehicle in this state knowing
that the ownership information relating to the vehicle has not been entered
into the automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common
Pleas;
      (2)   Display or display for sale or sell as a dealer or acting on behalf
of a dealer, a motor vehicle without having obtained a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate, a certificate of title or an assignment of a
certificate of title for it as provided in R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title or any certificate of
registration or license plates upon cancellation of the same by the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed in R.C. Chapter
4505;
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 4505 in case of the destruction or
dismantling or change of a motor vehicle in such respect that it is not the
motor vehicle described in the certificate of title;
      (5)   Violate any rules adopted pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (6)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapters 4505 and 4517, sell
at wholesale a motor vehicle ownership of which is not evidenced by an Ohio
certificate of title, or the current certificate of title issued for the motor
vehicle, or the manufacturer’s certificate of origin, and all title assignments
that evidence the seller’s ownership of the motor vehicle, and an odometer
disclosure statement that complies with R.C. § 4505.06 and subchapter IV of the
“Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act”, 86 Stat. 961 (1972), 15
U.S.C. 1981;
      (7)   Operate in this state a motor vehicle knowing that the certificate
of title to the vehicle or ownership of the vehicle as otherwise reflected in
the automated title processing system has been canceled.
   (b)   This section does not apply to persons engaged in the business of
warehousing or transporting motor vehicles for the purpose of salvage
disposition.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $200,
imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4505.18)
§ 436.14 DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES; REGISTRATION; OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   No person who is the owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall
fail to display in plain view on the rear of the motor vehicle a license plate
that displays the distinctive number and registration mark assigned to the
motor vehicle by the Ohio Director of Public Safety, including any county
identification sticker and any validation sticker when required by and issued
under R.C. §§ 4503.19 and 4503.191. However, a commercial tractor shall display
the license plate on the front of the commercial tractor.
      (2)   The license plate shall be securely fastened so as not to swing,
and shall not be covered by any material that obstructs its visibility.
      (3)   No person to whom a temporary motor vehicle license registration
has been issued for the use of a motor vehicle under R.C. § 4503.182, and no
operator of that motor vehicle, shall fail to display the temporary motor
vehicle license registration in plain view from the rear of the vehicle either
in the rear window or on an external rear surface of the motor vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall cover a temporary motor vehicle license
registration by any material that obstructs its visibility.
(R.C. § 4503.21(A))
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided by R.C. §§ 4503.103, 4503.107, 4503.173,
4503.41, 4503.43 and 4503.46, no person who is the owner or chauffeur of a
motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways shall fail
to file annually the application for registration or to pay the tax therefor.
(R.C. § 4503.11(A))
   (c)   (1)   Within 30 days of becoming a resident of this state, any person
who owns a motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways
shall register the vehicle in this state. If such a person fails to register a
vehicle owned by the person, the person shall not operate any motor vehicle in
this state under a license issued by another state.
      (2)   For purposes of division (c)(1) of this section, RESIDENT means any
person to whom any of the following applies:
         A.   The person maintains their principal residence in this state and
does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States armed forces.
         B.   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to be
a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under R.C. §
4507.01.
(R.C. § 4503.111(A), (C))
   (d)   Upon the transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle, the registration of
the motor vehicle expires, and the original owner immediately shall remove the
license plates from the motor vehicle, except as otherwise provided in R.C. §
4503.12.
(R.C. § 4503.12(A))
   (e)   No person shall operate or drive upon the highways of this
municipality a motor vehicle acquired from a former owner who has registered
the motor vehicle, while the motor vehicle displays the distinctive number or
identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration.
(R.C. § 4549.11(A))
   (f)   No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident of this
state shall operate or drive the motor vehicle upon the highways of this
municipality while it displays a distinctive number or identification mark
issued by or under the authority of another state, without complying with the
laws of this state relating to the registration and identification of motor
vehicles.
(R.C. § 4549.12(A))
   (g)   (1)   A.   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   The offenses established under division (a) of this section are
strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of
these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability,
is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4503.21(B), (C))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4503.11(D))
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
         B.   The offense established under division (g)(3)A. of this section
is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
(R.C. § 4503.111(B))
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4503.12(D))
      (5)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section is guilty of
operation of a motor vehicle bearing license plates or an identification mark
issued to another, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.11(B))
      (6)   Whoever violates division (f) of this section is guilty of illegal
operation by a resident of this state of a motor vehicle bearing the
distinctive number or identification mark issued by a foreign jurisdiction, a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4549.12(B))
§ 436.15 USE OF ILLEGAL LICENSE PLATES.
   (a)   No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the public roads
and highways in this municipality if it displays a license plate or a
distinctive number or identification mark that meets any of the following
criteria:
      (1)   It is fictitious;
      (2)   It is a counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any distinctive
number or identification mark;
      (3)   It belongs to another motor vehicle, provided that this section
does not apply to a motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads and
highways in this municipality when the motor vehicle displays license plates
that originally were issued for a motor vehicle that previously was owned by
the same person who owns the motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads
and highways in this municipality during the 30-day period described in R.C. §
4503.12(A)(4).
   (b)   A person who fails to comply with the transfer of registration
provisions of R.C. § 4503.12 and is charged with a violation of that section
shall not be charged with a violation of this section.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section is
guilty of operating a motor vehicle bearing an invalid license plate or
identification mark, this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the third degree on each
subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.08)
§ 436.16 FAILURE TO STOP AFTER ACCIDENT.
   (a)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision with
persons or property on a public road or highway, the operator of the motor
vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, immediately shall stop
the operator’s motor vehicle at the scene of the accident or collision. The
operator shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until the
operator has given the operator’s name and address and, if the operator is not
the owner, the name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together
with the registered number of that motor vehicle, to all of the following:
         A.   Any person injured in the accident or collision;
         B.   The operator, occupant, owner, or attendant of any motor vehicle
damaged in the accident or collision;
         C.   The police officer at the scene of the accident or collision.
      (2)   In the event an injured person is unable to comprehend and record
the information required to be given under division (a)(1) of this section, the
other operator involved in the accident or collision shall notify the nearest
police authority concerning the location of the accident or collision, and the
operator’s name, address, and the registered number of the motor vehicle the
operator was operating. The operator shall remain at the scene of the accident
or collision until a police officer arrives, unless removed from the scene by
an emergency vehicle operated by a political subdivision or an ambulance.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a
conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident. Except as otherwise provided in division (b)
(2) or (b)(3) of this section, failure to stop after an accident is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months
of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this
division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. §
2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.02)
§ 436.17 STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT ON OTHER THAN PUBLIC ROADS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (a)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision resulting
in injury or damage to persons or property on any public or private property
other than a public road or highway, the operator of the motor vehicle, having
knowledge of the accident or collision, shall stop at the scene of the accident
or collision. Upon request of any person who is injured or damaged, or any
other person, the operator shall give that person the operator’s name and
address, and, if the operator is not the owner, the name and address of the
owner of that motor vehicle, together with the registered number of that motor
vehicle, and, if available, exhibit the operator’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license.
      (2)   If the operator of the motor vehicle involved in the accident or
collision does not provide the information specified in division (a)(1) of this
section, the operator shall give that information, within 24 hours after the
accident or collision, to the police department of the city or village in which
the accident or collision occurred, or if it occurred outside the corporate
limits of a city or village, to the sheriff of the county in which the accident
or collision occurred.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required under division (a)(1) of this section, in
writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor
vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident. Except as otherwise provided
in division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section, failure to stop after a nonpublic
road accident is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months
of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this
division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. §
2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.021)
§ 436.18 VEHICLE ACCIDENT RESULTING IN DAMAGE TO REALTY.
   (a)   (1)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
damage to real property, or personal property attached to real property,
legally upon or adjacent to a public road or highway immediately shall stop and
take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of the
property of that fact, of the driver’s name and address, and of the
registration number of vehicle the driver is driving and, upon request and if
available, shall exhibit the driver’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (2)   If the owner or person in charge of the property cannot be located
after reasonable search, the driver of the vehicle involved in the accident
resulting in damage to the property within 24 hours after the accident, shall
forward to the Police Department of the municipality the same information
required to be given to the owner or person in control of the property and give
the location of the accident and a description of the damage insofar as it is
known.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident involving the property of others, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to § 698.02
(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.03)
§ 436.19 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES AFTER ACCIDENTS.
   (a)   If a motor vehicle accident occurs on any highway, public street, or
other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel and if any
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that has been damaged or spilled as
a result of the motor vehicle accident is blocking the highway, street, or
other property or is otherwise endangering public safety, a public safety
official may do either of the following without the consent of the owner but
with the approval of the law enforcement agency conducting any investigation of
the accident:
      (1)   Remove, or order the removal of, the motor vehicle if the motor
vehicle is unoccupied, cargo, or personal property from the portion of the
highway, public street, or property ordinarily used for vehicular travel on the
highway, public street, or other property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.
      (2)   If the motor vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle, allow the owner
or operator of the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the removal of the
motor vehicle within a period of time specified by the public safety official.
If the public safety official determines that the motor vehicle cannot be
removed within the specified period of time, the public safety official shall
remove or order the removal of the motor vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, the
Department of Transportation, any employee of the Department of Transportation,
or a public safety official who authorizes or participates in the removal of
any unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by
division (a) of this section, regardless of whether the removal is executed by
a private towing service, is not liable for civil damages for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that results from the removal of that
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property. Further, except as
provided in division (b)(2) of this section, if a public safety official
authorizes, employs, or arranges to have a private towing service remove any
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by division
(a) of this section, that private towing service is not liable for civil
damages for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that results from
the removal of that unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         A.   Any person or entity involved in the removal of an unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property pursuant to division (a) of this
section if that removal causes or contributes to the release of a hazardous
material or to structural damage to the roadway;
         B.   A private towing service that was not authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to remove an unoccupied motor vehicle,
cargo, or personal property under this section;
         C.   Except as provided in division (b)(2)D. of this section, a
private towing service that was authorized, employed, or arranged by a public
safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo,
or personal property but the private towing service performed the removal in a
negligent manner;
         D.   A private towing service that was authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that was endangering public safety
but the private towing service performed the removal in a reckless manner.
   (c)   As used in divisions (a) and (b) of this section:
      (1)   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.232.
      (2)   PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICIAL. Means any of the following:
         A.   The sheriff of the county, or the chief of a law enforcement
agency in the municipal corporation, township, port authority, conservancy
district, university campus police department, park district police force, or
township or joint police district, in which the accident occurred;
         B.   A state highway patrol trooper;
         C.   The chief of the fire department having jurisdiction where the
accident occurred;
         D.   A duly authorized subordinate acting on behalf of an official
specified in divisions A. to C. of this definition;
         E.   A natural resources officer or a wildlife officer.
(R.C. § 4513.66)
   (d)   If a towing service is removing a motor vehicle, and the removal was
not authorized under R.C. § 4513.60, 4513.601, 4513.61, or 4513.66, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, prior to removing the motor
vehicle, the towing service shall provide a written estimate of the price for
the removal to the operator of the motor vehicle, if requested.
   (e)   The towing service shall ensure that any estimate provided under
division (d) of this section includes the fees, services to be rendered, and
destination of the vehicle.
   (f)   If a towing service fails to provide a written estimate as required by
this section, the towing service shall not charge fees for the towing and
storage of the motor vehicle that exceed 25% of any applicable fees established
by the public utilities commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25(B)(4)
or, if the vehicle was towed within a municipal corporation that has
established vehicle removal and storage fees, 25% of the fees established by
the municipal corporation.
   (g)   Any storage facility that accepts towed vehicles shall conspicuously
post a notice at the entrance to the storage facility that states the
limitation on fees established under division (f) of this section.
(R.C. § 4513.68)
§ 436.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 438
Safety and Equipment
438.01   Driving unsafe vehicles; application.
438.02   Lighted lights; measurement of distances and heights.
438.03   Headlights on motor vehicles and motorcycles.
438.04   Tail light; illumination of rear license plate.
438.05   Rear red reflectors.
438.06   Safety lighting on commercial vehicles.
438.07   Obscured lights on vehicles in combination.
438.08   Red light or red flag on extended loads.
438.09   Lights on parked or stopped vehicles.
438.10   Lights, emblems, and reflectors on slow-moving vehicles, farm
machinery, agricultural tractors, and animal-drawn vehicles.
438.11   Spotlight and auxiliary lights.
438.12   Cowl, fender and back-up lights.
438.13   Two lights displayed.
438.14   Use of headlight beams.
438.15   Lights of less intensity on slow-moving vehicles.
438.16   Number of lights permitted; red and flashing lights.
438.17   Lights and sound-producing devices on coroners’ vehicles.
438.18   Vehicles transporting preschool children.
438.19   Focus and aim of headlights.
438.20   Motor vehicle and motorcycle brakes.
438.21   Horn, siren and theft alarm signal.
438.22   Muffler; muffler cutout; excessive smoke, gas or noise.
438.23   Rear-view mirror; clear view to front, both sides and rear.
438.24   Windshield required; sign or poster upon windshield; windshield wiper.
438.25   Tinted glass; materials on glass.
438.26   Limited load extension on left side of passenger vehicle.
438.27   Motor vehicle stop lights.
438.28   Bumpers.
438.29   Air cleaner required.
438.30   Use of child restraints.
438.31   Use of occupant restraining devices.
438.32   Air bags.
438.33   Noise emitted by engine compression braking.
438.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Collector’s vehicles, see R.C. §§ 4513.38, 4513.41
   Warning devices for commercial vehicles disabled upon freeways, see R.C. §
4513.28
   Bicycle equipment, see §
444.05
   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle, see §
678.05
   Occupying travel trailers while in motion, see §
440.08
   Snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle and all-purpose vehicle equipment, see §
446.02
   Towing requirements; exception to size and weight restrictions, see §
440.05
   Use of stop and turn signals, see §
432.13
   Vehicles transporting explosives, see §
440.04
   Wheel protectors for commercial vehicles, see §
440.03
§ 438.01 DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLES; APPLICATION.
   (a)   No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to be
driven or moved, on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is
in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.02(A), (H))
§ 438.02 LIGHTED LIGHTS; MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCES AND HEIGHTS.
   (a)   Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a street
or highway within this state shall display lighted lights and illuminating
devices as required by R.C. §§ 4513.04 through 4513.37 during all of the
following times:
      (1)   The time from sunset to sunrise;
      (2)   At any other time when, due to insufficient natural light or
unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons, vehicles and substantial objects
on the highway are not discernible at a distance of 1,000 feet ahead;
      (3)   At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle are in use
because of precipitation on the windshield.
   (b)   Every motorized bicycle shall display at such times lighted lights
meeting the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4511.521. No motor vehicle, during any time specified in this section, shall be
operated upon a street or highway within this state using only parking lights
as illumination.
   (c)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the distance
from which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible, or within
which such lamps or devices shall be visible, such distance shall be measured
upon a straight level unlighted highway under normal atmospheric conditions
unless a different condition is expressly stated.
   (d)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the mounted
height of lights or devices, it shall mean from the center of such light or
device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a vehicle being operated upon a
street or highway within this state to stop the vehicle solely because the
officer observes that a violation of division (a)(3) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of that division, or causing the arrest of or
commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that division.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.03)
§ 438.03 HEADLIGHTS ON MOTOR VEHICLES AND MOTORCYCLES.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall be equipped
with at least two headlights with at least one near each side of the front of
the motor vehicle.
      (2)   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more
than two headlights.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.04)
§ 438.04 TAIL LIGHT; ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATE.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or
vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles shall be
equipped with at least one tail light mounted on the rear which, when lighted,
shall emit a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear,
provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the tail light on the
rearmost vehicle need be visible from the distance specified.
      (2)   Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so constructed and
placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate, when
the registration plate is required, and render it legible from a distance of 50
feet to the rear. Any tail light, together with any separate light for
illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted
whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving lights are lighted, except where
separate lighting systems are provided for trailers for the purpose of
illuminating the registration plate.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.05)
§ 438.05 REAR RED REFLECTORS.
   (a)   (1)   Every new motor vehicle sold after September 6, 1941, and
operated on a highway, other than a commercial tractor to which a trailer or
semitrailer is attached, shall carry at the rear, either as a part of the tail
lamps or separately, two red reflectors meeting the requirements of this
section, except that vehicles of the type mentioned in R.C. § 4513.07 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be equipped with reflectors
as required by the regulations provided for in that section.
      (2)   Every such reflector shall be of a size and characteristics and so
maintained as to be visible at night from all distances within 300 feet to 50
feet from the vehicle.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.06)
§ 438.06 SAFETY LIGHTING ON COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   When the Director of Public Safety prescribes and promulgates
regulations relating to clearance lights, marker lights, reflectors and stop
lights on buses, trucks, commercial tractors, trailers, semitrailers and pole
trailers, when operated upon any highway, these vehicles shall be equipped as
required by the regulations, and the equipment shall be lighted at all times
mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
except that clearance lights and side marker lights need not be lighted on any
such vehicle when it is operated within the municipality where there is
sufficient light to reveal any person or substantial object on the highway at a
distance of 500 feet.
      (2)   This equipment shall be in addition to all other lights
specifically required by R.C. §§ 4513.03 through 4513.16, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinances.
      (3)   Vehicles operated under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission are not subject to this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.07)
§ 438.07 OBSCURED LIGHTS ON VEHICLES IN COMBINATION.
   Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during the
time that lights are required, any light, except tail lights, which by reason
of its location on a vehicle of the combination would be obscured by another
vehicle of the combination, need not be lighted, but this section does not
affect the requirement that lighted clearance lights be displayed on the front
of the foremost vehicle required to have clearance lights or that all lights
required on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any combination shall be
lighted.
(R.C. § 4513.08)
§ 438.08 RED LIGHT OR RED FLAG ON EXTENDED LOADS.
   (a)   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or
more beyond the bed or body of this vehicle, there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a red light or lantern plainly
visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and rear. The red
light or lantern required by this section is in addition to the red rear light
required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of the load a red flag or cloth not less than 16 inches
square.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.09)
§ 438.09 LIGHTS ON PARKED OR STOPPED VEHICLES.
   (a)   Except in case of an emergency, whenever a vehicle is parked or
stopped upon a roadway open to traffic or a shoulder adjacent thereto, whether
attended or unattended, during the times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the vehicle shall be equipped
with one or more lights which shall exhibit a white or amber light on the
roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle,
and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. No lights need
be displayed upon any such vehicle when it is stopped or parked within the
municipality where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or
substantial object within a distance of 500 feet upon the highway. Any lighted
headlights upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
(R.C. § 4513.10)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 438.10 LIGHTS, EMBLEMS, AND REFLECTORS ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES, FARM
MACHINERY, AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS, AND ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      (1)   BOAT TRAILER. Means any vehicle designed and used exclusively to
transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a
marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more
than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
      (2)   SLOW-MOVING VEHICLE and SMV. Mean a boat trailer, unit of farm
machinery, road construction machinery, or other machinery designed by the
manufacturer to operate at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less. The term does
not include a bicycle, motorized bicycle, electric bicycle, or animal-drawn
vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.11)
   (b)   Generally.
      (1)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall operate
either of the following vehicles unless it is equipped with and displays the
lamps described in division (b)(2) of this section:
         A.   A vehicle not specifically required to be equipped with lamps or
other lighting devices by R.C. §§ 4513.03 to 4513.10;
         B.   A vehicle referred to in R.C. § 4513.02(G).
      (2)   Vehicles described in division (b)(1) of this section shall be
equipped with both of the following:
         A.   At least one lamp displaying a white light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the vehicle;
         B.   Two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the vehicle, or as an alternative, one lamp
displaying a red light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to
the rear and two red reflectors visible from all distances of 600 feet to 100
feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlamps.
      (3)   A.   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall
operate a multi- wheel agricultural tractor model year 2001 or earlier on a
street or highway unless it is equipped with and displays reflectors and
illuminated amber lamps so that the extreme left and right projections of the
tractor are indicated by all of the following:
            1.   Flashing lamps displaying amber light, visible to the front
and the rear. The lamps need not flash simultaneously and need not flash in
conjunction with any directional signals of the tractor.
            2.   Amber reflectors, all visible to the front;
            3.   Red reflectors, all visible to the rear.
         B.   Rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4513.111 governing the lamps and reflectors described in division (b)(3)A. of
this section and their placement correlate with and, as far as possible,
conform with paragraphs 4.1.4.1, 4.1.7.1, and 4.1.7.2 respectively of the
American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S279.10 OCT 98,
Lighting and Marking of Agricultural Equipment on Highways.
      (4)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall operate a
unit of farm machinery model year 2002 or later on a street or highway unless
it is equipped with and displays markings and illuminated lamps that meet or
exceed the lighting, illumination, and marking standards and specifications
that are applicable to that type of farm machinery for the unit's model year
specified in the American society of agricultural engineers standard ANSI/ASAE
S279.10 OCT 98, lighting and marking of agricultural equipment on highways.
      (5)   Any unit of farm machinery designed by its manufacturer to operate
at a speed of 25 miles per hour or greater or any SMV may be equipped with and
display a red flashing light that is visible from a distance of not less than
1,000 feet to the rear at all times specified in R.C. § 4513.03. When a double-
faced light is used, it shall display amber light to the front and red light to
the rear.
      (6)   Lights and reflectors required under divisions (b)(3) and (b)(4) of
this section and authorized under division (b)(5) of this section are in
addition to other lights required or permitted by this division (b) or R.C. §
4513.17.
      (7)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 that establish standards and specifications for lamps and
reflectors required or authorized by this section. Lamps and reflectors
required or authorized by this section shall meet those standards and
specifications.
      (8)   This division (b) does not apply to a bicycle, motorized bicycle,
electric bicycle, or animal-drawn vehicle.
      (9)   Whoever violates this division (b) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.111)
   (c)   Slow-moving vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall
operate an SMV on a street or highway as follows:
         A.   At a speed exceeding 25 miles per hour;
         B.   Without displaying the triangular SMV emblem mounted in
accordance with division (c)(2) of this section.
      (2)   The SMV emblem shall be mounted so as to be visible from a distance
of not less than 500 feet to the rear. In accordance with R.C. Chapter 119, the
Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt standards and specifications for the
design and position of mounting the SMV emblem. The standards and
specifications for the SMV emblem correlate with and, so far as possible,
conform with those approved by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers.
      (3)   A person may operate an SMV on a street or highway without
displaying the triangular SMV emblem when any of the following apply:
         A.   The SMV is being used in actual construction and maintenance work
in an area guarded by a flagperson, or where flares are used.
         B.   The SMV is operating or traveling within the limits of a
construction area designated by the Ohio Director of Transportation, a city
engineer, or the county engineer of the several counties, when such
construction area is marked in accordance with requirements of the Ohio
Director of Transportation and the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
as set forth in R.C. § 4511.09.
      (4)   No person shall display an SMV emblem on any of the following:
         A.   Any vehicle not required to use the SMV emblem by this division
(c) or R.C. § 4513.113 or 4513.114;
         B.   An SMV being transported upon any other vehicle;
         C.   Any stationary object on the highway.
      (5)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate an SMV, except a unit
designed to be completely mounted on a primary power unit that is manufactured
or assembled on or after April 1, 1966, unless it is equipped with an SMV
emblem mounting device.
      (6)   Whoever violates this division (c) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.112)
   (d)   Farm machinery and agricultural tractors.
      (1)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate on a street or
highway any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the unit displays both
of the following:
         A.   The SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. § 4513.112(B);
         B.   A speed identification symbol that does both of the following:
            1.   Meets the specifications contained in the American Society of
Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment:
Speed Identification Symbol (SIS);
            2.   Indicates the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the
unit of farm machinery is designed by its manufacturer to operate.
      (2)   No person operating a tractor on a street or highway that is
designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per
hour and that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery
while operating at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour shall fail to display
both of the following on the unit of farm machinery:
         A.   The SMV emblem;
         B.   The speed identification symbol that matches the speed
identification symbol required to be displayed on the agricultural tractor.
      (3)   No person shall operate an agricultural tractor that is designed by
its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless
the person possesses documentation published or provided by the manufacturer
indicating the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the manufacturer
designed the agricultural tractor to operate.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (d) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.113)
   (e)   Animal-drawn vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (e)(4) of this section, no
person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle on a street or highway unless it
is equipped with and displays, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, both
of the following:
         A.   At least one lamp displaying a white light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the animal-drawn vehicle;
         B.   Two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the animal-drawn vehicle, or as an
alternative, one lamp displaying a red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear and two red reflectors visible from all
distances of 600 feet to one hundred feet to the rear when illuminated by the
lawful lower beams of headlamps.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (e)(4) of this section, no
person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle on a street or highway unless it
is equipped with and displays, at all times, all of the following:
         A.   One yellow flashing lamp displaying yellow light that is visible
from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet and that is mounted in either of
the following positions:
            1.   On the top most portion of the rear of the animal-drawn
vehicle;
            2.   On the top of the animal-drawn vehicle.
         B.   At least one of the following:
            1.   An SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. § 4513.112(B);
            2.   Micro-prism reflective tape that is visible from a distance of
not less than 500 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams
of headlamps;
            3.   Both an SMV emblem and micro-prism reflective tape, as
specified in this division.
         C.   Lamps and micro-prism reflective tape required by this section
shall meet standards and specifications adopted by the Ohio Director of Public
Safety under R.C. § 4513.114.
      (3)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety, in accordance with R.C. Chapter
119, shall adopt rules establishing standards and specifications for the
position and mounting of the lamps and micro-prism reflective tape required by
R.C. § 4513.114. The rules permit the micro-prism reflective tape to be red,
amber, white, or silver in color.
      (4)   A.   Divisions (e)(1) and (e)(2) of this section do not apply to
the operator of animal-drawn agricultural equipment who is not transporting any
livestock or a person other than the operator.
         B.   No operator described in division (e)(4)A. of this section shall
operate animal-drawn agricultural equipment unless it is equipped with and
displays, at all times, the SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. §
4513.112(B).
         C.   As used in division (e)(4) of this section, ANIMAL-DRAWN
AGRICULTURAL EQUIPMENT means equipment drawn by the muscular power of an animal
that is used solely for agricultural purposes. ANIMAL-DRAWN AGRICULTURAL
EQUIPMENT includes any of the following:
            1.   A plow;
            2.   A manure spreader;
            3.   A thresher.
      (5)   Whoever violates this division (e) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.114)
   (f)   Strict liability offenses. The offenses established under this section
are strict liability offenses, and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The
designation of these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be
construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no specified
degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4513.115)
§ 438.11 SPOTLIGHT AND AUXILIARY LIGHTS.
   (a)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one
spotlight and every lighted spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon
approaching another vehicle that no part of the high- intensity portion of the
beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side
of the vehicle, nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than three
auxiliary driving lights mounted on the front of the vehicle. Any such lights
which do not conform to the specifications for auxiliary driving lights and the
regulations for their use prescribed by the Director of Public Safety shall not
be used.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.12)
§ 438.12 COWL, FENDER AND BACK-UP LIGHTS.
   (a)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or fender
lights which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with lights on each side thereof
which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (3)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights, either
separately or in combination with another light. No back-up lights shall be
continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.13)
§ 438.13 TWO LIGHTS DISPLAYED.
   (a)   At all times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, at least two lighted lights shall be displayed, one near
each side of the front of every motor vehicle, except when the vehicle is
parked subject to the regulations governing lights on parked vehicles.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.14)
§ 438.14 USE OF HEADLIGHT BEAMS.
   (a)   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto during the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the driver shall use a
distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of
sufficient intensity to reveal persons, vehicles and substantial objects at a
safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle,
the driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that
the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver.
      (2)   Every new motor vehicle registered in this state which has
multiple-beam road lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam indicator,
which shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of light from the
headlights is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. This indicator shall
be so designed and located that, when lighted, it will be readily visible
without glare to the driver of the vehicle.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.15)
§ 438.15 LIGHTS OF LESS INTENSITY ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES.
   (a)   Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions specified in
R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance when it is
equipped with two lighted lights upon the front thereof capable of revealing
persons and substantial objects 75 feet ahead, in lieu of lights required in
R.C. § 4513.14, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, provided
that the vehicle shall not be operated at a speed in excess of 20 miles per
hour.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.16)
§ 438.16 NUMBER OF LIGHTS PERMITTED; RED AND FLASHING LIGHTS.
   (a)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights is also equipped
with any auxiliary lights or spotlight or any other light on the front thereof
projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower, not more than a
total of five of any such lights on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at
any one time when the vehicle is upon a highway.
   (b)   Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other
than headlights, spotlights, signal lights or auxiliary driving lights, that
projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower shall be
so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of the roadway on
which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than 75 feet from the vehicle.
   (c)   (1)   Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles, except as a
means for indicating a right or a left turn, or in the presence of a vehicular
traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, or overtaking or passing.
      (2)   The prohibition in division (c)(1) of this section does not apply
to any of the following:
         A.   Emergency vehicles, road service vehicles servicing or towing a
disabled vehicle, stationary waste collection vehicles actively collecting
garbage, refuse, trash, or recyclable materials on the roadside, rural mail
delivery vehicles, vehicles as provided in R.C. § 4513.182, highway maintenance
vehicles, and similar equipment operated by state or local authorities,
provided such vehicles are equipped with and display, when used on a street or
highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing,
oscillating, or rotating amber light;
         B.   Vehicles or machinery permitted by R.C. § 4513.111 to have a
flashing red light;
         C.   Farm machinery and vehicles escorting farm machinery, provided
such machinery and vehicles are equipped with and display, when used on a
street or highway, a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber light. Farm
machinery also may display the lights described in R.C. § 4513.111.
         D.   A funeral hearse or funeral escort vehicle, provided that the
funeral hearse or funeral escort vehicle is equipped with and displays, when
used on a street or highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights,
a flashing, oscillating, or rotating purple or amber light.
         E.   A vehicle being used for emergency preparedness, response, and
recovery activities, as those terms are defined in R.C. § 5502.21, that is
equipped with and displays, when used on a street or highway for the special
purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber
or red and white light, provided that the vehicle is being operated by a person
from one of the following and the vehicle is clearly marked with the applicable
agency’s or authority’s insignia:
            1.   The Ohio Emergency Management Agency;
            2.   A countywide emergency management agency established under
R.C. § 5502.26;
            3.   A regional authority for emergency management established
under R.C. § 5502.27;
            4.   A program for emergency management established under R.C. §
5502.271.
      (3)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not apply to animal-drawn
vehicles subject to R.C. § 4513.114.
   (d)   (1)   Except a person operating a public safety vehicle, as defined in
R.C. § 4511.01(E), an emergency management agency vehicle, as described in
division (c)(2)E. of this section, or a school bus, no person shall operate,
move, or park upon, or permit to stand within the right-of-way of any public
street or highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with and displaying
a flashing red or a flashing combination red and white light, or an oscillating
or rotating red light, or a combination red and white oscillating or rotating
light.
      (2)   Except a public law enforcement officer, or other person sworn to
enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state, operating a public safety
vehicle when on duty, no person shall operate, move, or park upon, or permit to
stand within the right-of-way of any street or highway any vehicle or equipment
that is equipped with, or upon which is mounted, and displaying a flashing blue
or a flashing combination blue and white light, or an oscillating or rotating
blue light, or a combination blue and white oscillating or rotating light.
   (e)   This section does not prohibit the use of warning lights required by
law or the simultaneous flashing of turn signals on disabled vehicles or on
vehicles being operated in unfavorable atmospheric conditions in order to
enhance their visibility. This section also does not prohibit the simultaneous
flashing of turn signals or warning lights whether on farm machinery or
vehicles escorting farm machinery when used on a street or highway.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.17)
§ 438.17 LIGHTS AND SOUND-PRODUCING DEVICES ON CORONERS’ VEHICLES.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a motor vehicle operated
by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator may be equipped with a
flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and siren, whistle or bell
capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of
not less than 500 feet. Such a vehicle may display the flashing, oscillating or
rotating red or blue light and may give the audible signal of the siren,
whistle or bell only when responding to a fatality or a fatal motor vehicle
accident on a street or highway and only at those locations where the stoppage
of traffic impedes the ability of the coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s
investigator to arrive at the site of the fatality.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s
investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard
for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.171)
§ 438.18 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING PRESCHOOL CHILDREN.
   (a)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle owned, leased or hired by a
nursery school, kindergarten or child care center, while transporting preschool
children to or from such an institution, unless the motor vehicle is equipped
with and displaying two amber flashing lights mounted on a bar attached to the
top of the vehicle, and a sign bearing the designation “caution — children,”
which shall be attached to the bar carrying the amber flashing lights in such a
manner as to be legible to persons both in front of and behind the vehicle. The
lights and sign shall meet standards and specifications adopted by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle displaying the lights and sign
required by this section for any purpose other than the transportation of
preschool children as provided in this section.
(R.C. § 4513.182)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 438.19 FOCUS AND AIM OF HEADLIGHTS.
   (a)   No person shall use any lights mentioned in R.C. §§ 4513.03 through
4513.18, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, upon any motor
vehicle, trailer or semitrailer unless these lights are equipped, mounted and
adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance with regulations which are
prescribed by the Director of Public Safety.
   (b)   The headlights on any motor vehicle shall comply with the headlamp
color requirements contained in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number
108, 49 C.F.R. § 571.108. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in violation
of this division.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.19)
§ 438.20 MOTOR VEHICLE AND MOTORCYCLE BRAKES.
   (a)   The following requirements govern as to brake equipment on vehicles:
      (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated upon a
highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and
to stop and hold the motor vehicle, including two separate means of applying
the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at
least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are
connected in any way, then on those motor vehicles, manufactured or assembled
after January 1, 1942, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one
part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without
brakes on at least two wheels.
      (2)   Every motorcycle, when operated upon a highway shall be equipped
with at least one adequate brake, which may be operated by hand or by foot.
      (3)   Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes meeting the
rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety under R.C. § 4511.521.
      (4)   When operated upon the highways, the following vehicles shall be
equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to
hold the vehicle, designed to be applied by the driver of the towing motor
vehicle from its cab, and also designed and connected so that, in case of a
breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically applied:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every trailer or
semitrailer, except a pole trailer, with an empty weight of 2,000 pounds or
more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1942;
         B.   Every manufactured home or travel trailer with an empty weight of
2,000 pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2001.
      (5)   Every watercraft trailer with a gross weight or manufacturer’s
gross vehicle weight rating of 3,000 pounds or more that is manufactured or
assembled on or after January 1, 2008, shall have separate brakes equipped with
hydraulic surge or electrically operated brakes on two wheels.
      (6)   In any combination of motor-drawn trailers or semitrailers equipped
with brakes, means shall be provided for applying the rearmost brakes in
approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle, and developing
the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest rate; or
means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the rearmost
brakes; or both of the above means, capable of being used alternatively, may be
employed.
      (7)   Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles and
motorized bicycles, and except trailers and semitrailers of a gross weight of
less than 2,000 pounds, and pole trailers, shall be equipped with parking
brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under
all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice or loose material.
The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in conformance with the
foregoing requirements by the driver’s muscular effort or by spring action or
by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the service brakes or
other source of power provided that failure of the service brake actuation
system or other power assisting mechanism will not prevent the parking brakes
from being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements. The parking
brakes shall be so designed that when once applied they shall remain applied
with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of any source of energy or
leakage of any kind.
      (8)   The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies, brake shoe
anchors, and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally associated with
the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service brakes and the
parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes and the service
brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of
any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative brakes.
      (9)   Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall,
at all times and under all conditions of loading, be capable of being stopped
on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon application of the
service or foot brake, within the following specified distances, or shall be
capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate corresponding to these
distances:
         A.   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles having brakes on all wheels
shall come to a stop in 30 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per hour.
         B.   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles not having brakes on all
wheels shall come to a stop in 40 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per
hour.
      (10)   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be
so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels
on opposite sides of the vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.20)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 438.21 HORN, SIREN AND THEFT ALARM SIGNAL.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway shall be
equipped with a horn which is in good working order and capable of emitting
sound audible, under normal conditions, from a distance of not less than 200
feet.
      (2)   No motor vehicle shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use
upon a vehicle, any siren, whistle or bell. Any vehicle may be equipped with a
theft alarm signal device which shall be so arranged that it cannot be used as
an ordinary warning signal. Every emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a
siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal
conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a type approved by
the Director of Public Safety. The equipment shall not be used except when the
vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or is in the immediate
pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which case the driver
of the emergency vehicle shall sound the equipment when it is necessary to warn
pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.21)
§ 438.22 MUFFLER; MUFFLER CUTOUT; EXCESSIVE SMOKE, GAS OR NOISE.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle with an internal combustion
engine shall at all times be equipped with a muffler which is in good working
order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, and no
person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor
vehicle on a highway. Every motorcycle muffler shall be equipped with baffle
plates.
      (2)   No person shall own, operate or have in the person’s possession any
motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with a device for producing excessive
smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit oil or any other chemical to flow
into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of the vehicle, or equipped in any way
to produce or emit smoke or dangerous or annoying gases from any portion of the
vehicle, other than the ordinary gases emitted by the exhaust of an internal
combustion engine under normal operation.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.22)
§ 438.23 REAR-VIEW MIRROR; CLEAR VIEW TO FRONT, BOTH SIDES AND REAR.
   (a)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall be equipped with a mirror so
located as to reflect to the operator a view of the highway to the rear of the
vehicle or motorcycle. Operators of vehicles and motorcycles shall have a clear
and unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of their vehicles and
motorcycles and shall have a clear view to the rear of their vehicles and
motorcycles by mirror.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.24)
§ 438.24 WINDSHIELD REQUIRED; SIGN OR POSTER UPON WINDSHIELD; WINDSHIELD WIPER.
   (a)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle on a street or highway in this
municipality, other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, that is not
equipped with a windshield.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a bus, with
any sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield,
sidewings, side or rear windows of the vehicle other than a certificate or
other paper required to be displayed by law, except that there may be in the
lower left-hand or right-hand corner of the windshield a sign, poster or decal
not to exceed four inches in height by six inches in width. No sign, poster or
decal shall be displayed in the front windshield in such a manner as to conceal
the vehicle identification number for the motor vehicle when, in accordance
with federal law, that number is located inside the vehicle passenger
compartment and so placed as to be readable through the vehicle glazing without
moving any part of the vehicle.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a passenger car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if either of
the following apply to the device:
         A.   It is a “vehicle safety technology” as defined in 49 C.F.R. §
393.5 and complies with 49 C.F.R. § 393.60(e)(1)(ii).
         B.   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals, and it does not conceal the vehicle
identification number.
      (3)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a commercial car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if either of
the following apply to the device:
         A.   It is a “vehicle safety technology” as defined in 49 C.F.R. §
393.5 and complies with 49 C.F.R. § 393.60(e)(1)(ii).
         B.   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals, and it is mounted not more than 8.5 inches
below the upper edge of the windshield.
   (c)   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device
for cleaning rain, snow or other moisture from the windshield. The device shall
be maintained in good working order and so constructed as to be controlled or
operated by the operator of the vehicle.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.24)
§ 438.25 TINTED GLASS; MATERIALS ON GLASS.
   (a)   No person shall operate, on any highway or other public or private
property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking, lease or rent any
motor vehicle that is registered in this state unless the motor vehicle
conforms to the requirements concerning tinted glass and reflectorized material
of R.C. § 4513.241 and of any applicable rule adopted under that section.
   (b)   No person shall install in or on any motor vehicle any glass or other
material that fails to conform to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any
rule adopted under that section.
   (c)   (1)   No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor vehicle dealer, as
defined in R.C. § 4517.01, shall sell any motor vehicle that fails to conform
to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that
section.
      (2)   No manufacturer, remanufacturer, or distributor, as defined in R.C.
§ 4517.01, shall provide to a motor vehicle dealer licensed under R.C. Chapter
4517 or to any other person, a motor vehicle that fails to conform to the
requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that section.
   (d)   No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in any front
windshield, side windows, sidewings or rear window.
   (e)   This section does not apply to the manufacturer’s tinting or glazing
of motor vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise in compliance with or
permitted by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 205.
   (f)   With regard to any side window behind a driver’s seat or any rear
window other than any window on an emergency door, this division (b) does not
apply to any school bus used to transport a child with disabilities pursuant to
R.C. Chapter 3323, whom it is impossible or impractical to transport by regular
school bus in the course of regular route transportation provided by a school
district. As used in this division, CHILD WITH DISABILITIES has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 3323.01.
   (g)   This section does not apply to any school bus that is to be sold and
operated outside the municipality.
   (h)   (1)   This section does not apply to a motor vehicle used by a law
enforcement agency when the motor vehicle is used by the law enforcement agency
for a purpose within the scope of the law enforcement agency’s duties.
      (2)   As used in this division, LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY means a police
department, the office of a sheriff, the State Highway Patrol, a county
prosecuting attorney, or a federal, state, or local governmental body that
enforces criminal laws and that has employees who have a statutory power of
arrest.
(R.C. § 4513.241(C) - (J))
   (i)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a), (c)(2) or (d) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c)(1) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor if the dealer or the dealer’s agent knew of the nonconformity
at the time of sale.
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree, except that an organization may not be
convicted unless the act of installation was authorized by the board of
directors, trustees, partners, or by a high managerial officer acting on behalf
of the organization, and installation was performed by an employee of the
organization acting within the scope of the person’s employment.
         B.   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section,
whoever violates division (b) of this section is liable in a civil action to
the owner of a motor vehicle on which was installed the nonconforming glass or
material for any damages incurred by that person as a result of the
installation of the nonconforming glass or material, costs of maintaining the
civil action, and attorney fees.
         C.   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section, if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of division (b) of this section and the offender is a motor vehicle repair
operator registered under R.C. Chapter 4775 or a motor vehicle dealer licensed
under R.C. Chapter 4517, whoever violates division (b) of this section is
subject to a registration or license suspension, as applicable, for a period of
not more than 180 days.
(R.C. § 4513.241(K))
Statutory reference:
   Administrative regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-41
§ 438.26 LIMITED LOAD EXTENSION ON LEFT SIDE OF PASSENGER VEHICLE.
   (a)   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a highway with any load
carried on the vehicle which extends more than six inches beyond the line of
the fenders on the vehicle’s left side.
(R.C. § 4513.30)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 438.27 MOTOR VEHICLE STOP LIGHTS.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer and pole trailer when
operated upon a highway shall be equipped with two or more stop lights, except
that passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January 1, 1967,
motorcycles and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least one stop
light. Stop lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle, actuated upon
application of the service brake, and may be incorporated with other rear
lights. These stop lights when actuated shall emit a red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear; provided that in the case of a train of
vehicles only the stop lights on the rearmost vehicle need be visible from the
distance specified.
      (2)   These stop lights when actuated shall give a steady warning light
to the rear of a vehicle or train of vehicles to indicate the intention of the
operator to diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train of vehicles.
      (3)   When stop lights are used as required by this section, they shall
be constructed or installed so as to provide adequate and reliable illumination
and shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations established under
R.C. § 4513.19.
      (4)   Historical motor vehicles as defined in R.C. § 4503.181, not
originally manufactured with stop lights, are not subject to this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.071)
§ 438.28 BUMPERS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING. The manufacturer’s gross vehicle
weight rating established for that vehicle.
      (2)   MANUFACTURER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      (3)   MULTIPURPOSE PASSENGER VEHICLE. A motor vehicle with motive power,
except a motorcycle, designed to carry ten persons or less, that is constructed
either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional off-road
operation.
      (4)   PASSENGER CAR. Any motor vehicle with motive power, designed for
carrying ten persons or less, except a multipurpose passenger vehicle or
motorcycle.
      (5)   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers,
designed and used to carry property and having a gross vehicle weight rating of
10,000 pounds or less.
   (b)   Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, in accordance with
R.C. Chapter 119, shall govern the maximum bumper height or, in the absence of
bumpers and in cases where bumper height has been lowered or modified, the
maximum height to the bottom of the frame rail of any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck.
   (c)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state that does not
conform to the requirements of this section or any applicable rule adopted
pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021.
   (d)   No person shall modify any motor vehicle registered in this state in
such a manner as to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in contact with
the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage from collision, or cause the wheels
to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and no person shall
disconnect any part of the original suspension system of the vehicle to defeat
the safe operation of that system.
   (e)   Nothing contained in this section or in the rules adopted pursuant to
R.C. § 4513.021 shall be construed to prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   The installation upon a passenger car, multipurpose passenger
vehicle or truck registered in this state of heavy duty equipment, including
shock absorbers and overload springs.
      (2)   The operation on a street or highway of a passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle, or truck registered in this state with normal
wear to the suspension system if the normal wear does not adversely affect the
control of the vehicle.
   (f)   This section and the rules adopted pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021 do not
apply to any specially designed or modified passenger car, multipurpose
passenger vehicle or truck when operated off a street or highway in races and
similar events.
   (g)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.021)
Statutory reference:
   Maximum height on bumpers, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-43
§ 438.29 AIR CLEANER REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate upon any street, alley or other public place any
motor vehicle which is not equipped with a functioning air cleaner, except for
motor vehicles equipped with electronic fuel- injection engines.
§ 438.30 USE OF CHILD RESTRAINTS.
   (a)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child
restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (b)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, that is owned,
leased or otherwise under the control of a nursery school or child care center,
the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child restraint system
that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (c)   When any child who is less than eight years of age and less than four
feet nine inches in height, who is not required by division (a) or (b) of this
section to be secured in a child restraint system, is being transported in a
motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 4511.01 or a vehicle that is regulated under R.C. § 5104.015, that is
required by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with
seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor
vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions on a booster seat that meets federal motor vehicle
safety standards.
   (d)   When any child who is at least eight years of age but not older than
15 years of age, and who is not otherwise required by division (a), (b), or (c)
of this section to be secured in a child restraint system or booster seat, is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly restrained either in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions
in a child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards
or in an occupant restraining device as defined in R.C. § 4513.263.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or
summons for a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section or causing the
arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of division
(c) or (d) of this section, and absent another violation of law, a law
enforcement officer’s view of the interior or visual inspection of a motor
vehicle being operated on any street or highway may not be used for the purpose
of determining whether a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section has
been or is being committed.
   (f)   The Director of Public Safety shall adopt such rules as are necessary
to carry out this section.
   (g)   The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a child in a
child restraint system, a booster seat or in an occupant restraining device as
required in this section is not negligence imputable to the child, is not
admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the rights of the child
against any other person allegedly liable for injuries to the child, is not to
be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the operator of the motor
vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section, and is not
admissible as evidence in any criminal action involving the operator of the
motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
   (h)   This section does not apply when an emergency exists that threatens
the life of any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle that is being
used to transport a child who otherwise would be required to be restrained
under this section. This section does not apply to a person operating a motor
vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4731, a clinical nurse specialist or certified nurse
practitioner licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4723, or a
chiropractor licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that
states that the child who otherwise would be required to be restrained under
this section has a physical impairment that makes use of a child restraint
system, booster seat, or an occupant restraining device impossible or
impractical, provided that the person operating the vehicle has safely and
appropriately restrained the child in accordance with any recommendations of
the physician, nurse, or chiropractor as noted on the affidavit.
   (i)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person to
carry with the person the birth certificate of a child to prove the age of the
child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for a child showing that
the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a defense against
any ticket, citation or summons issued for violating this section.
   (j)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a), (b), (c), or (d) of this section
shall be punished as follows, provided that the failure of an operator of a
motor vehicle to secure more than one child in a child restraint system,
booster seat or occupant restraining device as required by this section that
occurred at the same time, on the same day and at the same location is deemed
to be a single violation of this section:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (j)(1)B. of this
section, the offender is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not
less than $25 nor more than $75.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (a), (b),(c) or (d) of this section or of a
state law or municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent any of those
divisions, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   All fines imposed pursuant to division (j)(1) of this section shall
be forwarded to the State Treasurer for deposit in the Child Highway Safety
Fund created by R.C. § 4511.81(I).
(R.C. § 4511.81(A) - (H), (K), (L))
§ 438.31 USE OF OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICES.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   AUTOMOBILE. Any commercial tractor, passenger car, commercial car
or truck that is required to be factory-equipped with an occupant restraining
device for the operator or any passenger by regulations adopted by the United
States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the “National Traffic and Motor
Vehicle Safety Act of 1966", 80 Stat. 719, 15 U.S.C. 1392.
      (2)   COMMERCIAL TRACTOR, PASSENGER CAR and COMMERCIAL CAR. Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      (3)   OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE. A seat safety belt, shoulder belt,
harness or other safety device for restraining a person who is an operator of
or passenger in an automobile and that satisfies the minimum federal vehicle
safety standards established by the United States Department of Transportation.
      (4)   PASSENGER. Any person in an automobile, other than its operator,
who is occupying a seating position for which an occupant restraining device is
provided.
      (5)   TORT ACTION. A civil action for damages for injury, death or loss
to person or property. “Tort action” includes a product liability claim, as
defined in R.C. § 2307.71, and as asbestos claim, as defined in R.C. § 2307.91,
but does not include a civil action for damages for breach of contract or
another agreement between persons.
      (6)   VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE. As used in the definitions of the terms
set forth above, have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (b)   Prohibited acts. No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless he or she is
wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device, or operate a school bus that has an occupant restraining
device installed for use in its operator’s seat unless he or she is wearing all
of the available elements of the device, as properly adjusted.
      (2)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless each
passenger in the automobile who is subject to the requirement set forth in
division (b)(3) of this section is wearing all of the available elements of a
properly adjusted occupant restraining device.
      (3)   Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front seat of an
automobile being operated on any street or highway unless he or she is wearing
all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining
device.
      (4)   Operate a taxicab on any street or highway unless all factory-
equipped occupant restraining devices in the taxicab are maintained in usable
form.
   (c)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Division (b)(3) of this section does not apply to a person who is
required by R.C. § 4511.81 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to
be secured in a child restraint device or booster seat.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
an employee of the United States Postal Service or of a newspaper home delivery
service, during any period in which the person is engaged in the operation of
an automobile to deliver mail or newspapers to addressees.
      (3)   Divisions (b)(1) and (b)(3) of this section do not apply to a
person who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that states the following:
         A.   That the person has a physical impairment that makes use of an
occupant restraining device impossible or impractical;
         B.   Whether the physical impairment is temporary, permanent, or
reasonably expected to be permanent;
         C.   If the physical impairment is temporary, how long the physical
impairment is expected to make the use of an occupant restraining device
impossible or impractical.
      (4)   Divisions (b)(1) and (b)(3) of this section do not apply to a
person who has registered with the Registrar of Motor Vehicles in accordance
with division (c)(5) of this section.
      (5)   A person who has received an affidavit under division (c)(3) of
this section stating that the person has a permanent or reasonably expected to
be permanent physical impairment that makes use of an occupant restraining
device impossible or impracticable may register with the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles attesting to that fact. Upon such registration, the Registrar shall
make that information available in the law enforcement automated data system. A
person included in the database under division (c)(5) of this section is not
required to have the affidavit obtained in accordance with division (c)(3) of
this section in their possession while operating or occupying an automobile.
      (6)   A physician or chiropractor who issues an affidavit for the
purposes of division (c)(3) or (c)(4) of this section is immune from civil
liability arising from any injury or death sustained by the person who was
issued the affidavit due to the failure of the person to wear an occupant
restraining device unless the physician or chiropractor, in issuing the
affidavit, acted in a manner that constituted willful, wanton, or reckless
misconduct.
      (7)   The Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 establishing a process for a person to be included in the
database under division (c)(5) of this section. The information provided and
included in the database under division (c)(5) of this section is not a public
record subject to inspection or copying under R.C. § 149.43.
   (d)   Officers not permitted to stop cars to determine violation.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement
officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on any street
or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of determining whether a
violation of division (b) of this section has been or is being committed or for
the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or summons for the violation or
for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for the
violation. No law enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually
inspect any automobile being operated on any street or highway for the sole
purpose of determining whether the violation has been or is being committed.
   (e)   Use of fines for educational program. All fines collected for
violations of division (b) of this section shall be forwarded to the State
Treasurer for deposit in the funds as set forth in R.C. § 4513.263(E).
   (f)   Limitations on evidence used for prosecution.
      (1)   Subject to division (f)(2) of this section, the failure of a person
to wear all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device in violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(3) of this section or
the failure of a person to ensure that each minor who is a passenger of an
automobile being operated by that person is wearing all of the available
elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device in violation of
division (b)(2) of this section shall not be considered or used by the trier of
fact in a tort action as evidence of negligence or contributory negligence.
But, the trier of fact may determine based on evidence admitted consistent with
the Ohio Rules of Evidence that the failure contributed to the harm alleged in
the tort action and may diminish a recovery of compensatory damages that
represents non-economic loss, as defined in R.C. § 2307.011, in a tort action
that could have been recovered but for the plaintiff’s failure to wear all of
the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device.
Evidence of that failure shall not be used as a basis for a criminal
prosecution of the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this
section; and shall not be admissible as evidence in a criminal action involving
the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
      (2)   If, at the time of an accident involving a passenger car equipped
with occupant restraining devices, any occupant of the passenger car who
sustained injury or death was not wearing an available occupant restraining
device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a device, or was
not wearing such a device as properly adjusted, then, consistent with the Rules
of Evidence, the fact that the occupant was not wearing the available occupant
restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a
device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted is admissible in
evidence in relation to any claim for relief in a tort action to the extent
that the claim for relief satisfies all of the following:
         A.   It seeks to recover damages for injury or death to the occupant;
         B.   The defendant in question is the manufacturer, designer,
distributor or seller of the passenger car;
         C.   The claim for relief against the defendant in question is that
the injury or death sustained by the occupant was enhanced or aggravated by
some design defect in the passenger car or that the passenger car was not
crashworthy.
   (g)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (b)(1) of this section shall be fined
$30.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b)(2) of this section shall be subject
to the penalty set forth in § 408.02.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (b)(3) of this section shall be fined
$20.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (b)(4) of this section, whoever violates division (b)(4) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4513.263)
§ 438.32 AIR BAGS.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   AIR BAG. Has the same meaning as in 49 C.F.R. § 579.4, as amended.
      (2)   COUNTERFEIT AIR BAG. An air bag displaying a mark identical or
similar to the genuine mark of a motor vehicle manufacturer, without the
authorization of the motor vehicle manufacturer.
      (3)   NONFUNCTIONAL AIR BAG. Any of the following:
         A.   A replacement air bag that has been previously deployed or
damaged;
         B.   A replacement air bag that has an electrical fault that is
detected by the air bag diagnostic system of a vehicle after the air bag is
installed;
         C.   A counterfeit air bag, air bag cover, or some other object that
is installed in a vehicle to deceive an owner or operator of the vehicle into
believing that a functional air bag has been installed.
   (b)   No person shall install or reinstall in any motor vehicle a
counterfeit or nonfunctional air bag or any object intended to fulfill the
function of an air bag other than an air bag that was designed in conformance
with or that is regulated by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208
for the make, model, and model year of the vehicle, knowing that the object is
not in accordance with that standard.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly manufacture, import, sell, or offer for sale
any of the following:
      (1)   A counterfeit air bag;
      (2)   A nonfunctional air bag;
      (3)   Any other object that is intended to be installed in a motor
vehicle to fulfill the function of an air bag and that is not in conformance
with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208 for the make, model, and
model year of the vehicle in which the object is intended to be installed.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly sell, install, or reinstall a device in a
motor vehicle that causes the diagnostic system of a vehicle to inaccurately
indicate that the vehicle is equipped with a functional air bag.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) or (d) of this section is guilty
of improper replacement of a motor vehicle air bag, a misdemeanor of the first
degree on a first offense. On each subsequent offense, or if the violation
results in serious physical harm to an individual, the person is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Each manufacture, importation, installation, reinstallation, sale,
or offer for sale in violation of this section shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation.
(R.C. § 4549.20)
§ 438.33 NOISE EMITTED BY ENGINE COMPRESSION BRAKING.
   (a)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle, except when necessary for
safe operation, or in compliance with the law, in such a manner that the
vehicle is so rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position, in the
shifting of gears while in motion, that the exhaust system emits a loud
cracking or chattering noise unusual to its normal operation commonly known as
engine compression braking.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor
and shall be fined a maximum of $100.
(Ord. 04-13, passed 7-6-2004)
§ 438.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 440
Commercial and Heavy Vehicles
440.01   Load limits.
440.02   Maximum width, height and length.
440.03   Wheel protectors.
440.04   Vehicles transporting explosives.
440.05   Towing requirements; exception to size and weight restrictions.
440.06   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required.
440.07   Vehicles with spikes, lugs and chains.
440.08   Occupying travel trailer, fifth wheel vehicle, or manufactured or
mobile home while in motion.
440.09   Route and load information.
440.10   Shifting load; loose loads.
440.11   Chauffeured limousines.
440.12   Road access for commercial agricultural equipment within subdivisions
limited.
440.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Arrest notice of drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
   Display of certificates of registration, see R.C. § 4549.18
   Bus stops and taxicab stands, see §
452.11
   Fatigued or ill drivers, see §
442.09
   Riding in cargo storage areas, see §
416.06
   Slow-moving equipment at grade crossings, see §
432.36
   Stopping at grade crossings, see §§
432.35,
432.36
   Truck loading zones, see §
452.10
§ 440.01 LOAD LIMITS.
   (a)   State regulations.
      (1)   A.   The municipality, with respect to highways under their
jurisdiction, upon application in writing, shall issue a special regional heavy
hauling permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or
combination of vehicles as follows:
            1.   At a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum
specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with
R.C. §§ 4513.01 to 4513.37.
            2.   Upon any highway under the jurisdiction of municipality except
those highways with a condition insufficient to bear the weight of the vehicle
or combination of vehicles as stated in the application.
            3.   Issuance of a special regional heavy hauling permit is subject
to the payment of a fee established by the municipality in accordance with this
section.
         B.   In circumstances where a person is not eligible to receive a
permit under division (a)(1)A. of this section, the municipality, with respect
to highways under its jurisdiction, upon application in writing and for good
cause shown, may issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to
operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of
vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with R.C. §§ 4513.01 through 4513.37,
upon any highway under its jurisdiction.
      (2)   A.   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 715.22 and 723.01, the holder of a
permit issued by the Director of Transportation under R.C. § 4513.34 may move
the vehicle or combination of vehicles described in the permit on any highway
that is a part of the state highway system when the movement is partly within
and partly without the corporate limits of the municipality. No local authority
shall require any other permit or license or charge any license fee or other
charge against the holder of a permit for the movement of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles on any highway which is a part of the state highway
system. The Ohio Director of Transportation shall not require the holder of a
permit issued by the municipality to obtain a special permit for the movement
of vehicles or combination of vehicles on highways within the jurisdiction of
the municipality.
         B.   Except as provided in R.C. § 4513.34(B)(3), permits may be issued
for any period of time not to exceed one year, as the local authority in its
discretion determines advisable or for the duration of any public construction
project.
      (3)   A.   The application for a permit issued under this section shall
be in the form that the municipality prescribes. The municipality may prescribe
a permit fee to be imposed and collected when any permit described in this
section is issued. The permit fee may be in an amount sufficient to reimburse
the municipality for the administrative costs incurred in issuing the permit,
and also to cover the cost of normal and expected damage caused to the roadway
or a street or highway structure as the result of the operation of the
nonconforming vehicle or combination of vehicles.
         B.   For the purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the
Director under R.C. § 4513.34, milk transported in bulk by vehicle is deemed a
nondivisible load.
         C.   For purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the Director
under R.C. § 4513.34, three or fewer aluminum coils, transported by a vehicle,
are deemed a nondivisible load. The Director shall adopt rules establishing
requirements for an aluminum coil permit that are substantially similar to the
requirements for a steel coil permit under O.A.C. Chapter 5501:2-1.
      (4)   The municipality shall issue a special regional heavy hauling
permit under division (a)(1)A. of this section upon application and payment of
the applicable fee. However, the municipality may issue or withhold a special
permit specified in division (a)(1)B. of this section. If a permit is to be
issued, the municipality may limit or prescribe conditions of operation for the
vehicle and may require the posting of a bond or other security conditioned
upon the sufficiency of the permit fee to compensate for damage caused to the
roadway or a street or highway structure. In addition, the municipality, as a
condition of issuance of an overweight permit, may require the applicant to
develop and enter into a mutual agreement with the municipality to compensate
for or to repair excess damage caused to the roadway by travel under the
permit.
      (5)   Every permit issued under this section shall be carried in the
vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to
inspection by any police officer or authorized agent of any authority granting
the permit. No person shall violate any of the terms of a permit.
      (6)   The Director of Transportation may debar an applicant from applying
for a special permit under this section upon a finding based on a reasonable
belief that the applicant has done any of the actions specified in R.C. §
4513.34(F).
      (7)   Notice and procedures for debarment shall be as provided in R.C. §
4513.34(G).
      (8)   A.   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under
this section that relate to gross load limits.
         B.   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to axle load by more than 2,000 pounds per axle or group of
axles.
         C.   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to an approved route except upon order of a law enforcement
officer or authorized agent of the issuing authority.
      (9)   A permit issued by the municipality under this section for the
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles is valid for the purposes of
the vehicle operation in accordance with the conditions and limitations
specified on the permit. Such a permit is voidable by law enforcement only for
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles in violation of the weight,
dimension, or route provisions of the permit. However, a permit is not voidable
for operation in violation of a route provision of a permit if the operation is
upon the order of a law enforcement officer.
(R.C. § 4513.34)
   (b)   Violations. Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
   (c)   Local streets. No person shall operate a vehicle exceeding a size as
specified R.C. §§ 5577.01 through 5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with
R.C. §§ 4513.01 through 4513.37, or exceeding a gross weight of five tons, upon
any street in the municipality other than state routes and county roads, except
those local streets designated as a truck route and marked as such by
appropriate traffic signs, and except when the operation is necessary to load
or unload property, to go to or from the usual place of storage of the vehicle
or to perform any other legitimate business or act other than passage through
the municipality. Operators of vehicles so deviating from either a state route
or a designated truck route within the municipality shall confine the deviation
to that required in order to accomplish the purpose of the departure. On county
roads, Council or other duly designated local authority shall establish
reasonable weight limits commensurate with the construction and material
specifications for the roads and the load resistance of the roads as determined
by the County Engineer. County roads shall be posted with signs indicating the
weight limits.
   (d)   Local permit and conditions. Upon application and for good cause, the
Police Chief may issue a local permit authorizing an applicant to move an
oversize or overweight vehicle or combination of vehicles upon local streets
and highways.
      (1)   No permittee shall be required to obtain a special permit from the
Ohio Director of Transportation for the movement of the vehicle or combination
of vehicles on streets or highways under local jurisdiction. However, the
approval of the Ohio Director of Transportation shall be required for movement
upon state routes as provided in division (a) of this section.
      (2)   The Police Chief may grant a permit for a single or round trip, or
for such period of time, not to exceed one year, as the Police Chief in his or
her discretion deems advisable, or for the duration of any construction
project. The Police Chief may limit or prescribe terms or conditions of
operation for the vehicle or combination of vehicles by designating the route,
hours, speed or such other restrictions as may be necessary for the
preservation of the public peace, property, health and safety. The Police Chief
may require the posting of bond or other security necessary to compensate for
any damage to a roadway or road structure.
      (3)   For each such permit, the Police Chief shall charge $25, and for
each hour of time or any part thereof spent by the Police Department in
supervising the movement of the vehicle, the applicant shall pay the sum of
$50.
      (4)   Except as provided in divisions (a) and (b) of this section,
streets and highways shall be posted with signs indicating “no thru trucks -
gross weight 5 tons” or words of similar import to inform drivers of the
limitations imposed by this section. No driver shall disobey the instructions
indicated on any such sign.
      (5)   Violation of any of the limitations, terms or conditions of the
permit granted by the Police Chief shall be cause for immediate revocation or
suspension of the permit and denial of request for any future permit. This
violation shall also subject the violator to the penalties prescribed by §§
408.01 and
408.02.
§ 440.02 MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT AND LENGTH.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be operated upon the public highways, streets,
bridges and culverts within this municipality whose dimensions exceed those
specified in this section.
   (b)   No such vehicle shall have a width:
      (1)   In excess of 104 inches for passenger bus type vehicles operated
exclusively within the municipality.
      (2)   In excess of 102 inches, excluding such safety devices as are
required by law, for passenger bus type vehicles operated over freeways, and
other state roads with minimum pavement widths of 22 feet, except those roads
or portions of roads over which operation of 102-inch buses is prohibited by
order of the Director of Transportation.
      (3)   In excess of 132 inches for traction engines.
      (4)   In excess of 102 inches for recreational vehicles, excluding safety
devices and retracted awnings and other appurtenances of six inches or less in
width and except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch
recreational vehicles on designated state highways or portions of highways.
      (5)   In excess of 102 inches, including load, for all other vehicles,
except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch vehicles on the
state highways or portions of state highways as the Director designates.
   (c)   No such vehicle shall have a length:
      (1)   In excess of 66 feet for passenger bus type vehicles and
articulated passenger bus type vehicles operated by a regional transit
authority pursuant to R.C. §§ 306.30 to 306.54.
      (2)   In excess of 45 feet for all other passenger bus type vehicles.
      (3)   In excess of 53 feet for any semitrailer when operated in a
commercial tractor- semitrailer combination, with or without load, except that
the Director may prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor-
semitrailer combination on the state highways or portions of state highways as
the Director designates.
      (4)   In excess of 28.5 feet for any semitrailer or trailer when operated
in a commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-semitrailer-
semitrailer combination, except that the Director may prohibit the operation of
any such commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-
semitrailer-semitrailer combination on the state highways or portions of state
highways as the Director designates.
      (5)   A.   In excess of 97 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations when operated on any interstate, United States route
or state route, including reasonable access travel on all other roadways for a
distance not to exceed one road mile from any interstate, United States route
or state route, not to exceed three saddlemounted vehicles, but which may
include one fullmount;
         B.   In excess of 75 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations when operated on any roadway not designated as an
interstate, United States route or state route, not to exceed three
saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one fullmount.
      (6)   In excess of 65 feet for any other combination of vehicles coupled
together, with or without load, except as provided in division (c)(3) and (c)
(4), and in division (e) below.
      (7)   In excess of 45 feet for recreational vehicles.
      (8)   In excess of 50 feet for all other vehicles, except trailers and
semitrailers, with or without load.
   (d)   No such vehicle shall have a height in excess of 13.5 feet, with or
without load.
   (e)   An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed a
length of 65 feet, and a stinger-steered automobile transporter or stinger-
steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of 75 feet, except that the
load thereon may extend no more than four feet beyond the rear of such vehicles
and may extend no more than three feet beyond the front of the vehicles, and
except further that the Director may prohibit the operation of a stinger-
steered automobile transporter, stinger-steered boat transporter, or a B-train
assembly on any state highway or portion of any state highway that the Director
designates.
   (f)   (1)   The widths prescribed in division (b) of this section shall not
include side mirrors, turn signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds for cab entry
and egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, splash and spray suppressant
devices, and load-induced tire bulge.
      (2)   The widths prescribed in division (b)(5) of this section shall not
include automatic covering devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and tiedown
assemblies, provided these safety devices do not extend more than three inches
from either side of the vehicle.
      (3)   The lengths prescribed in divisions (c)(2) to (c)(7) shall not
include safety devices, bumpers attached to the front or rear of the bus or
combination, non-property carrying devices or components that do not extend
more than 24 inches beyond the rear of the vehicle and are needed for loading
or unloading, B-train assembly used between the first and second semitrailer of
a commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, energy conservation
devices as provided in any regulations adopted by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Transportation, or any noncargo-carrying refrigerator
equipment attached to the front of trailers and semitrailers. In special cases,
vehicles that dimensions exceed those prescribed by this section may operate in
accordance with rules adopted by the Director.
   (g)   (1)   This section does not apply to fire engines, fire trucks or
other vehicles or apparatus belonging to the municipality or to the volunteer
fire department thereof or used by that department in the discharge of its
functions. This section does not apply to vehicles and pole trailers used in
the transportation of wooden and metal poles, nor to the transportation of
pipes or well-drilling equipment, nor to farm machinery and equipment.
      (2)   The owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery or equipment not
specifically enumerated in this section but the dimensions of which exceed the
dimensions provided by this section, when operating the same on the highways
and streets of the municipality, shall comply with the rules of the Director
governing such movement. Any person adversely affected shall have the same
right of appeal as provided in R.C. Chapter 119.
      (3)   This section does not require the municipality or any railroad or
other private corporation to provide sufficient vertical clearance to permit
the operation of the vehicle, or to make any changes in or about existing
structures now crossing streets, roads and other public thoroughfares.
   (h)   As used in this section, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 4501.01.
(R.C. § 5577.05)
   (i)   No person shall violate any rule or regulation promulgated by the
Director of Transportation in accordance with R.C. § 5577.05.
(R.C. § 5577.06)
   (j)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second or subsequent offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 5577.99(C))
§ 440.03 WHEEL PROTECTORS.
   (a)   No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated,
any commercial car, trailer or semitrailer, used for the transportation of
goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons,
upon the public highways, streets, bridges and culverts within the
municipality, unless the vehicle is equipped with suitable metal protectors or
substantial flexible flaps on the rearmost wheels of the vehicle or combination
of vehicles to prevent, as far as practicable, the wheels from throwing dirt,
water or other materials on the windshields of following vehicles. The
protectors or flaps shall have a ground clearance of not more than one-third of
the distance from the center of the rearmost axle to the center of the flaps
under any conditions of loading of the vehicle, and they shall be at least as
wide as the tires they are protecting. If the vehicle is so designed and
constructed that the requirements are accomplished by means of fenders, body
construction or other means of enclosure, then no such protectors or flaps are
required. Rear wheels not covered at the top by fenders, bodies or other parts
of the vehicle shall be covered at the top by protective means extending at
least to the centerline of the rearmost axle.
(R.C. § 5577.11)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $25.
(R.C. § 5577.99(E))
§ 440.04 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES.
   (a)   Any person operating any vehicle transporting explosives upon a
highway shall at all times comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   The vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and on the
rear with the word “EXPLOSIVES” in letters not less than eight inches high, or
there shall be displayed on the rear of the vehicle a red flag not less than 24
inches square marked with the word “DANGER” in white letters six inches high,
or shall be marked or placarded in accordance with § 177.823 of the United
States Department of Transportation regulations.
      (2)   The vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two fire
extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use, and placed at convenient
points on the vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.29)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 440.05 TOWING REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTION TO SIZE AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   When one vehicle is towing another vehicle, the drawbar or other
connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed
thereby, and the drawbar or other connection shall not exceed 15 feet from one
vehicle to the other, except the connection between any two vehicles
transporting poles, pipe, machinery or other objects of structural nature which
cannot readily be dismembered.
      (2)   When one vehicle is towing another and the connection consists only
of a chain, rope or cable, there shall be displayed upon the connection a white
flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square.   
      (3)   In addition to the drawbar or other connection, each trailer and
each semitrailer which is not connected to a commercial tractor by means of a
fifth wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the vehicle by which
it is being drawn. These chains or cables shall be of sufficient size and
strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle in
case the drawbar or other connection should break or become disengaged. In case
of a loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to the drawing vehicle shall be
coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains or cables of sufficient size
and strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle.
      (4)   Every trailer or semitrailer, except pole and cable trailers and
pole and cable dollies operated by a public utility as defined in R.C. §
5727.01, shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be so designed
and constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the path of the
vehicle drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to side. Vehicles
used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials
between a local place of storage and supply and the farm, when drawn or towed
on a street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less, and vehicles
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less, shall have a drawbar or other connection, including the hitch
mounted on the towing vehicle, which shall be of sufficient strength to pull
all the weight towed thereby. Only one such vehicle used to transport
agricultural produce or agricultural production materials as provided in this
section may be towed or drawn at one time except as follows:
         A.   An agricultural tractor may tow or draw more than one such
vehicle;
         B.   A pickup truck or straight truck designed by the manufacturer to
carry a load of not less than one-half ton and not more than two tons may tow
or draw not more than two such vehicles that are being used to transport
agricultural produce from the farm to a local place of storage. No vehicle
being so towed by such a pickup truck or straight truck shall be considered to
be a motor vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.32)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
   (c)   Exception to size and weight restrictions.
      (1)   The size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter
5577 do not apply to any of the following:
         A.   A person who is engaged in the initial towing or removal of a
wrecked or disabled motor vehicle from the site of an emergency on a public
highway where the vehicle became wrecked or disabled to the nearest site where
the vehicle can be brought into conformance with the requirements of this
chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577, to the nearest storage facility, or to the
nearest qualified repair facility;
         B.   A person who is en route to the site of an emergency on a public
highway to remove a wrecked or disabled motor vehicle;
         C.   A person who is returning from delivering a wrecked or disabled
motor vehicle to a site, storage facility, or repair facility as specified in
division (c)(1)A. of this section.
      (2)   Any subsequent towing of a wrecked or disabled vehicle shall comply
with the size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577.
      (3)   No court shall impose any penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99 or
the civil liability established in R.C. § 5577.12 upon a person who is
operating a vehicle in the manner described in division (c)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 5577.15)
§ 440.06 LOADS DROPPING OR LEAKING; TRACKING MUD; REMOVAL REQUIRED.
   (a)   (1)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the
vehicle is so constructed, loaded or covered as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand or
other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water
or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining
the roadway.
      (2)   Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the process of
acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans, bottles, waste
paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper, cartons, boxes,
glass, solid waste or any other material of an unsanitary nature that is
susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a moving vehicle shall be driven or
moved on any highway unless the load is covered with a sufficient cover to
prevent the load or any part of the load from spilling onto the highway.
(R.C. § 4513.31)
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
   (c)   No person shall operate any vehicle so as to track mud on any public
way or place.
   (d)   It shall be the duty of the driver of a vehicle who unlawfully drops
or deposits mud or permits the load or any portion thereof to be dropped or
deposited upon any public way or place to immediately remove the same or cause
it to be removed.
§ 440.07 VEHICLES WITH SPIKES, LUGS AND CHAINS.
   (a)   No person shall drive over the improved highways of this municipality
a traction engine or tractor with tires or wheels equipped with ice picks,
spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any kind extending beyond the
cleats, and no person shall tow or in any way pull another vehicle over the
improved highways of this municipality which towed or pulled vehicle has tires
or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections
of any kind. “Traction engine” or “tractor”, as used in this section, applies
to all self-propelling engines equipped with metal-tired wheels operated or
propelled by any form of engine, motor or mechanical power.
   (b)   This municipality shall not adopt, enforce or maintain any ordinance,
rule or regulation contrary to or inconsistent with division (a), nor shall
this municipality require any license tax upon or registration fee for any
traction engine, tractor or trailer, or any permit or license to operate.
Operators of traction engines or tractors shall have the same rights upon the
public streets and highways as the drivers of any other vehicles, unless some
other safe and convenient way is provided, and no public road open to traffic
shall be closed to traction engines or tractors.
(R.C. § 5589.08)
   (c)   For the purposes of this section, STUDDED TIRE means any tire designed
for use on a vehicle and equipped with metal studs or studs of wear-resisting
material that project beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire.
   (d)   (1)   Except as provided in division (d)(2) of this section, no person
shall operate any motor vehicle other than a public safety vehicle or school
bus that is equipped with studded tires on any street or highway in this
Municipality, except during the period extending from the first day of November
of each year through the fifteenth day of April of the succeeding year.
      (2)   A person may operate a motor vehicle that is equipped with
retractable studded tires with the studs retracted at any time of the year, but
shall operate the motor vehicle with the studs extended only as provided in
division (d)(1) of this section.
   (e)   Division (d) of this section does not apply to the use of tire chains
when there is snow or ice on the streets or highways where the chains are being
used, or the immediate vicinity thereof.
(R.C. § 5589.081)
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
§ 440.08 OCCUPYING TRAVEL TRAILER, FIFTH WHEEL VEHICLE, OR MANUFACTURED OR
MOBILE HOME WHILE IN MOTION.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, no person shall
occupy any travel trailer, fifth wheel trailer, or manufactured or mobile home
while it is being used as a conveyance upon a street or highway.
   (b)   (1)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a fifth wheel
trailer when both of the following apply:
         A.   Any child riding in the fifth wheel trailer is properly secured
in the manner provided in R.C. § 4511.81.
         B.   The operator of the vehicle towing the fifth wheel trailer has
some means of viable communication with the passengers riding in the trailer.
      (2)   As used in this division, VIABLE COMMUNICATION includes a cellular
or satellite telephone, a radio, or any other similar electronic wireless
communications device.
   (c)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
(R.C. § 4511.701)
§ 440.09 ROUTE AND LOAD INFORMATION.
   Drivers of vehicles described in this chapter are required, upon request by
a police officer, to give full and true information as to the route they are
following and the name of the consignor and consignee and place of delivery or
removal and the location of any consignment being hauled or goods being
removed, and upon a designation by such police officer of a route to be
followed, shall immediately adopt and pursue the route.
§ 440.10 SHIFTING LOAD; LOOSE LOADS.
   (a)   In addition to any other lawful requirements of load distribution, no
person shall operate any vehicle upon a street or highway unless the vehicle is
so laden as to prevent its contents from shifting or otherwise unbalancing the
vehicle to such an extent as to interfere with the safe operation of the same.
   (b)   No motor vehicle or trailer shall be driven unless the tailboard or
tailgate, tarpaulins, chains (except ground or contact chains), ropes, stakes,
poles and the like, or any part of the load, are securely fastened to prevent
dangling, flapping, swinging or falling from the side, end or top of the load
or body. All projecting cargo shall be properly guarded by a red flag or cloth
or a red light or lantern as required by R.C. § 4513.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
§ 440.11 CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINES.
   (a)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine shall accept passengers only
on the basis of prearranged contracts, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, and shall
not cruise in search of patronage unless the limousine is in compliance with
any statute or ordinance governing the operation of taxicabs or other similar
vehicles for hire.
   (b)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine may provide transportation to
passengers who arrange for the transportation through an intermediary,
including a digital dispatching service. Notwithstanding any law to the
contrary, when providing transportation arranged through an intermediary, the
operator of a chauffeured limousine may establish the fare and method of fare
calculation, so long as the method of fare calculation is provided to the
passenger upon request.
   (c)   No person shall advertise or hold himself or herself out as doing
business as a limousine service or livery service or other similar designation
unless each vehicle used by the person to provide the service is registered in
accordance with R.C. § 4503.24 and is in compliance with R.C. § 4509.80.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.85)
§ 440.12 ROAD ACCESS FOR COMMERCIAL AGRICULTURAL EQUIPMENT WITHIN SUBDIVISIONS
LIMITED.
   (a)   No commercial agricultural vehicles and/or equipment shall be
operated, or in any other manner used, upon any and all streets located within
a subdivision in the village.
   (b)   The provisions of this section are severable, and if any provisions of
this section or the application thereof are held invalid, the invalidity shall
not affect other provisions or applications of this section.
   (c)   Exemptions.
      (1)   Any vehicle while engaged in highway maintenance or repair under
the direction of the state or village;
      (2)   Any emergency vehicle (such as firefighting apparatus or
ambulances) while training or responding to an emergency.
   (d)   Village construction. Nothing contained in this section shall restrict
the use of snow plows, road machines, oilers, traction engines, tractors,
rollers, power shovels, dump wagons, trucks or other construction or
maintenance equipment when used by the village, in the construction or the
maintenance of any street, provided that such construction or maintenance is
performed by persons employed by or under contract with the village, for such
purpose.
   (e)   Penalty. Whoever shall fail to comply with any provision of this
section shall be guilty of a violation and subject to fine of $250 for a first
occurrence, and $500 for any subsequent occurrence.
   (f)   Administration and enforcement. This section shall be administered and
may be enforced by the municipal officers or their duly authorized designee
(such as law enforcement officer).
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 4-22-2013)
§ 440.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 442
Drivers of Commercial Vehicles
442.01   Definitions.
442.02   Use of actual gross weight in lieu of rating.
442.03   Licensing requirements.
442.04   Physical qualification to operate commercial motor vehicles.
442.05   Criminal offenses.
442.06   Application of 49 C.F.R. Part 383.
442.07   Information required of prospective drivers by employers; unauthorized
driving.
442.08   Authority of peace officers re drunk driving.
442.09   Permitting or driving while fatigued or ill prohibited.
442.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Arrest notice of drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
   Hours of service of truck drivers, see R.C. §§ 4921.30, 4923.16
   Warning devices when disabled on freeways, see R.C. § 4513.28
   Driving under the influence, generally, see §
434.01
   Load limits, see §
440.01
   Route and load information, see §
440.09
   Stopping after accidents, generally, see §§
436.16,
436.17
§ 442.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION. The concentration of alcohol in a person’s
blood, breath or urine. When expressed as a percentage, it means grams of
alcohol per the following:
      (1)   One hundred milliliters of whole blood, blood serum or blood
plasma;
      (2)   Two hundred ten liters of breath;
      (3)   One hundred milliliters of urine.
   (b)   COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE.
      (1)   A license issued in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4506 that
authorizes an individual to drive a commercial motor vehicle. Except as
otherwise specifically provided, “commercial driver’s license” includes an
“enhanced commercial driver’s license.”
      (2)   “Enhanced commercial driver’s license” means a commercial driver’s
license issued in accordance with R.C. §§ 4507.021 and 4506.072 that denotes
citizenship and identity and is approved by the United States Secretary of
Homeland Security or other designated federal agency for purposes of entering
the United States.
   (c)   COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE INFORMATION SYSTEM. The information system
established pursuant to the requirements of the “Commercial Motor Vehicle
Safety Act of 1986", 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 U.S.C. App. 2701.
   (d)   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Except when used in R.C. § 4506.25, any
motor vehicle designed or used to transport persons or property that meets any
of the following qualifications:
      (1)   Any combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight or combined
gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more, provided that the gross
vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle or vehicles being
towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds;
      (2)   Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle
weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more;
      (3)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is not a class A
or class B vehicle, but is designed to transport 16 or more passengers
including the driver;
      (4)   Any school bus with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight
rating of less than 26,001 pounds that is designed to transport fewer than 16
passengers including the driver;
      (5)   Is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is
required under 49 C.F.R. Part 172, Subpart F, as amended; or
      (6)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is designed to
be operated and to travel on a public street or highway and is considered by
the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration to be a commercial motor
vehicle, including but not limited to a motorized crane, a vehicle whose
function is to pump cement, a rig for drilling wells and a portable crane.
   (e)   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Includes all of the following:
      (1)   Any substance classified as a controlled substance under the
“Controlled Substances Act”, 80 Stat. 1242 (1970), 21 U.S.C. 802(6), as
amended;
      (2)   Any substance included in Schedules I through V of 21 C.F.R. Part
1308, as amended;
      (3)   Any drug of abuse.
   (f)   CONVICTION. An unvacated adjudication of guilt or a determination that
a person has violated or failed to comply with the law in a court of original
jurisdiction or an authorized administrative tribunal, an unvacated forfeiture
of bail or collateral deposited to secure the person’s appearance in court, a
plea of guilty or nolo contendere accepted by the court, the payment of a fine
or court cost, or violation of a condition of release without bail, regardless
of whether or not the penalty is rebated, suspended or probated.
   (g)   DISQUALIFICATION. Any of the following:
      (1)   The suspension, revocation or cancellation of a person’s privileges
to operate a commercial motor vehicle;
      (2)   Any withdrawal of a person’s privileges to operate a commercial
motor vehicle as the result of a violation of state or local law relating to
motor vehicle traffic control other than parking, vehicle weight or vehicle
defect violations;
      (3)   A determination by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
that a person is not qualified to operate a commercial motor vehicle under 49
C.F.R. 391.
   (h)   DOMICILED. Having a true, fixed, principal, and permanent residence to
which an individual intends to return.
   (i)   DOWNGRADE. Any of the following, as applicable:
      (1)   A change in the commercial driver’s license, or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit, holder’s self-certified status as
described in R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1);
      (2)   A change to a lesser class of vehicle;
      (3)   Removal of commercial driver’s license privileges from the
individual’s driver’s license.
   (j)   DRIVE. To drive, operate or be in physical control of a motor vehicle.
   (k)   DRIVER. Any person who drives, operates or is in physical control of a
commercial motor vehicle or is required to have a commercial driver’s license.
   (l)   DRIVER’S LICENSE. A license issued by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles
that authorizes an individual to drive.
   (m)   DRUG OF ABUSE. Any controlled substance, dangerous drug as defined in
R.C. § 4729.01, harmful intoxicant as defined in R.C. § 2925.01, or over-the-
counter medication that, when taken in quantities exceeding the recommended
dosage, can result in impairment of judgment or reflexes.
   (n)   ELECTRONIC DEVICE. Includes a cellular telephone, a personal digital
assistant, a pager, a computer, and any other device used to input, write,
send, receive, or read text.
   (o)   ELIGIBLE UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. A village, township or county that
has a population of not more than 3,000 persons according to the most recent
federal census.
   (p)   EMPLOYER. Any person, including the federal government, any state and
a political subdivision of any state, that owns or leases a commercial motor
vehicle or assigns a person to drive such a motor vehicle.
   (q)   ENDORSEMENT. An authorization on a person’s commercial driver’s
license that is required to permit the person to operate a specified type of
commercial motor vehicle.
   (r)   FARM TRUCK. A truck controlled and operated by a farmer for use in the
transportation to or from a farm, for a distance of not more than 150 miles, of
products of the farm, including livestock and its products, poultry and its
products, floricultural and horticultural products, and in the transportation
to the farm, from a distance of not more than 150 miles, of supplies for the
farm, including tile, fence and every other thing or commodity used in
agricultural, floricultural, horticultural, livestock and poultry production,
and livestock, poultry and other animals and things used for breeding, feeding
or other purposes connected with the operation of the farm, when the truck is
operated in accordance with this definition and is not used in the operations
of a motor carrier, as defined in R.C. § 4923.01.
   (s)   FATALITY. The death of a person as the result of a motor vehicle
accident occurring not more than 365 days prior to the date of death.   
   (t)   FELONY. Any offense under federal or state law that is punishable by
death or imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and includes any offense
specifically classified as a felony under the law of this state, regardless of
the penalty that may be imposed.
   (u)   FOREIGN JURISDICTION. Any jurisdiction other than a state.
   (v)   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING. The value specified by the manufacturer
as the maximum loaded weight of a single or a combination vehicle. The gross
vehicle weight rating of a combination vehicle is the gross vehicle weight
rating of the power unit plus the gross vehicle weight rating of each towed
unit.
   (w)   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material that has been designated as
hazardous under 49 U.S.C. 5103 and is required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R.
Part 172, Subpart F or any quantity of a material listed as a select agent or
toxin in 42 C.F.R. Part 73, as amended.
   (x)   IMMINENT HAZARD. The existence of a condition that presents a
substantial likelihood that death, serious illness, severe personal injury or a
substantial endangerment to health, property or the environment may occur
before the reasonably foreseeable completion date of a formal proceeding begun
to lessen the risk of death, illness, injury or endangerment.
   (y)   MEDICAL VARIANCE. One of the following received by a driver from the
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration that allows the driver to be issued
a medical certificate:
      (1)   An exemption letter permitting operation of a commercial motor
vehicle under 49 C.F.R. part 381, subpart C or 49 C.F.R. § 391.64;
      (2)   A skill performance evaluation certificate permitting operation of
a commercial motor vehicle pursuant to 49 C.F.R. § 391.49.
   (z)   MOBILE TELEPHONE. A mobile communication device that falls under or
uses any commercial mobile radio service as defined in 47 C.F.R. part 20,
except that mobile telephone does not include two-way or citizens band radio
services.
   (aa)   MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer or semitrailer
propelled or drawn by mechanical power used on highways, except that the term
does not include a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer or semitrailer operated
exclusively on a rail.
   (bb)   OUT-OF-SERVICE ORDER. A declaration by an authorized enforcement
officer of a federal, state, local, Canadian or Mexican jurisdiction declaring
that the driver, commercial motor vehicle or commercial motor carrier operation
is out of service as defined in 49 C.F.R. 390.5.
   (cc)   PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
   (dd)   PORTABLE TANK. A liquid or gaseous packaging designed primarily to be
loaded on or temporarily attached to a vehicle and equipped with skids,
mountings or accessories to facilitate handling of the tank by mechanical
means.
   (ee)   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01(E)
(1) and (E)(3).
   (ff)   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Includes every vehicle that is defined as a
recreational vehicle in R.C. § 4501.01 and is used exclusively for purposes
other than engaging in business for profit.
   (gg)   RESIDENCE. Any person’s residence determined in accordance with
standards prescribed in the rules adopted by the Registrar.
   (hh)   SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (ii)   SERIOUS TRAFFIC VIOLATION. Any of the following:
      (1)   A conviction arising from a single charge of operating a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of any provision of R.C. § 4506.03;
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (2)B. of this definition, a
violation while operating a commercial motor vehicle of a law of this state, or
any municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or any other
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, prohibiting either of the following:
            1.   Texting while driving;
            2.   Using a handheld mobile telephone.
         B.   It is not a serious traffic violation if the person was texting
or using a handheld mobile telephone to contact law enforcement or other
emergency services.
      (3)   A conviction arising from the operation of any motor vehicle that
involves any of the following:
         A.   A single charge of any speed in excess of the posted speed limit
by 15 miles per hour or more;
         B.   Violations of R.C. § 4511.20 or 4511.201 or any substantially
equivalent ordinance or resolution, or of any substantially equivalent law of
another state or political subdivision of another state;
         C.   Violation of a law of this state or an ordinance or resolution
relating to traffic control, other than a parking violation, or of any
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, that results in a fatal accident;
         D.   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license with the proper class or endorsement for the specific vehicle
group being operated or for the passengers or type of cargo being transported;
         E.   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license being in the person’s possession;
         F.   Violation of R.C. § 4511.33 or 4511.34, or any municipal
ordinance or county or township resolution substantially equivalent to either
of those sections, or any substantially equivalent law of another state or
political subdivision of another state;
         G.   Violation of any other law of this state, any law of another
state, or any ordinance or resolution of a political subdivision of this state
or another state that meets both of the following requirements:
            1.   It relates to traffic control, other than a parking violation;
            2.   It is determined to be a serious traffic violation by the
United States Secretary of Transportation and is designated by the director as
such by rule.
   (jj)   STATE. A state of the United States and includes the District of
Columbia.
   (kk)   TANK VEHICLE. Any commercial motor vehicle that is designed to
transport any liquid or gaseous materials within a tank or tanks that are
either permanently or temporarily attached to the vehicle or its chassis and
have an individual rated capacity of more than 119 gallons and an aggregate
rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or more. The term does not include a commercial
motor vehicle transporting an empty storage container tank that is not designed
for transportation, has a rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or more, and is
temporarily attached to a flatbed trailer.
   (ll)   TESTER. A person or entity acting pursuant to a valid agreement
entered into pursuant to R.C. § 4506.09(B).
   (mm)   TEXTING. Manually entering alphanumeric text into, or reading text
from, an electronic device. “Texting” includes short message service (SMS), e-
mail, instant messaging, a command or request to access a world wide web page,
pressing more than a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone, or engaging in any other form of
electronic text retrieval or entry, for present or future communication.
“Texting” does not include the following:
      (1)   Using voice commands to initiate, receive, or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone;
      (2)   Inputting, selecting, or reading information on a global
positioning system or navigation system;
      (3)   Pressing a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone; or
      (4)   Using, for a purpose that is not otherwise prohibited by law, a
device capable of performing multiple functions, such as a fleet management
system, a dispatching device, a mobile telephone, a citizens band radio, or a
music player.
   (nn)   TEXTING WHILE DRIVING. Texting while operating a commercial motor
vehicle, with the motor running, including while temporarily stationary because
of traffic, a traffic control device, or other momentary delays. Texting while
driving does not include operating a commercial motor vehicle with or without
the motor running when the driver has moved the vehicle to the side of, or off,
a highway and is stopped in a location where the vehicle can safely remain
stationary.
   (oo)   UNITED STATES. The 50 states and the District of Columbia.
   (pp)   UPGRADE. A change in the class of vehicles, endorsements, or self-
certified status as described in R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1) that expands the ability
of a current commercial driver’s license holder to operate commercial motor
vehicles under this chapter or R.C. Chapter 4506.
   (qq)   USE OF A HANDHELD MOBILE TELEPHONE. Means:
      (1)   Using at least one hand to hold a mobile telephone to conduct a
voice communication;
      (2)   Dialing or answering a mobile telephone by pressing more than a
single button; or
      (3)   Reaching for a mobile telephone in a manner that requires a driver
to maneuver so that the driver is no longer in a seated driving position, or
restrained by a seat belt that is installed in accordance with 49 C.F.R. §
393.93 and adjusted in accordance with the vehicle manufacturer’s instructions.
   (rr)   VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 4506.01)
§ 442.02 USE OF ACTUAL GROSS WEIGHT IN LIEU OF RATING.
   For purposes of this chapter, the actual gross weight of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles may be used in lieu of a gross vehicle weight rating to
determine whether a vehicle or combination of vehicles qualifies as a
commercial motor vehicle if the gross vehicle weight rating specified by the
manufacturer for the vehicle of combination of vehicles is not determinable, or
if the manufacturer of the vehicle has not specified a gross vehicle weight
rating.
(R.C. § 4506.011)
§ 442.03 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having in the person’s
possession or otherwise under the person’s control more than one valid driver’s
license issued by this state, any other state or by a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this municipality
in violation of an out-of-service order while the person’s driving privilege is
suspended, revoked or cancelled, or while the person is subject to
disqualification;
      (3)   Drive a motor vehicle on a highway in the municipality under the
authority of a commercial driver’s license issued by another state or a foreign
jurisdiction, after having been a resident of this state for 30 days or longer;
      (4)   Knowingly give false information in any application or
certification required by R.C. § 4506.07;
      (5)   Knowingly provide false statements or engage in any fraudulent act
related to testing for a commercial driver’s license as required in R.C. §
4506.09.
   (b)   The municipality shall give every conviction occurring out of this
state and notice of which was received by the State Department of Public Safety
after December 31, 1989, full faith and credit and treat it for sanctioning
purposes under this chapter as though the conviction had occurred in this
state.
(R.C. § 4506.04(A), (B))
   (c)   No person shall drive any commercial motor vehicle for which an
endorsement is required under R.C. § 4506.12 unless the proper endorsement
appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit. No person shall drive a commercial motor
vehicle in violation of a restriction established under R.C. § 4506.12 that
appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit.
(R.C. § 4506.12(I))
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(4) of this section is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition, the provisions
of R.C. § 4507.19 apply.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (a)(5) of this section is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition, the provisions
of R.C. § 4507.19 apply.
(R.C. § 4506.04(C))
      (4)   A.   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   The offenses established under division (c) of this section are
strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of
these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense for which there is no specified degree of culpability,
whether in this section or another section of this code or the Ohio Revised
Code, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4506.12(J))
§ 442.04 PHYSICAL QUALIFICATION TO OPERATE COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   No person who holds a valid commercial driver’s license shall drive a
commercial motor vehicle unless the person is physically qualified to do so.
      (1)   Any person applying for a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit, the renewal or upgrade of a
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit, or the transfer of a commercial driver’s license from out
of state shall self-certify to the Registrar for purposes of 49 C.F.R. § 383.71
one of the following in regard to the applicant’s operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, as applicable:
         A.   1.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in interstate or foreign commerce and is subject to and meets the
requirements under 49 C.F.R. part 391, the applicant shall self-certify that
the applicant is non-excepted interstate and shall provide the Registrar with
the original or a copy of a medical examiner’s certificate and each
subsequently issued medical examiner’s certificate prepared by a qualified
medical examiner to maintain a medically certified status on the applicant’s
commercial driver licensing system driver record;
            2.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in interstate commerce, but engages in transportation or
operations excepted under 49 C.F.R. §§ 390.3(f), 391.2, 391.68, or 398.3 from
all or parts of the qualification requirements of 49 C.F.R. part 391, the
applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted interstate and is
not required to obtain a medical examiner’s certificate;
         B.   1.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and is
subject to state driver qualification requirements, the applicant shall self-
certify that the applicant is non-excepted intrastate;
            2.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and is
excepted from all or parts of the state driver qualification requirements, the
applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted intrastate.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the expiration date on a person’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit,
every commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit holder shall provide the Registrar with the certification
required by this section on or after January 30, 2012, but prior to January 30,
2014.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4506.10(A), (E))
§ 442.05 CRIMINAL OFFENSES.
   (a)   No person who holds a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit or who operates a motor vehicle
for which a commercial driver’s license or permit is required shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having a measurable or
detectable amount of alcohol or of a controlled substance in the person’s
blood, breath or urine;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath;
      (3)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma;
      (4)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.056% or more by urine;
      (5)   Drive a motor vehicle while under the influence of a controlled
substance;
      (6)   Drive a motor vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a municipal
O.V.I. ordinance as defined in R.C. § 4511.181;
      (7)   Use a vehicle in the commission of a felony;
      (8)   Refuse to submit to a test under R.C. § 4506.17 or R.C. § 4511.191,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (9)   Operate a commercial motor vehicle while the person’s commercial
driver’s license or permit or other commercial driving privileges are revoked,
suspended, cancelled, or disqualified;
      (10)   Cause a fatality through the negligent operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, including but not limited to the offenses of aggravated
vehicular homicide, vehicular homicide and vehicular manslaughter;
      (11)   Fail to stop after an accident in violation of R.C. §§ 4549.02 to
4549.03, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (12)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle in violation of any provision of
R.C. §§ 4511.61 to 4511.63 or any federal or local law or ordinance pertaining
to railroad-highway grade crossings;
      (13)   Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony involving the
manufacture, distribution, or dispensing of a controlled substance as defined
in R.C. § 3719.01 or the possession with intent to manufacture, distribute, or
dispense a controlled substance;
      (14)   Use a commercial motor vehicle in the commission of a violation of
R.C. § 2905.32 or any other substantially equivalent offense established under
federal law or the laws of another state.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
   (c)   The offenses established under this section are strict liability
offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of these offenses
as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
(R.C. § 4506.15)
Statutory reference:
   Alcohol or controlled substance testing, disqualification of drivers, see
R.C. § 4506.17
   Disqualification of drivers for violations, see R.C. § 4506.16
§ 442.06 APPLICATION OF 49 C.F.R. PART 383.
   (a)   The provisions of 49 C.F.R. Part 383, Subpart C (Notification
Requirements and Employer Responsibilities), as amended, shall apply to all
commercial drivers or persons who apply for employment as commercial drivers.
No person shall fail to make a report to the person’s employer as required by
this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4506.19)
§ 442.07 INFORMATION REQUIRED OF PROSPECTIVE DRIVERS BY EMPLOYERS; UNAUTHORIZED
DRIVING.
   (a)   Each employer shall require every applicant for employment as a driver
of a commercial vehicle to provide the applicant’s employment history for the
ten years preceding the date the employment application is submitted to the
prospective employer. The following information shall be submitted:
      (1)   A list of the names and addresses of the applicant’s previous
employers for which the applicant was the operator of a commercial motor
vehicle;
      (2)   The dates the applicant was employed by these employers;
      (3)   The reason for leaving each of these employers.
   (b)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize any driver employed by
the employer to drive a commercial motor vehicle during any period in which any
of the following apply:
      (1)   The driver’s commercial driver’s license is suspended, revoked or
cancelled by any state or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   The driver has lost the privilege to drive, or currently is
disqualified from driving, a commercial motor vehicle in any state or foreign
jurisdiction;
      (3)   The driver, the commercial motor vehicle the driver is driving, or
the motor carrier operation is subject to an out-of-service order in any state
or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (4)   The driver has more than one driver’s license.
   (c)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4506.15.
   (d)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle if the driver does not hold a valid, current
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit bearing the proper class or endorsements for the vehicle. No
employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of the restrictions on the driver’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (a), (b) or (d) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 4506.20)
§ 442.08 AUTHORITY OF PEACE OFFICERS RE DRUNK DRIVING.
   (a)   Within the jurisdictional limits of the appointing authority, any
peace officer shall stop and detain any person found violating R.C. § 4506.15,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, without obtaining a
warrant. When there is reasonable ground to believe that a violation of R.C. §
4506.15, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, has been
committed and a test or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood plasma or
blood serum, breath or urine is necessary, the peace officer shall take the
person to an appropriate place for testing. If a person refuses to submit to a
test after being warned as provided in R.C. § 4506.17(C), or submits to a test
that discloses the presence of a controlled substance or an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath, an alcohol
concentration of 0.048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma, or an alcohol
concentration of 0.056% or more by urine, the peace officer shall require that
the person immediately surrender the person’s commercial driver’s license to
the peace officer.
   (b)   As used in this section, JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS means the limits within
which a peace officer may arrest and detain a person without a warrant under
R.C. § 2935.03, except that the Superintendent and the troopers of the State
Highway Patrol may stop and detain, without warrant, any person who, in the
presence of the Superintendent or any trooper, is engaged in a violation of any
of the provisions of R.C. Chapter 4506.
(R.C. § 4506.23)
§ 442.09 PERMITTING OR DRIVING WHILE FATIGUED OR ILL PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle, as defined in R.C. §
4506.01, or a commercial car or commercial tractor, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, while the person’s ability or alertness is so impaired by fatigue,
illness or other causes that it is unsafe for the person to drive the vehicle.
No driver shall use any drug which would adversely affect the driver’s ability
or alertness.
   (b)   No owner, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, of a commercial motor vehicle,
commercial car or commercial tractor, or a person employing or otherwise
directing the driver of the vehicle, shall require or knowingly permit a driver
in any such condition described in division (a) of this section to drive the
vehicle upon any street or highway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.79, or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764 or
4511.77, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.79)
§ 442.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 444
Bicycles, Skateboards and Motorcycles Generally
444.01   Code application to bicycles.
444.02   Riding upon seats; carrying packages; motorcycle handle bars; helmets
and glasses.
444.03   Attaching bicycles, motorcycles to other vehicles.
444.04   Riding on right side of roadway; riding abreast.
444.05   Lights, signal devices, brakes on bicycles.
444.06   Operation of motorized bicycles.
444.07   Safe riding regulations for bicycles.
444.08   Parking; locks.
444.09   Parent’s responsibility.
444.10   Suspension of riding privileges; impounding of bicycles.
444.11   Electric bicycles.
444.12   Skateboards.
444.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Bicycle regulations to be consistent with state law, see R.C. § 4511.07(A)
(8)
   Bicycle defined, see §
402.01
   Bicycles prohibited on freeways, see §
412.05
   Motorcycle brakes, see §
438.20
   Motorcycle defined, see §
402.01
   Motorcycle headlight, see §
438.03
   Motorcycle operator’s license required, see §
436.01
   Off-highway motorcycles, see Ch.
446
   Operation of vehicles on bicycle paths, see §
432.42
§ 444.01 CODE APPLICATION TO BICYCLES.
   (a)   The provisions of this title that are applicable to bicycles and
electric bicycles apply whenever a bicycle or electric bicycle is operated upon
any highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (b)   Except as provided in division (d) of this section, a bicycle operator
or electric bicycle operator who violates any provisions of this title
described in division (a) of this section that is applicable to bicycles or
electric bicycles may be issued a ticket, citation, or summons by a law
enforcement officer for the violation in the same manner as the operator of a
motor vehicle would be cited for the same violation. A person who commits any
such violation while operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall not have any
points assessed against the person’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary license under R.C. §
4510.036.
   (c)   Except as provided in division (d) of this section, in the case of a
violation of any provision of this title described in division (a) of this
section by a bicycle operator, electric bicycle operator, or motor vehicle
operator when the trier of fact finds that the violation by the motor vehicle
operator endangered the lives of bicycle riders or electric bicycle riders at
the time of the violation, the court, notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio
Revised Code to the contrary, may require the bicycle operator, electric
bicycle operator, or motor vehicle operator to take and successfully complete a
bicycling skills course approved by the court in addition to or in lieu of any
penalty otherwise prescribed by this Traffic Code or the Ohio Revised Code for
that violation.
   (d)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to violations of
R.C. § 4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 4511.52)
   (e)   Every person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of
official traffic-control devices and signals applicable to vehicles, unless
otherwise directed by a police officer.
§ 444.02 RIDING UPON SEATS; CARRYING PACKAGES; MOTORCYCLE HANDLE BARS; HELMETS
AND GLASSES.
   (a)   For purposes of this section, SNOWMOBILE has the same meaning as given
that term in R.C. § 4519.01.
   (b)   (1)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall ride
other than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto or
carry any other person upon the bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon a
firmly attached and regular seat thereon, and no person shall ride upon a
bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon such a firmly attached and regular
seat.
      (2)   No person operating a motorcycle shall ride other than upon or
astride the permanent and regular seat or saddle attached thereto, or carry any
other person upon the motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular
seat or saddle thereon, and no person shall ride upon a motorcycle other than
upon such a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle.
      (3)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a
saddle other than while sitting astride the saddle, facing forward, with one
leg on each side of the motorcycle.
      (4)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a seat
other than while sitting upon the seat.
      (5)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall carry any
package, bundle or article that prevents the driver from keeping at least one
hand upon the handlebars.
      (6)   No bicycle, electric bicycle, or motorcycle shall be used to carry
more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
No motorcycle shall be operated on a highway when the handlebars rise higher
than the shoulders of the operator when the operator is seated in the
operator’s seat or saddle.
   (c)   (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(3) of this section, no person
shall operate or be a passenger on a snowmobile or motorcycle without using
safety glasses or other protective eye device. Except as provided in division
(c)(3) of this section, no person who is under the age of 18 years, or who
holds a motorcycle operator’s endorsement or license bearing a “novice”
designation that is currently in effect as provided in R.C. § 4507.13, shall
operate a motorcycle on a highway, or be a passenger on a motorcycle, unless
wearing a protective helmet on the person’s head, and no other person shall be
a passenger on a motorcycle operated by such a person unless similarly wearing
a protective helmet. The helmet, safety glasses, or other protective eye device
shall conform with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. The
provisions of this paragraph or a violation thereof shall not be used in the
trial of any civil action.
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (c)(3) of this section, no
person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary instruction permit and
temporary instruction permit identification card issued by the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 unless the person, at the time of
such operation, is wearing on the person’s head a protective helmet that
conforms with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety.
         B.   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary
instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 in any of the
following circumstances:
            1.   At any time when lighted lights are required by R.C. § 4513.03
(A)(1);
            2.   While carrying a passenger;
            3.   On any limited access highway or heavily congested roadway.
      (3)   Divisions (c)(1) and (c)(2)A. of this section do not apply to a
person who operates or is a passenger in an autocycle or cab-enclosed
motorcycle when the occupant compartment top is in place enclosing the
occupants.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the carrying
of a child in a seat or trailer that is designed for carrying children and is
firmly attached to the bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b) or (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates division (b) or (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (b) or (c)(1) or
(c)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.53)
§ 444.03 ATTACHING BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES TO OTHER VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person riding upon any bicycle, electric bicycle, coaster,
roller skates, sled, skateboard, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or self
to any vehicle upon a roadway.
      (2)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding upon any
bicycle, electric bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, skateboard, or toy
vehicle to attach the same or self to any vehicle while it is moving upon a
roadway.
      (3)   This section does not apply to towing a disabled vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.54)
§ 444.04 RIDING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; RIDING ABREAST.
   (a)   Every person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle upon a roadway
shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable obeying all
traffic rules applicable to vehicles and exercising due care when passing a
standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (b)   Persons riding bicycles, electric bicycles, or motorcycles upon a
roadway shall ride not more than two abreast in a single lane, except on paths
or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, electric
bicycles, or motorcycles.
   (c)   This section does not require a person operating a bicycle or electric
bicycle to ride at the edge of the roadway when it is unreasonable or unsafe to
do so. Conditions that may require riding away from the edge of the roadway
include when necessary to avoid fixed or moving objects, parked or moving
vehicles, surface hazards, or if it otherwise is unsafe or impracticable to do
so, including if the lane is too narrow for the bicycle or electric bicycle and
an overtaking vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (e)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.55)
§ 444.05 LIGHTS, SIGNAL DEVICES, BRAKES ON BICYCLES.
   (a)   Every bicycle or electric bicycle when in use at the times specified
in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be
equipped with the following:
      (1)   A lamp mounted on the front of either the bicycle or electric
bicycle or the operator that shall emit a white light visible from a distance
of at least 500 feet to the front and 300 feet to the sides. A generator-
powered lamp that emits light only when the bicycle or electric bicycle is
moving may be used to meet this requirement.
      (2)   A red reflector on the rear that shall be visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
      (3)   A lamp emitting either flashing or steady red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear shall be used in addition to the red
reflector. If the red lamp performs as a reflector in that it is visible as
specified in division (a)(2) of this section, the red lamp may serve as the
reflector and a separate reflector is not required.
   (b)   Additional lamps and reflectors may be used in addition to those
required under division (a) of this section, except that red lamps and red
reflectors shall not be used on the front of the bicycle or electric bicycle
and white lamps and white reflectors shall not be used on the rear of the
bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (c)   A bicycle or electric bicycle may be equipped with a device capable of
giving an audible signal, except that a bicycle or electric bicycle shall not
be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle or electric bicycle
any siren or whistle.
   (d)   Every bicycle and electric bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate
brake when used on a street or highway.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.56)
§ 444.06 OPERATION OF MOTORIZED BICYCLES.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, unless all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The person is 14 or 15 years of age and holds a valid probationary
motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test provided
for in this section, or the person is 16 years of age or older and holds either
a valid commercial driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 or a
driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid motorized bicycle
license issued after the person has passed the test provided for in this
section, except that if a person is 16 years of age, has a valid probationary
motorized bicycle license and desires a motorized bicycle license, the person
is not required to comply with the testing requirements provided for in this
section.
      (2)   The motorized bicycle is equipped in accordance with the rules
adopted under division (b) of this section and is in proper working order.
      (3)   The person, if under 18 years of age, is wearing a protective
helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened and the
motorized bicycle is equipped with a rearview mirror.
      (4)   The person operates the motorized bicycle when practicable within
three feet of the right edge of the roadway obeying all traffic rules
applicable to vehicles.
   (b)   The Director of Public Safety, subject to R.C. Chapter 119, shall
adopt and promulgate rules concerning protective helmets, the equipment of
motorized bicycles, and the testing and qualifications of persons who do not
hold a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license. The test shall be as near
as practicable to the examination required for a motorcycle operator’s
endorsement under R.C. § 4507.11. The test shall also require the operator to
give an actual demonstration of the operator’s ability to operate and control a
motorized bicycle by driving one under the supervision of an examining officer.
   (c)   Every motorized bicycle license expires on the birthday of the
applicant in the fourth or eighth year after the date it is issued, based on
the period of renewal requested by the applicant. No motorized bicycle license
shall be issued for a period longer than eight years. A person who is 65 years
of age or older may only apply for a motorized bicycle license that expires on
the birthday of the applicant in the fourth year after the date it is issued.
   (d)   No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry another person
upon the motorized bicycle.
   (e)   The protective helmet and rearview mirror required by division (a)(3)
of this section shall, on and after January 1, 1985, conform with rules adopted
by the Director under division (b) of this section.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a), (d) or (e) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.521)
Statutory reference:
   Suspension of probationary motorized bicycle license by the state, see R.C.
§ 4510.34
§ 444.07 SAFE RIDING REGULATIONS FOR BICYCLES.
   (a)   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk or street, the
person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible
signal before attempting to overtake and pass a pedestrian or another bicycle.
This audible signal must be given only by bell or other warning device capable
of giving an audible signal and shall be given at such a distance and in such a
manner as not to startle the person being overtaken and passed.
   (b)   No person shall ride a bicycle across or through any intersection
involving a through street. These intersections are to be crossed by walking
the bicycle across or through the intersection.
   (c)   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the person,
before overtaking and passing a blind person carrying a white or metallic cane,
shall dismount and overtake or pass on foot.
   (d)   When a bicycle is operated on the street, the operator shall give hand
signals before turning, changing lanes or stopping. The signals shall conform
with R.C. § 4511.40, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (e)   Every rider of a bicycle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding
with any pedestrian or any vehicle upon any roadway, sidewalk or bicycle path,
or endangering the life, limb or property of any person while in the lawful use
of the streets, sidewalks or any other private or public property.
   (f)   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is
reasonable and proper under the conditions then existing.
   (g)   The operator of a bicycle emerging from or turning into an alley,
driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area
extending across any alley, driveway or building, yield the right-of-way to all
pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk area. Upon entering the street, the
operator shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the
street.
   (h)   No person shall engage in trick riding or operate a bicycle without
both hands upon the handle grips except when necessary to give the hand signals
required herein.
§ 444.08 PARKING; LOCKS.
   (a)   No person shall park a bicycle upon a sidewalk in such a manner as to
interfere with pedestrian traffic or damage the property of another.
   (b)   No person shall park a bicycle upon a roadway in such a manner as to
interfere with vehicular traffic.
   (c)   No bicycle shall remain unlocked when parked upon any public way or
place.
§ 444.09 PARENT’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   No parent of any child or guardian of any ward shall authorize or knowingly
permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 444.10 SUSPENSION OF RIDING PRIVILEGES; IMPOUNDING OF BICYCLES.
   In addition to the penalties provided in §§
408.01 and
408.02, a court may prohibit any person who violates or fails to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter relating to bicycles from riding a
bicycle for a period not to exceed three months. In addition, any person
violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
relating to bicycles may be punished by having his or her bicycle impounded for
a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 444.11 ELECTRIC BICYCLES.
   (a)   (1)   On and after January 1, 2020, manufacturers and distributors of
electric bicycles shall permanently affix a label, in a prominent location, to
each electric bicycle. The label shall specify whether the electric bicycle is
a class 1, class 2, or class 3 electric bicycle, the top assisted speed that
the electric bicycle is capable of reaching, and the motor wattage of the
electric bicycle.
      (2)   No person shall modify an electric bicycle in a manner that changes
the top assisted speed that the electric bicycle is capable of reaching unless
the person also modifies the label required under division (a)(1) of this
section to reflect the modification.
   (b)   (1)   The manufacturer of an electric bicycle shall ensure that the
electric bicycle complies with the equipment and manufacturing requirements for
bicycles established by the consumer product safety commission under 16 C.F.R.
§§ 1512 et seq.
      (2)   The manufacturer shall manufacture all class 1 electric bicycles
and class 3 electric bicycles so that when the rider ceases pedaling the
electric motor ceases to provide assistance. The manufacturer shall manufacture
all class 2 electric bicycles so that when the rider applies the brakes or
releases or activates a switch or similar mechanism the electric motor ceases
to provide assistance.
      (3)   All class 3 electric bicycles shall be equipped with a speedometer
that displays the speed of the electric bicycle in miles per hour.
   (c)   (1)   The operation of a class 1 electric bicycle and a class 2
electric bicycle is permitted on a path set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles or on a shared-use path, unless the county, township, municipal
corporation, other local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60
with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule prohibits the use
of a class 1 electric bicycle or class 2 electric bicycle on such a path.
      (2)   No person shall operate a class 3 electric bicycle on a path set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or a shared-use path unless that path
is within or adjacent to a highway or the county, township, municipal
corporation, or local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60 with
control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule authorizes the use of a
class 3 electric bicycle on such a path.
      (3)   No person shall operate a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2
electric bicycle, or a class 3 electric bicycle on a path that is intended to
be used primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or other similar
uses, or any other single track or natural surface trail that has historically
been reserved for non-motorized use, unless the county, township, municipal
corporation, other local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60
with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule authorizes the use
of a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2 electric bicycle, or a class 3
electric bicycle on such a path.
      (4)   Divisions (c)(2) and (c)(3) of this section do not apply to a law
enforcement officer, or other person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic
laws of the state, using an electric bicycle while in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
   (d)   (1)   No person under 16 years of age shall operate a class 3 electric
bicycle; however, a person under 16 years of age may ride as a passenger on a
class 3 electric bicycle that is designed to accommodate passengers.
      (2)   No person shall operate or be a passenger on a class 3 electric
bicycle unless the person is wearing a protective helmet that meets the
standards established by the Consumer Product Safety Commission or the American
Society for Testing and Materials.
   (e)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever operates
an electric bicycle in a manner that is prohibited under division (c) of this
section and whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   The offenses established under division (e)(1) of this section are
strict liability offenses and strict liability is a culpable mental state for
purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of these offenses as strict
liability offenses shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
(R.C. § 4511.522)
§ 444.12 SKATEBOARDS.
   (a)   No person shall use or operate a skateboard upon a public street or
sidewalk within the Village of Commercial Point.
   (b)   No person shall park, leave, store or otherwise place a skateboard
anywhere within the Village of Commercial Point in such a manner as to obstruct
or hinder the normal or customary entrances to or exits from any building or
place or in such a manner as to obstruct or hinder the normal or customary use
of any sidewalk or walkway.
   (c)   The term SKATEBOARD shall, without limitation, include any vehicle or
device consisting basically of a board or platform mounted on wheels or
rollers, whether powered by gravity, muscle power or mechanical or motorized
means, which is not equipped with a positive, mechanical means of steering such
vehicle or device.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates this section and has not been previously
convicted of or plead guilty to a violation of this section within the year
immediately preceding this violation shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   If within one year of the offense, the offender previously
convicted of or plead guilty to a violation of this section, the offense shall
be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or plead guilty to two or more violations of this section,
then the offense shall be a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (4)   The maximum penalties for a violation of this section shall be set
forth under Ohio R.C. § 2929.21.
(Ord. 04-22, passed 11-1-2004)
§ 444.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 446
Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles and All-Purpose Vehicles
446.01   Definitions.
446.02   Equipment.
446.03   Code application; prohibited operation.
446.04   Permitted operation.
446.05   Licensing requirements of operator.
446.06   Accident reports.
446.07   Local control within police power.
446.08   Registration of vehicles.
446.09   Operation of off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle without
certificate of title; failure to surrender.
446.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power of court to impound registration certificates for certain violations,
see R.C. § 4519.47
   Bicycles and motorcycles generally, see Ch.
444
   Operation on bicycle paths, see §
432.42
   Required usage of helmets and safety glasses, see §
444.02
   Street or highway defined, see §
402.01
§ 446.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for
cross-country travel on land and water, or on more than one type of terrain,
and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or any combination thereof,
including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air, vehicles commonly known as
all-terrain vehicles, all season vehicles, mini-bikes and trail bikes. The term
does not include a utility vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or any vehicle
principally used in playing golf, any motor vehicle or aircraft required to be
registered under R.C. Chapter 4503 or R.C. Chapter 4561, and any vehicle
excepted from definition as a motor vehicle by R.C. § 4501.01(B).
   DEALER. Any person or firm engaged in the business of manufacturing or
selling snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles at
wholesale or retail, or who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes snowmobiles,
off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles for hire.
   ELECTRONIC. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   ELECTRONIC DEALER. A dealer whom the Registrar of Motor Vehicles designates
under R.C. § 4519.511.
   ELECTRONIC RECORD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   HIGHWAY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   INTERSTATE HIGHWAY. Any part of the interstate system of highways as defined
in subsection (e), 90 Stat. 431 (1976), 23 U.S.C. § 103, as amended.
   LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY OR FREEWAY. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
5511.02.
   MINI-TRUCK. A vehicle that has four wheels, is propelled by an electric
motor with a rated power of 7,500 watts or less or an internal combustion
engine with a piston displacement capacity of 660 cubic centimeters or less,
has a total dry weight of 900 to 2,200 pounds, contains an enclosed cabin and a
seat for the vehicle operator, resembles a pickup truck or van with a cargo
area or bed located at the rear of the vehicle, and was not originally
manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety standards.
   OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE. Every motorcycle, as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that
is designed to be operated primarily on lands other than a street or highway.
   OPERATOR. Any person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile, off- highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle.
   OWNER. Any person or firm, other than a lienholder or dealer, having title
to a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, or other right
to the possession thereof.
   PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4509.01.
   SNOWMOBILE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for use on snow or
ice, and steered by skis, runners or caterpillar treads.
   STATE HIGHWAY and STATE ROUTE. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   STREET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 4519.01)
§ 446.02 EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   In addition to any rules or regulations promulgated by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety pursuant to R.C. § 4519.20 and R.C. Chapter 119,
equipment of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles and all-purpose vehicles
shall include but not necessarily be limited to requirements for the following
items of equipment:
      (1)   At least one headlight having a minimum candlepower of sufficient
intensity to reveal persons and objects at a distance of at least 100 feet
ahead under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (2)   At least one red tail light having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to be plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the
rear under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (3)   Every snowmobile, while traveling on packed snow, shall be capable
of carrying a driver who weighs 175 pounds or more, and, while carrying the
driver, be capable of stopping in no more than 40 feet from an initial steady
speed of 20 miles per hour, or locking its traction belt; and
      (4)   A muffler system capable of precluding the emission of excessive
smoke or exhaust fumes, and of limiting the engine noise of vehicles. On
snowmobiles manufactured after January 1, 1973, the requirement shall include
sound dampening equipment such that noise does not exceed 82 decibels on the
“A” scale at 50 feet as measured according to SAE J192 (September 1970).
   (b)   No person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle in violation of this section, except that equipment specified
in division (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section shall not be required on
snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles or all-purpose vehicles operated during
the daylight hours.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b) of this section shall be fined not more than $50. If the offender
within the preceding year previously has committed a violation of division (b)
of this section or of R.C. § 4519.20(B), whoever violates division (b) of this
section shall be fined not less than $15 nor more than $100, imprisoned not
more than three days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.20)
§ 446.03 CODE APPLICATION; PROHIBITED OPERATION.
   (a)   The applicable provisions of this traffic code apply to the operation
of snowmobiles, off- highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles, except that
no person shall operate a snowmobile, off- highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On any state highway, including a limited access highway or freeway
or the right-of-way thereof, except for emergency travel during such time and
in such manner as the Ohio Director of Public Safety designates or except as
authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F);
      (2)   On any private property, or in any nursery or planting area,
without the permission of the owner or other person having the right to
possession of the property;
      (3)   On any land or waters controlled by the state, except at those
locations where a sign has been posted permitting the operation;
      (4)   On the tracks or right-of-way of any operating railroad;
      (5)   While transporting any firearm, bow or other implement for hunting
that is not unloaded and securely encased;
      (6)   For the purpose of chasing, pursuing, capturing or killing any
animal or wild fowl; or
      (7)   During the time from sunset to sunrise, unless displaying lighted
lights as required by R.C. § 4519.20 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500, or imprisoned not less than 3 nor more than 30 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.40)
§ 446.04 PERMITTED OPERATION.
   Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles and all-purpose vehicles may be
operated as follows:
   (a)   To make a crossing of a highway, other than a highway as designated in
R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
whenever the crossing can be made in safety and will not interfere with the
movement of vehicular traffic approaching from any direction on the highway,
and provided that the operator yields the right-of-way to any approaching
traffic that presents an immediate hazard;
   (b)   On highways in the county or township road systems whenever the local
authority having jurisdiction over the highways so permits;
   (c)   Off and alongside street or highway for limited distances from the
point of unloading from a conveyance to the point at which the snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle is intended and authorized to be
operated;
   (d)   On the berm or shoulder of a highway, other than a highway as
designated in R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1), or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, when the terrain permits the operation to be undertaken safely and
without the necessity of entering any traffic lane;
   (e)   On the berm or shoulder or a county or township road, while traveling
from one area of operation of the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle to another such area.
   (f)   For snowmobiles without metal studded tracks and all-purpose vehicles,
on state highways located on an island in Lake Erie, including limited access
highways and freeways, between the first day of November and the thirtieth day
of April, provided that all of the following conditions apply:
      (1)   The operator has a valid driver’s license as required under R.C. §
4519.44.
      (2)   The snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle is in compliance with rules
governing safety equipment adopted under R.C. § 4519.20.
      (3)   The owner of the snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle maintains proof
of financial responsibility for both on-road and off-road use of the snowmobile
or all-purpose vehicle.
      (4)   The operator obeys all traffic rules and regulations.
(R.C. § 4519.41)
§ 446.05 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS OF OPERATOR.
   (a)   No person who does not hold a valid, current motor vehicle driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, motorcycle operator’s endorsement or probationary
license, issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 or R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid,
current driver’s license issued by another jurisdiction, shall operate a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle on any street or
highway in this municipality, on any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on
any public land or waters.
   (b)   No person who is less than 16 years of age shall operate a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle on any land or waters other than
private property or waters owned by or leased to the person’s parent or
guardian, unless accompanied by another person who is 18 years of age or older,
and who holds a license as provided in division (a) of this section, except
that the Ohio Department of Natural Resources may permit the operation on
state-controlled land under its jurisdiction when the person is less than 16
years of age and is accompanied by a parent or guardian who is a licensed
driver 18 years of age or older.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500, or imprisoned not less than three nor more than 30 days, or
both.
(R.C. § 4519.44)
§ 446.06 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (a)   The operator of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle involved in any accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any
person or damage to the property of any person in excess of $100 shall report
the accident within 48 hours to the Chief of Police, and within 30 days shall
forward a written report of the accident to the Ohio Registrar of Motor
Vehicles on a form prescribed by the Registrar. If the operator is physically
incapable of making the reports and there is another participant in the
accident not so incapacitated, the participant shall make the reports. In the
event there is no other participant, and the operator is other than the owner,
the owner, within the prescribed periods of time, shall make the reports.
   (b)   Any law enforcement officer or other person authorized by R.C. §§
4519.42 and 4519.43 who investigates or receives information of an accident
involving a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle shall
forward to the Registrar a written report of the accident within 48 hours.
(R.C. § 4519.46)
§ 446.07 LOCAL CONTROL WITHIN POLICE POWER.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the municipality from
regulating the operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycle and all-purpose
vehicles on streets and highways and other public property under municipal
jurisdiction, and within the reasonable exercise of the police power, except
that no registration or licensing of any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle required to be registered or titled under R.C. Chapter 4519
shall be required.
(R.C. § 4519.48)
§ 446.08 REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b), (c) and (d) of this section,
no person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle within this municipality unless the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle is registered and numbered in accordance with R.C. §§
4519.03 and 4519.04.
      (2)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.215 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, no registration is required for a mini-truck that is
operated within this state. A mini-truck may be operated only in accordance
with R.C. § 4511.215 and R.C. § 4519.401, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (b)   (1)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle that is operated exclusively upon lands owned by the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle, or on lands to which the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle has a contractual right.
      (2)   No registration is required for an all-purpose vehicle that is used
primarily for agricultural purposes when the owner qualifies for the current
agricultural use valuation tax credit, unless it is to be used on any public
land, trail, or right-of-way.
      (3)   Any all-purpose vehicle exempted from registration under division
(b)(2) of this section and operated for agricultural purposes may use public
roads and rights-of-way when traveling from one farm field to another, when
such use does not violate R.C. § 4519.41.
      (4)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle
that is operated on a state highway as authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F).
   (c)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident of another
state whenever that state has in effect a registration law similar to R.C.
Chapter 4519 and the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all- purpose vehicle
is properly registered under that state’s law. Any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident of
a state not having a registration law similar to R.C. Chapter 4519 shall comply
with R.C. § 4519.09.
   (d)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this municipality by the United
States, another state or a political subdivision thereof, but the snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle shall display the name of the
owner thereon.
   (e)   The owner or operator of any all-purpose vehicle operated or used upon
the waters in this municipality shall comply with R.C. Chapters 1547 and 1548
relative to the operation of watercraft.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section shall be fined not less
than $50 nor more than $100.
(R.C. § 4519.02)
Statutory reference:
   Destruction or disposal of vehicle; transfer of ownership; change of
address; loss of certificate, see R.C. § 4519.05
   Registration of emergency vehicles, see R.C. § 4519.08
   Registration procedure, see R.C. § 4519.03
   Temporary license placards and fees, see R.C. § 4519.10
   Temporary operating permit for certain nonresidents, see R.C. § 4519.09
§ 446.09 OPERATION OF OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE OR ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE WITHOUT
CERTIFICATE OF TITLE; FAILURE TO SURRENDER.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle without having a certificate of title for the off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle if such a certificate is required by R.C. Chapter 4519 to
be issued for the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, or, if a
physical certificate of title has not been issued for it, operate an off-
highway motorcycle or all- purpose vehicle knowing that the ownership
information related to the motorcycle or vehicle has not been entered into the
automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common Pleas.
      (2)   Operate in this municipality an off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle if a certificate of title to the off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle has been issued and then has been canceled.
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon cancellation of it
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed
in R.C. Chapter 4519.
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 4519, in case of the destruction or
dismantling of, or change in, the off- highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle described in the certificate of title.
      (5)   Violate any provision of R.C. §§ 4519.51 to 4519.70 for which no
penalty is otherwise provided or any lawful rules adopted pursuant to those
sections.
      (6)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle knowing that the certificate of title to or ownership of the motorcycle
or vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has
been canceled.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $200, or
imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.66)
§ 446.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 448
Watercraft
448.01   Definitions; applicability.
448.02   Flashing lights prohibited; exceptions.
448.03   Siren prohibited; exceptions.
448.04   Regulations for operation of powercraft of more than ten horsepower.
448.05   Restrictions on child operators; duty of supervisory adult.
448.06   Reckless operation; maintaining sufficient control; wakes restricted.
448.07   Unsafe conditions.
448.08   Marking of bathing and vessel areas.
448.09   Mooring prohibited in certain areas.
448.10   Operating under influence of alcohol or drugs prohibited.
448.11   Implied consent.
448.12   Incapacitated operators prohibited.
448.13   Water skiing confined to ski zones.
448.14   Observer required when towing skier.
448.15   Water skiing after dark prohibited.
448.16   Personal flotation device required for towed person.
448.17   Ski jumps prohibited.
448.18   Permit for special water events.
448.19   Sale of single celled inflatable vessels prohibited.
448.20   Sitting, standing, walking on moving vessels restricted.
448.21   Engine warm-up required.
448.22   Personal flotation devices for children under ten.
448.23   Operation without personal flotation devices prohibited.
448.24   Distress signal or flag required.
448.25   Anchor requirements.
448.26   Specification for fire extinguishers.
448.27   Backfire flame control device required.
448.28   Ventilation requirement on powercraft.
448.29   Abandonment of junk vessels or outboard motors.
448.30   Exhaust muffler required; noise levels; exceptions.
448.31   Safety equipment on rental vessels.
448.32   Capacity plate.
448.33   Dwellings; sanitary systems.
448.34   Prima facie evidence of negligence.
448.35   Requirements for operating personal watercraft.
448.36   Numbering.
448.37   Registration.
448.38   Altering of serial numbers; false information prohibited.
448.39   Accident reports.
448.40   Enforcement.
448.41   Certificate of title; exceptions.
448.42   Manufacturer’s or importer’s certificate.
448.43   Prohibitions.
448.44   Permanently displayed hull identification number.
448.45   Firearms offenses; signaling devices.
448.46   Tampering with navigation aid or vessel prohibited.
448.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Watercraft, see R.C. Chs. 1547 and 1548
   Polluting watercourses, see §
660.04
   Unauthorized use of a vehicle, see §
642.04
§ 448.01 DEFINITIONS; APPLICABILITY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CANOE. A paddlecraft that is normally an open, narrow vessel of shallow
draft, typically pointed at both ends and propelled by its occupants through
the use of paddles while kneeling or sitting on a raised seat, including a
flat-backed canoe and a racing canoe.
      COAST GUARD APPROVED. Bearing an approval number assigned by the United
States Coast Guard.
      CONDITIONAL APPROVAL. A personal flotation device approval that has one
or more conditions with which the user must comply in order for the device to
be considered appropriate for meeting the requirements for personal flotation
devices for the vessel on which it is being used.
      DIVER’S FLAG. A red flag not less than one foot square having a diagonal
white stripe extending from the masthead to the opposite lower corner that when
displayed indicates that divers are in the water.
      DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.01.
      ELECTRONIC. Includes electrical, digital, magnetic, optical,
electromagnetic, or any other form of technology that entails capabilities
similar to these technologies.
      ELECTRONIC RECORD. A record generated, communicated, received, or stored
by electronic means for use in an information system or for transmission from
one information system to another.
      ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE. A signature in electronic form attached to or
logically associated with an electronic record.
      IDLE SPEED. The slowest possible speed needed to maintain steerage or
maneuverability.
      IMPOUNDMENT. The reservoir created by a dam or other artificial barrier
across a watercourse that causes water to be stored deeper than and generally
beyond the banks of the natural  channel of the watercourse during periods of
normal flow, but does not include water stored behind rock piles, rock riffle
dams, and low channel dams where the depth of water is less than ten feet above
the channel bottom and is essentially confined within the banks of the natural
channel during periods of normal stream flow.
      INFLATABLE WATERCRAFT. Any vessel constructed of rubber, canvas, or other
material that is designed to be inflated with any gaseous substance,
constructed with two or more air cells, and operated as a vessel. An inflatable
watercraft propelled by a motor is a powercraft. An inflatable watercraft
propelled by a sail is a sailboat. An inflatable watercraft propelled by human
muscular effort utilizing a paddle or pole is a paddlecraft. An inflatable
watercraft propelled by human muscular effort utilizing an oar with the aid of
a fulcrum provided by oarlocks, tholepins, crutches, or similar arrangements is
a rowboat.
      IN OPERATION. In reference to a vessel means that the vessel is being
navigated or otherwise used on the waters in this state.
      KAYAK. A paddlecraft that is typically pointed at both ends and is
propelled by human muscular effort by one or more seated individuals who use a
double-bladed paddle, including an open kayak with an open deck for operator
seating, an enclosed kayak designed to enclose an occupant within a cockpit, a
tandem kayak designed for multiple occupants, and a racing kayak.
      LAW ENFORCEMENT VESSEL. Any vessel used in law enforcement or under the
command of a law enforcement officer.
      MUFFLER. An acoustical suppression device or system that is designed and
installed to abate the sound of exhaust gases emitted from an internal
combustion engine and that prevents excessive or unusual noise.
      NAVIGABLE WATERS. Waters that come under the jurisdiction of the
Department of the Army of the United States and any waterways within or
adjacent to this state, except inland lakes having neither a navigable inlet
nor outlet.
      NO WAKE. Has the same meaning as “idle speed”.
      OPERATOR. Includes any person who uses, navigates, employs, or has under
the person’s control a vessel, or vessel and detachable motor, on the waters in
this state.
      OWNER. Includes any person, other than a secured party, who claims lawful
possession of a vessel by virtue of legal title or equitable interest therein
that entitled the person to use or possess the vessel, including a person
entitled to use or possess a vessel subject to a security interest in another
person, but does not include a lessee under a lease not intended as a security.
      PADDLECRAFT. Any type of canoe, kayak, paddleboard, or other vessel
powered only by its occupants using a single or double-bladed paddle as a lever
without the aid of a fulcrum provided by oarlocks, tholepins, crutches, or
similar mechanisms.
      PERFORMANCE TYPE. The in-water performance classification of a personal
flotation device as determined by the United States Coast Guard.
      PERSON. Includes any legal entity defined as a person in R.C. § 1.59 and
any body politic, except the United States and this state, and includes any
agent, trustee, executor, receiver, assignee, or other representative thereof.
      PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A United States Coast Guard approved personal
safety device designed to provide buoyancy to support a person in the water.
      PERSONAL WATERCRAFT. A vessel, less than 16 feet in length, that is
propelled by a water-jet pump or other machinery and designed to be operated by
an individual sitting, standing, or kneeling on the vessel rather than by an
individual sitting or standing inside the vessel.
      POWERCRAFT. Any vessel propelled by machinery, fuel, rockets, or similar
device.
      ROWBOAT. An open vessel, other than a paddlecraft, that is designed to be
rowed and that is propelled by human muscular effort by oars and upon which no
mechanical propulsion device, electric motor, internal combustion engine, or
sail has been affixed or is used for the operation of the vessel. The term
includes a racing shell and a rowing skull regardless of length or
construction.
      RULES. Rules adopted by the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft
under R.C. Chapter 1547, unless the context indicates otherwise.
      SAILBOAT. Any vessel, equipped with mast and sails, dependent upon the
wind to propel it in the normal course of operation. A vessel with sail as its
primary method of propulsion and mechanical propulsion as its secondary method
of propulsion is an auxiliary sail. Any sailboat being propelled by mechanical
power, whether under sail or not, is deemed a powercraft and subject to all
laws and rules governing powercraft operation.
      SEWAGE. Human body wastes and the wastes from toilets and other
receptacles intended to receive or retain body waste.
      THROWABLE PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that is intended to be
thrown to a person in the water. The phrase includes a personal flotation
device marked as “Type IV” or “Type V with Type IV performance”. The phrase
does not include a wearable personal flotation device unless it is specifically
marked otherwise.
      TOWED WATERSPORT. Any activity that involves being towed by or riding in
the wake of a recreational vessel, including both of the following:
         A.   Riding or attempting to ride on one or more water skis, a
wakeboard, a surfboard, an inflatable device, or any other device manufactured
or used for the purpose of being towed by a recreational vessel;
         B.   Engaging or attempting to engage in barefoot skiing or
parasailing.
      TYPE ONE PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that is designed to turn an
unconscious person floating in water from a face downward position to a
vertical or slightly face upward position and that has at least nine kilograms,
approximately 20 pounds, of buoyancy.
      TYPE TWO PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that is designed to turn an
unconscious person in the water from a face downward position to a vertical or
slightly face upward position and that has at least seven kilograms,
approximately 15.4 pounds, of buoyancy.
      TYPE THREE PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that is designed to keep a
conscious person in a vertical or slightly face upward position and that has at
least seven kilograms, approximately 15.4 pounds, of buoyancy.
      TYPE FOUR PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that is designed to be
thrown to a person in the water and not worn and that has at least 7.5
kilograms, approximately 16.5 pounds, of buoyancy.
      TYPE FIVE PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that, unlike other personal
flotation devices, has limitations on its approval by the United States Coast
Guard, including, without limitation, any of the following:
         A.   A designation that states the device is approved only for use
while participating in specific activities;
         B.   A designation that states the device is approved only for use by
an operator or passenger of specific types of vessels;
         C.   A designation that states the device is specifically approved as
a substitute for the type of personal flotation device required for use while
engaged in certain activities or as an operator or passenger of a vessel.
      VESSEL. Includes every description of craft, including nondisplacement
craft, multimodal craft, and submersibles, being used or capable of being used
as a means of transportation on water.
      VISIBLE. Means visible on a dark night with clear atmosphere.
      WATERCOURSE. A substantially natural channel with recognized banks and
bottom in which a flow of water occurs, with an average of at least ten feet
mean surface water width and at least five miles of length.
      WATERCRAFT.
         A.   Any of the following when used or capable of being used for
transportation on the water:
            1.   A vessel operated by machinery either permanently or
temporarily affixed;
            2.   A sailboat other than a sailboard;
            3.   An inflatable, manually propelled vessel that is required by
federal law to have a hull identification number meeting the requirements of
the United States Coast Guard;
            4.   A canoe, kayak, pedalboat, or rowboat;
            5.   Any of the following multimodal craft being operated on waters
in this state:
               a.   An amphibious vehicle;
               b.   A submersible;
               c.   An airboat or hovercraft.
            6.   A vessel that has been issued a certificate of documentation
with a recreational endorsement under 46 C.F.R. 67.
         B.   The term does not include ferries as referred to in R.C. Chapter
4583.
         C.   Watercraft subject to R.C. § 1547.54 are divided into five
classes as follows:
            1.   Class A: less than 16 feet in length;
            2.   Class 1: at least 16 feet, but less than 26 feet in length;
            3.   Class 2: At least 26 feet, but less than 40 feet in length;
            4.   Class 3: At least 40 feet, but less than 65 feet in length;
            5.   Class 4: At least 65 feet in length.
      WATERCRAFT DEALER. Any person who is regularly engaged in the business of
manufacturing, selling, displaying, offering for sale, or dealing in vessels at
an established place of business that is used primarily for the selling,
displaying, offering for sale, or dealing of vessels. The phrase does not
include a person who is a marine salvage dealer or any other person who
dismantles, salvages, or rebuilds vessels using used parts.
      WATERS IN THIS STATE. All streams, rivers, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, and other bodies of water, natural or human-made, that
are situated wholly or partially within this state or within its jurisdiction
and are used for recreational boating.
      WEARABLE PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that is intended to be worn
or otherwise attached to a person’s body. The phrase includes a personal
flotation device marked as “Type I”, “Type II”, “Type III”, “Type V with Type
II performance”, or “Type V with Type III performance”.
(R.C. § 1546.01)
   (b)   Unless otherwise provided, this chapter applies to all vessels
operating on the waters in this municipality. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed in contravention of any valid federal or state act or regulation, but
is in addition to the act or regulation where not inconsistent.
(R.C. § 1547.02)
§ 448.02 FLASHING LIGHTS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   No person shall install or use any intermittently flashing light of
any type or color on any vessel in use or operation on the waters in this
municipality, except in accordance with federal law.
   (b)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.03)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.03 SIREN PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   No person, except an authorized watercraft representative of the
federal government, the state or any of its political subdivisions shall use or
operate a siren on the waters in this municipality except for emergency
purposes.
   (b)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.04)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.04 REGULATIONS FOR OPERATION AND RENTAL OF POWERCRAFT OF MORE THAN TEN
HORSEPOWER.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, no person
born on or after January 1, 1982, shall operate on the waters in this
municipality a powercraft powered by more than ten horsepower, unless the
operator successfully has completed either a safe boater course approved by the
National Association of State Boating Law Administrators or a proctored or
nonproctored proficiency examination that tests knowledge of information
included in the curriculum of such a course, and has received a certificate as
evidence of successful completion of the course or examination.
      (2)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to an individual who
possesses valid merchant mariner credentials issued by the United States Coast
Guard in accordance with 46 C.F.R. 10.109 with at least one endorsement of
master or operator as defined in 46 C.F.R. § 10.107. Such an individual, while
operating any recreational vessel on the waters in this municipality, shall
carry onboard documentation of the merchant mariner credentials and required
endorsements and shall present the documentation to a natural resources officer
or law enforcement officer upon request.
      (3)   No person shall permit a powercraft to be operated in this
municipality in violation of division (a)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.05)
   (b)   A person born on or after January 1, 1982, who is operating on the
waters in this municipality a powercraft powered by more than ten horsepower
and who is stopped by a law enforcement officer in the enforcement of R.C.
Chapter 1547 or rules shall present to the law enforcement officer, not later
than 72 hours after being stopped, a certificate obtained by the person
pursuant to division (a) of this section prior to being stopped or proof of
holding such a certificate. Failure of the person to present the certificate or
proof of holding it within 72 hours constitutes prima facie evidence of a
violation of division (a) of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.051)
   (c)   No rental business shall lease, hire or rent a powercraft powered by
more than ten horsepower for operation on the waters in this municipality to a
person born on or after January 1, 1982, unless the person meets one of the
following requirements:
      (1)   The person signs a statement on the rental agreement or attached to
the rental agreement that the person has successfully completed a safe boater
course approved by the National Association of State Boating Law Administrators
or has successfully completed a proficiency examination as provided in division
(a) of this section.
      (2)   The person receives educational materials from the rental business
and successfully passes, with a score of 90% or better, an abbreviated
examination given by the rental business. The achievement of a passing score on
the examination shall be indicated on or attached to the powercraft rental
agreement.
   (d)   Any person born on or after January 1, 1982, operating or supervising
the operation of a leased, hired or rented powercraft shall:
      (1)   Meet the requirements for boater education of division (c) of this
section.
      (2)   Be named as an operator on the agreement that leases, hires or
rents the powercraft.
   (e)   The Division of Parks and Watercraft shall make available to all
watercraft rental businesses in the state boater safety educational materials
and an abbreviated examination that shall be used by the watercraft rental
business for the purposes of division (c)(2) of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.052)
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the violation is not related to a
collision, injury to a person, or damage to property and a misdemeanor of the
third degree if the violation is related to a collision, injury to a person, or
damage to property.
(R.C. § 1547.99(K))
   (g)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
   (h)   The sentencing court, in addition to the penalty provided under this
section for a violation of this section or a rule adopted under it that
involves a powercraft powered by more than ten horsepower and that, in the
opinion of the court, involves a threat to the safety of persons or property,
shall order the offender to complete successfully a boating course approved by
the National Association of State Boating Law Administrators before the
offender is allowed to operate a powercraft powered by more than ten horsepower
on the waters in this state. Violation of a court order entered under this
division is punishable as contempt under R.C. Chapter 2705.
(R.C. § 1547.99(L))
§ 448.05 RESTRICTIONS ON CHILD OPERATORS; DUTY OF SUPERVISORY ADULT.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, no person under 16
years of age shall operate a personal watercraft on the waters in this
municipality. A person who is not less than 12 nor more than 15 years of age
may operate a personal watercraft if a supervising person 18 years of age or
older is aboard the personal watercraft and, in the case of a supervising
person born on or after January 1, 1982, if the supervising person holds a
certificate obtained under §
448.04(a) or, in the case of a rented powercraft, meets the requirements of §
448.04(c) and (d).
   (b)   No person under 12 years of age shall operate any vessel on the waters
in this municipality unless the person is under the direct visual and audible
supervision, during the operation, of a person who is 18 years of age or older.
This division does not apply to a personal watercraft, which shall be governed
by division (a) of this section, or to a powercraft, other than a personal
watercraft, powered by more than ten horsepower, which shall be governed by
division (c) of this section.
   (c)   No person under 12 years of age shall operate on the waters in this
municipality a powercraft, other than a personal watercraft, powered by more
than ten horsepower unless the person is under the direct visual and audible
supervision, during the operation, of a person 18 years of age or older who is
aboard the powercraft and, in the case of such a supervising person born on or
after January 1, 1982, who holds a certificate obtained under §
448.04(a) or, in the case of a rented powercraft, meets the requirements of §
448.04(c) and (d).
   (d)   No supervising person 18 years of age or older shall permit any person
who is under the supervising person’s supervision and who is operating a vessel
on the waters in this municipality to violate any section of this chapter, R.C.
Chapter 1547 or a rule.
(R.C. § 1547.06)
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.06 RECKLESS OPERATION; MAINTAINING SUFFICIENT CONTROL; WAKES RESTRICTED.
   (a)   Reckless operation.
      (1)   Any person who operates any vessel or manipulates any water skis,
aquaplane or similar device on the waters in this municipality carelessly or
heedlessly, or in disregard of the rights or safety of any person, vessel or
property, or without due caution, at a rate of speed or in a manner so as to
endanger any person, vessel or property is guilty of reckless operation of the
vessel or other device.
      (2)   No person shall operate or permit the operation of a vessel in an
unsafe manner. A vessel shall be operated in a reasonable and prudent manner at
all times. Unsafe vessel operation includes, without limitation, any of the
following:
         A.   A vessel becoming airborne or completely leaving the water while
crossing the wake of another vessel at a distance of less than 100 feet, or at
an unsafe distance, from the vessel creating the wake;
         B.   Operating at such a speed and proximity to another vessel or to a
person attempting to ride on one or more water skis, surfboard, inflatable
device or similar device being towed by a vessel so as to require the operator
of either vessel to swerve or turn abruptly to avoid collision;
         C.   Operating less than 200 feet directly behind a person water
skiing or attempting to water ski;
         D.   Weaving through congested traffic.
(R.C. § 1547.07)
   (b)   Maintaining sufficient control. No person shall operate or permit the
operation of a vessel on the waters in this municipality without maintaining
sufficient control to avoid an incident that results in property damage,
physical injury, loss of life or any combination of them.
(R.C. § 1547.072)
   (c)   Wakes restricted.
      (1)   As used in this division (c), PUBLIC SERVICE means activities that
include but are not limited to escorting or patrolling special water events,
traffic control, salvage, firefighting, medical assistance, assisting disabled
vessels, and search and rescue.
      (2)   No person shall operate a vessel at a speed that creates a wake
within 100 feet of a stationary law enforcement vessel displaying at least one
flashing, oscillating or rotating light conforming with 33 C.F.R. 88.11.
      (3)   No person shall operate a vessel at a speed that creates a wake
within 100 feet of a vessel that is being used to provide public service and
that displays at least one flashing, oscillating or rotating light conforming
with 33 C.F.R. 88.12.
      (4)   No person shall permit any vessel to be operated on the waters in
this municipality in violation of this division (c).
(R.C. § 1547.132)
   (d)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates divisions (a) or (c) of this section without
causing injury to persons or damage to property is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(D))
      (2)   Whoever violates divisions (a) or (c) of this section causing
injury to persons or damage to property is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(E))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section shall be subject to
the penalty provided in §
448.99.
§ 448.07 UNSAFE CONDITIONS.
   (a)   If a law enforcement officer observes a vessel being used and
determines that at least one of the unsafe conditions identified in division
(c) of this section is present and that an especially hazardous condition
exists, the officer may direct the operator of the vessel to take whatever
immediate and reasonable actions are necessary for the safety of the persons
aboard the vessel, including directing the operator to return the vessel to
mooring and remain there until the situation creating the hazardous condition
is corrected or has ended. For the purposes of this section, an “especially
hazardous condition” is one in which a reasonably prudent person would believe
that the continued operation of a vessel would create a special hazard to the
safety of the persons aboard the vessel.
   (b)   The refusal by an operator of a vessel to terminate use of the vessel
after being ordered to do so by a law enforcement officer under division (a) of
this section is prima facie evidence of a violation of §
448.06.
   (c)   For the purposes of this section, any of the following is an unsafe
condition:
      (1)   Insufficient personal flotation devices;
      (2)   Insufficient fire extinguishers;
      (3)   Overloaded, insufficient freeboard for the water conditions in
which the vessel is operating;
      (4)   Improper display of navigation lights;
      (5)   Fuel leaks, including fuel leaking from either the engine or the
fuel system;
      (6)   Accumulation of or an abnormal amount of fuel in the bilges;
      (7)   Inadequate backfire flame control;
      (8)   Improper ventilation.
   (d)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Foreign vessels temporarily using waters that are subject to the
jurisdiction of the United States;
      (2)   Military vessels, vessels owned by the state or a political
subdivision, or other public vessels, except those that are used for
recreation;
      (3)   A ship’s lifeboats, as defined in R.C. § 1548.01;
      (4)   Vessels that are solely commercial and that are carrying more than
six passengers for hire.
(R.C. § 1547.071)
§ 448.08 MARKING OF BATHING AND VESSEL AREAS.
   (a)   No person shall operate a vessel within or through a designated
bathing area or within or through any area that has been buoyed off designating
it as an area in which vessels are prohibited.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall operate a vessel at greater than idle speed or
at a speed that creates a wake under any of the following circumstances:
         A.   Within 300 feet of any marina, boat docking facility, boat
gasoline dock, launch ramp, recreational boat harbor or harbor entrance on Lake
Erie or on the Ohio River;
         B.   During the period from sunset to sunrise according to local time
within any water between the Dan Beard bridge and the Brent Spence bridge on
the Ohio River for any vessel not documented by the United States Coast Guard
as commercial;
         C.   Within any area buoyed or marked as a “no wake” area on the
waters in this municipality.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply in either of the
following places:
         A.   An area designated by the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft unless it is marked by a buoy or sign as a “no wake” or “idle speed”
area;
         B.   Within any water between the Dan Beard bridge and the Brent
Spence bridge on the Ohio River when the United States Coast Guard has
authorized the holding of a special event of a community nature on that water.
   (c)   No person shall operate a vessel in any area of restricted or
controlled operation in violation of the designated restriction.
   (d)   No person shall operate a vessel within 300 feet of an official
diver’s flag unless the person is tendering the diving operation.
   (e)   (1)   All areas of restricted or controlled operation as described in
division (a) of this section or as provided for in §
448.13 or R.C. § 1547.16 or 1547.61 shall be marked by a buoy or sign
designating the restriction. All waters surrounded by or lying between such a
buoy or sign and the closest shoreline are thereby designated as an area in
which the designated restrictions shall apply in the operation of any vessel.
      (2)   Markings on buoys designating areas of restricted or controlled
operation shall be so spaced as to show all around the horizon. Lineal spacing
between the buoys shall be such that under normal conditions of visibility any
buoy shall be readily visible from the next adjacent buoy. No colors or
symbols, except as provided for in rules, shall be used on buoys or signs for
marking closed or controlled areas of boating waters.
      (3)   Any state department, conservancy district or political subdivision
having jurisdiction and control of impounded boating waters may place such
buoys or signs on its waters. Any political subdivision may apply to the Chief
of the Division of Parks and Watercraft for permission to place such buoys or
signs on other waters within its territorial limits. No person shall place or
cause to be placed a regulatory buoy or sign on, into or along the waters in
this municipality unless the person has complied with all the provisions of
this chapter and R.C. Chapter 1547.
   (f)   No person shall enter, operate a vessel that enters or allow a vessel
to enter a federally- declared security zone as defined in 33 C.F.R. Chapter 1,
subparts 6.01-1, 6.01-2, 6.01-3, 6.01-4, 6.01-5, 6.04-1, 6.04-5, 6.04-6, 6.04-
7 and 6.04-8.
   (g)   No person shall permit any vessel to be operated on the waters in this
municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.08)
   (h)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) or (g) of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (f) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(B))
§ 448.09 MOORING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS.
   (a)   No person shall moor or anchor any vessel in a designated speed zone
or water ski zone. No person, unless in distress and no other vessel is
endangered thereby, shall moor to, anchor to or tie up to any marker, aid,
buoy, light or other aid to navigation.
   (b)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.09)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.10 OPERATING UNDER INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall operate or be in physical control of any vessel
underway or shall manipulate any water skis, aquaplane or similar device on the
waters in this municipality if, at the time of the operation, control or
manipulation, any of the following applies:
      (1)    The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them;
      (2)   The person has a concentration of 0.08% or more by weight of
alcohol per unit volume in the person’s whole blood;
      (3)   The person has a concentration of 0.096% or more by weight per unit
volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or plasma;
      (4)   The person has a concentration of 0.11 grams or more by weight of
alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine;
      (5)   The person has a concentration of 0.08 grams or more by weight of
alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
      (6)   Except as provided in division (h) of this section, the person has
a concentration of any of the following controlled substances or metabolites of
a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds any of the following:
         A.   The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s
urine of at least 500 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
         B.   The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s urine
of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s urine or
has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
         C.   The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of
cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
         D.   The person has a concentration of heroin in the person’s urine of
at least 2,000 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s urine or has
a concentration of heroin in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma
of at least 50 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma.
         E.   The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl
morphine) in the person’s urine of at least ten nanograms of heroin metabolite
(6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a
concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma.
         F.   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s urine of
at least 25 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a
concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of
at least ten nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma.
         G.   The person has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s urine
of at least ten nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person’s urine or
has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least two nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
         H.   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a rule pursuant to R.C. §
4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia divinorum and the amount of
salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of salvia divinorum and salvinorin
A in a person’s urine, in a person’s whole blood, or in a person’s blood serum
or plasma at or above which the person is impaired for purposes of operating or
being in physical control of any vessel underway or manipulating any water
skis, aquaplane or similar device on the waters of this state, the rule is in
effect, and the person has a concentration of salvia divinorum or salvinorin A
of at least that amount so specified by rule in the person’s urine, in the
person’s whole blood, or in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
         I.   Either of the following applies:
            1.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse,
or a combination of them, and, as measured by gas chromatography mass
spectrometry, the person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least 15 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least five nanograms of
marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum
or plasma.
            2.   As measured by gas chromatography mass spectrometry, the
person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s urine of at
least 35 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine
or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
         J.   The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person’s
urine of at least 500 nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of methamphetamine per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
         K.   The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person’s
urine of at least 25 nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
   (b)   No person under 21 years of age shall operate or be in physical
control of any vessel underway or shall manipulate any water skis, aquaplane or
similar device on the waters in this municipality if, at the time of the
operation, control or manipulation, any of the following applies:
      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02% but less than
0.08% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood;
      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.03% but less than
0.096% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma.
      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.028 grams, but less
than 0.11 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine;
      (4)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02 grams, but less
than 0.08 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
   (c)   In any proceeding arising out of one incident, a person may be charged
with a violation of division (a)(1) and a violation of division (b)(1), (b)(2),
(b)(3) or (b)(4) of this section, but the person shall not be convicted of more
than one violation of those divisions.
   (d)   (1)   A.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding
for a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section or for an equivalent
offense that is watercraft-related, the result of any test of any blood, oral
fluid, or urine withdrawn and analyzed at any health care provider, as defined
in R.C. § 2317.02, may be admitted with expert testimony to be considered with
any other relevant and competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence
of the defendant.
         B.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a) or (b) of this section or for an equivalent offense
that is watercraft-related, the court may admit evidence on the presence and
concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse, controlled substances, metabolites of
a controlled substance, or a combination of them in the defendant’s or child’s
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, urine, oral fluid, or breath at the time of
the alleged violation as shown by chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn,
or specimen taken within three hours of the time of the alleged violation. The
three-hour time limit specified in this division regarding the admission of
evidence does not extend or affect the two-hour time limit specified in R.C. §
1547.111(C), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, as the
maximum period of time during which a person may consent to a chemical test or
tests as described in that section. The court may admit evidence on the
presence and concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse, or a combination of them
as described in this division when a person submits to a blood, breath, urine,
oral fluid, or other bodily substance test at the request of a law enforcement
officer under R.C. § 1547.111, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or a blood or urine sample is obtained pursuant to a search warrant.
Only a physician, a registered nurse, an emergency medical technician-
intermediate, an emergency medical technician- paramedic, or a qualified
technician, chemist, or phlebotomist shall withdraw blood for the purpose of
determining the alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled
substance, or combination content of the whole blood, blood serum, or blood
plasma. This limitation does not apply to the taking of breath, oral fluid, or
urine specimens. A person authorized to withdraw blood under this division may
refuse to withdraw blood under this division if, in that person’s opinion, the
physical welfare of the defendant or child would be endangered by withdrawing
blood.
         C.   The whole blood, blood serum or plasma, urine, oral fluid, or
breath withdrawn under division (d)(1)B. of this section shall be analyzed in
accordance with methods approved by the Director of Health by an individual
possessing a valid permit issued by the Director pursuant to R.C. § 3701.143.
      (2)   In a criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is
watercraft-related, if there was at the time the bodily substance was taken a
concentration of less than the applicable concentration of alcohol specified
for a violation of division (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), or (a)(5) of this section
or less than the applicable concentration of a listed controlled substance or a
listed metabolite of a controlled substance specified for a violation of
division (a)(6) of this section, that fact may be considered with other
competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant or in
making an adjudication for the child. This division does not limit or affect a
criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division
(b) of this section or for a violation of a prohibition that is substantially
equivalent to that division.
      (3)   A.   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of
the chemical test shall be made available to the person or the person’s
attorney immediately upon completion of the test analysis.
         B.   If the chemical test was administered pursuant to division (d)
(1)B. of this section, the person tested may have a physician, registered
nurse, or qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist of the person’s own
choosing administer a chemical test or tests in addition to any administered at
the direction of a law enforcement officer, and shall be so advised. The
failure or inability to obtain an additional test by a person shall not
preclude the admission of evidence relating to the test or tests taken at the
direction of a law enforcement officer.
      (4)   In a criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is
watercraft-related, if there was at the time the bodily substance was taken a
concentration of less than the applicable concentration of alcohol specified
for a violation of division (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this section or
less than the applicable concentration of a listed controlled substance or a
listed metabolite of a controlled substance specified for a violation of
division (a)(6) of this section, that fact may be considered with other
competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant or in
making an adjudication for the child. This division does not limit or affect a
criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division
(b) of this section or for a violation of a prohibition that is substantially
equivalent to that division.
      (5)   A.   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of
the chemical test shall be made available to the person or the person’s
attorney immediately upon completion of the test analysis.
         B.   If the chemical test was administered pursuant to division (d)(2)
of this section, the person tested may have a physician, registered nurse or
qualified technician, chemist or phlebotomist of the person’s own choosing
administer a chemical test or tests in addition to any administered at the
direction of a law enforcement officer, and shall be so advised. The failure or
inability to obtain an additional test by a person shall not preclude the
admission of evidence relating to the test or tests taken at the direction of a
law enforcement officer.
   (e)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a) or (b) of this section, of a municipal ordinance
relating to operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or to
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device on the waters of this
state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them, or of a municipal ordinance relating to operating or being in physical
control of any vessel underway or to manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or
similar device on the waters of this state with a prohibited concentration of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine, if a law
enforcement officer has administered a field sobriety test to the operator or
person found to be in physical control of the vessel underway involved in the
violation or the person manipulating the water skis, aquaplane, or similar
device involved in the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing
evidence that the officer administered the test in substantial compliance with
the testing standards for reliable, credible, and generally accepted field
sobriety tests for vehicles that were in effect at the time the tests were
administered, including but not limited to any testing standards then in effect
that have been set by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, that
by their nature are not clearly inapplicable regarding the operation or
physical control of vessels underway or the manipulation of water skis,
aquaplanes, or similar devices, all of the following apply:
         A.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
         B.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field sobriety
test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal prosecution
or juvenile court proceeding.
         C.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (e)(1)A. or (e)(1)B. of this section and if the testimony or evidence
is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the testimony
or evidence, and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the trier of
fact considers to be appropriate.
      (2)   Division (e)(1) of this section does not limit or preclude a court,
in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (e)(1) of this section.
   (f)   (1)   Subject to division (f)(3) of this section, in any criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division (a) or (b)
of this section or for an equivalent offense that is substantially equivalent
to either of those divisions, the court shall admit as prima facie evidence a
laboratory report from any laboratory personnel issued a permit by the
Department of Health authorizing an analysis as described in this division that
contains an analysis of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine
or other bodily substance tested and that contains all of the information
specified in this division. The laboratory report shall contain all of the
following:
         A.   The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the
analysis;
         B.   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them that was found;
         C.   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director or a
designee of the director that contains the name of each certified analyst or
test performer involved with the report, the analyst’s or test performer’s
employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a
notation that performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the
analyst’s or test performer’s regular duties;
         D.   An outline of the analyst’s or test performer’s education,
training and experience in performing the type of analysis involved and a
certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate quality control
standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the
Department of Health.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission
of evidence, a report of the type described in division (f)(1) of this section
is not admissible against the defendant or child to whom it pertains in any
proceeding, other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless
the prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant’s or child’s
attorney or, if the defendant or child has no attorney, on the defendant or
child.
      (3)   A report of the type described in division (f)(1) of this section
shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity or amount of any
substance if, within seven days after the defendant or child to whom the report
pertains or the defendant’s or child’s attorney receives a copy of the report,
the defendant or child or the defendant’s or child’s attorney demands the
testimony of the person who signed the report. The judge in the case may extend
the seven-day time limit in the interests of justice.
   (g)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, any physician,
registered nurse, emergency medical technician-intermediate, emergency medical
technician-paramedic, or qualified technician, chemist or phlebotomist who
withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section, R.C. § 1547.111 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and a hospital, first-aid station
or clinic at which blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this section,
R.C. § 1547.111 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is immune
from criminal and civil liability based upon a claim of assault and battery or
any other claim that is not a claim of malpractice, for any act performed in
withdrawing blood from the person. The immunity provided in this division also
extends to an emergency medical service organization that employs an emergency
medical technician-intermediate or an emergency medical technician-paramedic
who withdraws blood under this section. The immunity provided in this division
is not available to a person who withdraws blood if the person engages in
willful or wanton misconduct.
   (h)   Division (a)(6) of this section does not apply to a person who
operates or is in physical control of a vessel underway or manipulates any
water skis, aquaplane or similar device while the person has a concentration of
a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance
in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or
exceeds the amount specified in that division, if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   The person injected, ingested or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
   (i)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   COCAINE and L.S.D. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2925.01.
      (2)   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE and MARIHUANA. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 3719.01.
      (3)   EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL
TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.
      (4)   EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.181.
      (5)   EQUIVALENT OFFENSE THAT IS WATERCRAFT-RELATED. An equivalent
offense that is one of the following:
         (a)   A violation of division (a) of this section;
         (b)   A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from
operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or from
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar device on the waters of this
state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of
any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar
device on the waters of this state with a prohibited concentration of alcohol,
a controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine;
         (c)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
division (a) of this section;
         (d)   A violation of an existing or former law of this state that is
or was substantially equivalent to division (a) of this section.
      (6)   NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION. Has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4511.19.
      (7)   OPERATE. A vessel is being used on the waters in this state when
the vessel is not securely affixed to a dock or to shore or to any permanent
structure to which the vessel has the right to affix or that a vessel is not
anchored in a designated anchorage area or boat camping area that is
established by the United States Coast Guard, this state or a political
subdivision and in which the vessel has the right to anchor.
(R.C. § 1547.11)
   (j)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree and shall be punished as provided in division (j)(1), (j)(2) or (j)(3)
of this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (j)(2) or (j)(3) of this
section, the court shall sentence the offender to a jail term of three
consecutive days and may sentence the offender pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24 to a
longer jail term. In addition, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine
of not less than $150 nor more than $1,000. The court may suspend the execution
of the mandatory jail term of three consecutive days that it is required to
impose by this division (j)(1) if the court, in lieu of the suspended jail
term, places the offender under a community control sanction pursuant to R.C. §
2929.25 and requires the offender to attend, for three consecutive days, a
drivers’ intervention program that is certified pursuant to R.C. § 5119.38. The
court also may suspend the execution of any part of the mandatory jail term of
three consecutive days that it is required to impose by this division (j)(1) if
the court places the offender under a community control sanction pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.25 for part of the three consecutive days; requires the offender to
attend, for that part of the three consecutive days, a drivers’ intervention
program that is certified pursuant to R.C. § 5119.38; and sentences the
offender to a jail term equal to the remainder of the three consecutive days
that the offender does not spend attending the drivers’ intervention program.
The court may require the offender, as a condition of community control, to
attend and satisfactorily complete any treatment or education programs, in
addition to the required attendance at a drivers’ intervention program, that
the operators of the drivers’ intervention program determine that the offender
should attend and to report periodically to the court on the offender’s
progress in the programs. The court also may impose any other conditions of
community control on the offender that it considers necessary.
      (2)   If, within ten years of the offense, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of division (a) of this
section, R.C. § 1547.11(A) or one other equivalent offense, the court shall
sentence the offender to a jail term of ten consecutive days and may sentence
the offender pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24 to a longer jail term. In addition, the
court shall impose upon the offender a fine of not less than $150 nor more than
$1,000. In addition to any other sentence that it imposes upon the offender,
the court may require the offender to attend a drivers’ intervention program
that is certified pursuant to R.C. § 5119.38.
      (3)   If, within ten years of the offense, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to more than one violation or offense identified
in division (j)(2) of this section, the court shall sentence the offender to a
jail term of 30 consecutive days and may sentence the offender to a longer jail
term of not more than one year. In addition, the court shall impose upon the
offender a fine of not less than $150 nor more than $1,000. In addition to any
other sentence that it imposes upon the offender, the court may require the
offender to attend a drivers’ intervention program that is certified pursuant
to R.C. § 5119.38.
      (4)   Upon a showing that serving a jail term would seriously affect the
ability of an offender sentenced pursuant to division (j)(1), (j)(2) or (j)(3)
of this section to continue the offender’s employment, the court may authorize
that the offender be granted work release after the offender has served the
mandatory jail term of three, ten or 30 consecutive days that the court is
required by division (j)(1), (j)(2) or (j)(3) of this section to impose. No
court shall authorize work release during the mandatory jail term of three, ten
or 30 consecutive days that the court is required by division (j)(1), (j)(2) or
(j)(3) of this section to impose. The duration of the work release shall not
exceed the time necessary each day for the offender to commute to and from the
place of employment and the place in which the jail term is served and the time
actually spent under employment.
      (5)   Notwithstanding any section of the Ohio Revised Code that
authorizes the suspension of the imposition or execution of a sentence or the
placement of an offender in any treatment program in lieu of being imprisoned
or serving a jail term, no court shall suspend the mandatory jail term of ten
or 30 consecutive days required to be imposed by division (j)(2) or (j)(3) of
this section or place an offender who is sentenced pursuant to division (j)(2)
or (j)(3) of this section in any treatment program in lieu being imprisoned or
serving a jail term until after the offender has served the mandatory jail term
of ten or 30 consecutive days required to be imposed pursuant to division (j)
(2) or (j)(3) of this section. Notwithstanding any section of the Ohio Revised
Code that authorizes the suspension of the imposition or execution of a
sentence or the placement of an offender in any treatment program in lieu of
being imprisoned or serving a jail term, no court, except as specifically
authorized by division (j)(1) of this section, shall suspend the mandatory jail
term of three consecutive days required to be imposed by division (j)(1) of
this section or place an offender who is sentenced pursuant to division (j)(1)
of this section in any treatment program in lieu of being imprisoned or serving
a jail term until after the offender has served the mandatory jail term of
three consecutive days required to be imposed pursuant to division (j)(1) of
this section.
      (6)   For the purpose of this division (j) of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.181.
         B.   JAIL TERM and MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 2929.01.
(R.C. § 1547.99(G))
§ 448.11 IMPLIED CONSENT.
   (a)   (1)   A.   Any person who operates or is in physical control of a
vessel or manipulates any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device upon any
waters in this municipality shall be deemed to have given consent to a chemical
test or tests to determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance,
metabolite of a controlled substance, or combination content of the person’s
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine if arrested
for operating or being in physical control of a vessel or manipulating any
water skis, aquaplane, or similar device in violation of R.C. § 1547.11 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         B.   The test or tests under division (a)(1)A. of this section shall
be administered at the request of a law enforcement officer having reasonable
grounds to believe the person was operating or in physical control of a vessel
or manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar device in violation of
R.C. § 1547.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. The law
enforcement agency by which the officer is employed shall designate which test
or tests shall be administered.
      (2)   Any person who is dead or unconscious or who otherwise is in a
condition rendering the person incapable of refusal shall be deemed to have
consented as provided in division (a)(1) of this section, and the test or tests
may be administered, subject to R.C. §§ 313.12 to 313.16.
   (b)   (1)   If a law enforcement officer arrests a person for operating or
being in physical control of a vessel or manipulating any water skis, aquaplane
or similar device in violation of R.C. § 1547.11 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and if the person previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to two or more violations of § 1547.11(A) or other equivalent
offenses, the law enforcement officer shall request the person to submit, and
the person shall submit, to a chemical test or tests of the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine for the purpose of
determining the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a
controlled substance, or combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine. A law enforcement officer who
makes a request pursuant to this division that a person submit to a chemical
test or tests is not required to advise the person of the consequences of
refusing to submit to the test or tests and is not required to give the person
the form described in division (c) of this section, but the officer shall
advise the person at the time of the arrest that if the person refuses to take
a chemical test the officer may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary
to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma. The officer shall also advise the person at the
time of the arrest that the person may have an independent chemical test taken
at the person’s own expense. The advice shall be in written form prescribed by
the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft and shall be read to the
person. The form shall contain a statement that the form was shown to the
person under arrest and read to the person by the arresting officer. The
reading of the form shall be witnessed by one or more persons, and the
witnesses shall certify to this fact by signing the form. Divisions (a)(1)B.
and (a)(2) of this section apply to the administration of a chemical test or
tests pursuant to this division.
      (2)   If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test upon a request
made pursuant to division (b)(1) of this section, the law enforcement officer
who made the request may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary to
ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma. A law enforcement officer who acts pursuant to this
division to ensure that a person submits to a chemical test of the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma is immune from criminal and civil
liability based upon a claim for assault and battery or any other claim for the
acts, unless the officer so acted with malicious purpose, in bad faith, or in a
wanton or reckless manner.
   (c)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, any person under
arrest for violating R.C. § 1547.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance shall be advised of the consequences of refusing to submit to a
chemical test or tests designated as provided in division (a) of this section.
The advice shall be in a written form prescribed by the Chief of the Division
of Parks and Watercraft and shall be read to the person. The form shall contain
a statement that the form was shown to the person under arrest and read to the
person by the arresting officer. The reading of the form shall be witnessed by
one or more persons, and the witnesses shall certify to this fact by signing
the form. The person must submit to the chemical test or tests, subsequent to
the request of the arresting officer, within two hours of the time of the
alleged violation, and if the person does not submit to the test or tests
within that two-hour time limit, the failure to submit automatically
constitutes a refusal to submit to the test or tests.
   (d)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, if a law
enforcement officer asks a person under arrest for violating R.C. § 1547.11 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to submit to a chemical test or
tests as provided in division (a) of this section, if the arresting officer
advises the person of the consequences of the person’s refusal as provided in
division (c) of this section, and the person refuses to submit, no chemical
test shall be given. Upon receipt of a sworn statement of the officer that the
arresting law enforcement officer had reasonable grounds to believe the
arrested person violated R.C. § 1547.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance and that the person refused to submit to the chemical test upon the
request of the officer, and upon receipt of the form as provided in division
(d) of this section certifying that the arrested person was advised of the
consequences of the refusal, the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft
shall inform the person by written notice that the person is prohibited from
operating or being in physical control of a vessel, from manipulating any water
skis, aquaplane or similar device, and from registering any watercraft in
accordance with R.C. § 1547.54, for one year following the date of the alleged
violation. The suspension of these operation, physical control, manipulation
and registration privileges shall continue for the entire one-year period,
subject to review as provided in this section.
      (2)   If the person under arrest is the owner of the vessel involved in
the alleged violation, the law enforcement officer who arrested the person
shall seize the watercraft registration certificate and tags from the vessel
involved in the violation and forward them to the Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft. The Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft shall
retain the impounded registration certificate and tags and shall impound all
other registration certificates and tags issued to the person in accordance
with R.C. §§ 1547.54 and 1547.57, for a period of one year following the date
of the alleged violation, subject to review as provided in this section.
      (3)   If the arrested person fails to surrender the registration
certificate because it is not on the person of the arrested person or in the
watercraft, the law enforcement officer who made the arrest shall order the
person to surrender it within 24 hours to the law enforcement officer or the
law enforcement agency that employs the law enforcement officer. If the person
fails to do so, the law enforcement officer shall notify the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft of that fact in the statement the officer
submits to the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft under this
division.
   (e)   Upon suspending a person’s operation, physical control, manipulation
and registration privileges in accordance with division (d) of this section,
the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft shall notify the person in
writing, at the person’s last known address, and inform the person that the
person may petition for a hearing in accordance with division (f) of this
section. If a person whose operation, physical control, manipulation and
registration privileges have been suspended petitions for a hearing or appeals
any adverse decision, the suspension shall begin at the termination of any
hearing or appeal unless the hearing or appeal results in a decision favorable
to the person.
   (f)   (1)   Any person who has been notified by the Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft that the person is prohibited from operating or being in
physical control of a vessel or manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or
similar device and from registering any watercraft in accordance with R.C. §
1547.54, or who has had the registration certificate and tags of the person’s
watercraft impounded pursuant to division (d) of this section, within 20 days
of the notification or impoundment, may file a petition in the municipal court
or the county court, or if the person is a minor in juvenile court, with
jurisdiction over the place at which the arrest occurred, agreeing to pay the
cost of the proceedings and alleging error in the action taken by the Chief of
the Division of Parks and Watercraft under division (d) of this section or
alleging one or more of the matters within the scope of the hearing as provided
in this section, or both. The petitioner shall notify the Chief of the Division
of Parks and Watercraft of the filing of the petition and send the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft a copy of the petition.
      (2)   The scope of the hearing is limited to the issues of whether the
law enforcement officer had reasonable grounds to believe the petitioner was
operating or in physical control of a vessel or manipulating any water skis,
aquaplane or similar device in violation of R.C. § 1547.11 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, whether the petitioner was placed under arrest,
whether the petitioner refused to submit to the chemical test upon request of
the officer, and whether the petitioner was advised of the consequences of the
petitioner’s refusal.
   (g)   (1)   The Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft shall furnish
the court a copy of the affidavit as provided in division (c) of this section
and any other relevant information requested by the court.
      (2)   In hearing the matter and in determining whether the person has
shown error in the decision taken by the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft as provided in division (d) of this section, the court shall decide
the issue upon the relevant, competent and material evidence submitted by the
Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft or the person whose operation,
physical control, manipulation and registration privileges have been suspended.
In the proceedings, the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft shall be
represented by the prosecuting attorney of the county in which the petition is
filed if the petition is filed in a county court or juvenile court, except that
if the arrest occurred within a city or village within the jurisdiction of the
county court in which the petition is filed, the city director of law or
village solicitor of that city or village shall represent the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft. If the petition is filed in the municipal
court, the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft shall be represented
as provided in R.C. § 1901.34.
      (3)   If the court finds from the evidence submitted that the person has
failed to show error in the action taken by the Chief of the Division of Parks
and Watercraft under division (d) of this section or in one or more of the
matters within the scope of the hearing as provided in division (f) of this
section, or both, the court shall assess the cost of the proceeding against the
person and shall uphold the suspension of the operation, physical control, use
and registration privileges provided in division (d) of this section. If the
court finds that the person has shown error in the action taken by the Chief of
the Division of Parks and Watercraft under division (d) of this section or in
one or more of the matters within the scope of the hearing as provided in
division (f) of this section, or both, the cost of the proceedings shall be
paid out of the county treasury of the county in which the proceedings were
held, Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft shall reinstate the
operation, physical control, manipulation and registration privileges of the
person without charge, and the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft
shall return the registration certificate and tags, if impounded, without
charge.
      (4)   The court shall give information in writing of any action taken
under this section to the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft.
   (h)   At the end of any period of suspension or impoundment imposed under
this section, and upon request of the person whose operation, physical control,
use and registration privileges were suspended or whose registration
certificate and tags were impounded, the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft shall reinstate the person’s operation, physical control,
manipulation and registration privileges by written notice and return the
certificate and tags.
   (i)   No person who has received written notice from the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft that the person is prohibited from operating
or being in control of a vessel, from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or
similar device, and from registering a watercraft, or who has had the
registration certificate and tags of the person’s watercraft impounded, in
accordance with division (d) of this section or R.C. § 1547.111(D), shall
operate or be in physical control of a vessel or manipulate any water skis,
aquaplane or similar device for a period of one year following the date of the
person’s alleged violation of R.C. § 1547.11 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 1547.111)
   (j)   Whoever violates division (i) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(B))
§ 448.12 INCAPACITATED OPERATORS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall operate any vessel if the person is so mentally or
physically incapacitated as to be unable to operate the vessel in a safe and
competent manner.
   (b)   No person shall permit any vessel to be operated on the waters in this
municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.12)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section without causing injury to persons or
damage to property is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(D))
   (d)   Whoever violates this section causing injury to persons or damage to
property is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(E))
§ 448.13 WATER SKIING CONFINED TO SKI ZONES.
   (a)   Except on the waters of the Ohio River or Lake Erie and immediately
connected harbors and bays, any person who rides or attempts to ride upon one
or more water skis, surfboard or similar device, or who engages or attempts to
engage in barefoot skiing, and any person who operates a vessel towing a person
riding or attempting to ride on one or more water skis, surfboard or similar
device, or engaging or attempting to engage in barefoot skiing, shall confine
that activity to the water area within a designated ski zone on all bodies of
water on which a ski zone has been established.
   (b)   On all bodies of water where no specific activity zones have been
established, the activities described in division (a) of this section shall be
confined to areas where the activities are not specifically restricted by this
chapter, R.C. Chapter 1547 and rules.
   (c)   Divisions (a) and (b) of this section do not apply to an activity
described in division (a) of this section if the vessel involved in the
activity is traveling at idle speed in a designated “no wake zone” and the
activity is not being conducted in any of the following areas:
      (1)   Within 300 feet of a gas dock, marina, launch ramp or harbor
entrance;
      (2)   Within a designated anchorage area, swim zone, boat swim zone or
boat camping area;
      (3)   Under a bridge or within 300 feet of a bridge underpass;
      (4)   Any area designated as a “no ski zone”.
   (d)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.14)
   (e)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.14 OBSERVER REQUIRED WHEN TOWING SKIER.
   (a)   Any person who operates a vessel towing any person riding or
attempting to ride upon one or more water skis or upon a surfboard or similar
device, or engaging or attempting to engage in barefoot skiing, on the waters
in this municipality shall have present in the vessel a person or persons other
than the operator, ten years of age or older, who shall at all times observe
the progress of the person being towed. The operator of the towing vessel shall
at all times observe the traffic pattern toward which the vessel is
approaching.
   (b)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.15)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.15 WATER SKIING AFTER DARK PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall ride or attempt to ride upon water skis, surfboard or
similar device, or engage or attempt to engage in barefoot skiing, or use or
operate any vessel to tow any person thereon on the waters in this municipality
during that period of the day between sunset and sunrise, except upon special
permit issued by the state department, conservancy district or political
subdivision having jurisdiction and control of the water.
(R.C. § 1547.16)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.16 PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE REQUIRED FOR TOWED PERSON.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, no person shall
engage in any form of towed watersports without wearing an adequate and
effective Coast Guard approved wearable personal flotation device specifically
designed for towed watersports, in good and serviceable condition and of
appropriate size, except upon special permit issued by one of the following
persons or entities that manages the waterway:
      (1)   The political subdivision having primary jurisdiction;
      (2)   The administrator of a federal agency;
      (3)   The director of a state agency;
      (4)   The board of directors of a conservancy district;
      (5)   Any other governing body having jurisdiction.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person engaging or
attempting to engage in barefoot skiing if the person is wearing a wet suit
specifically designed for barefoot skiing that is in good and serviceable
condition and of appropriate size.
   (c)   No operator of a vessel shall allow any person who fails to comply
with division (a) or (b) of this section to engage in any form of towed
watersports.
(R.C. § 1547.18)
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.17 SKI JUMPS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall install or maintain any structure or inclined platform
known as a water ski jump on the waters in this municipality. No person shall
use any such platform or structure for the purpose of water ski jumping, except
upon special permit issued by the state department, conservancy district or
political subdivision having jurisdiction and control over the water.
(R.C. § 1547.19)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.18 PERMIT FOR SPECIAL WATER EVENTS.
   (a)   No person or organization shall conduct any race, regatta or other
special event upon the waters in this municipality without first obtaining
written permission, upon application not less than 30 days prior to the time of
the proposed race, regatta or event, of the federal agency, state department,
conservancy district or political subdivision having jurisdiction and control
over the waters. Any state department, conservancy district or political
subdivision may suspend its respective rules during a race, regatta or special
event. Nothing in this section shall be construed to mean that the operator of
a vessel competing in a specially authorized race, regatta or special event
shall not attempt to attain high speeds on a marked racing course.
   (b)   On any waters in this municipality over which no federal agency, state
department, conservancy district or political subdivision has jurisdiction and
control, no person or organization shall conduct any race, regatta or other
special event without first obtaining written permission, upon application not
less than 30 days prior to the time of the proposed race, regatta or event, of
the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft. The Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft may, after determining that the public safety will be
adequately protected, grant written permission for holding the race, regatta or
special event. This section does not apply to privately owned lakes or ponds
nor to canoes or rowboats.
(R.C. § 1547.20)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.19 SALE OF SINGLE CELLED INFLATABLE VESSELS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall use or offer for use on the waters in this
municipality any inflatable vessel made of canvas, rubber, synthetic rubber or
vinyl plastic unless the inflatable vessel is of multiple air cell or
compartment construction and is capable of remaining afloat if one air cell or
compartment is punctured or collapsed.
(R.C. § 1547.21)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.20 SITTING, STANDING, WALKING ON MOVING VESSELS RESTRICTED.
   (a)   No occupant of any vessel underway on the waters in this municipality
shall sit, stand or walk upon any portion of the vessel not specifically
designed for that movement, except when immediately necessary for the safe and
reasonable navigation or operation of the vessel. No operator of a vessel
underway on the waters in this municipality shall allow any occupant of the
vessel to sit, stand or walk on any portion of the vessel underway not
specifically designed for that use, except when immediately necessary for the
safe and reasonable navigation or operation of the vessel.
   (b)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.22)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.21 ENGINE WARM-UP REQUIRED.
   (a)   The pilot or engineer of any powercraft for hire to carry passengers
shall not permit passengers to come aboard before the engine of the powercraft
has been permitted to run for a minimum of two minutes.
(R.C. § 1547.23)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.22 PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICES FOR CHILDREN UNDER TEN.
   (a)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel under 18
feet in length while there is present in the vessel any person under ten years
of age, not wearing a Coast Guard approved wearable personal flotation device
in good and serviceable condition of appropriate size securely attached to the
person under ten years of age.
(R.C. § 1547.24)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.23 OPERATION WITHOUT PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel, other
than a vessel exempted by rules, on the waters in this municipality:
      (1)   That is 16 feet or greater in length without carrying aboard one
wearable personal flotation device for each person aboard and one throwable
personal flotation device;
      (2)   That is less than 16 feet in length, including paddlecraft of any
length, without carrying aboard one wearable personal flotation device for each
person aboard.
   (b)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any commercial vessel
on the waters in this municipality:
      (1)   That is less than 40 feet in length and is not carrying persons for
hire without carrying aboard at least one wearable personal flotation device
for each person aboard;
      (2)   That is carrying persons for hire or is 40 feet in length or longer
and is not carrying persons for hire without carrying aboard at least one type
one wearable personal flotation device for each person aboard that complies
with all of the following:
         A.   It is designed to support the person wearing the wearable
personal flotation device in the water in an upright or slightly backward
position and provides support to the head so that the face of an unconscious or
exhausted person is held above the water.
         B.   It is capable of turning the person wearing the wearable personal
flotation device, upon entering the water, to a safe flotation position.
         C.   It is capable of being worn inside out.
         D.   It is capable of supporting a minimum of 22 pounds in fresh water
for 48 hours.
         E.   It is a highly visible color.
      (3)   That is 26 feet in length or longer without carrying aboard at
least one throwable personal flotation device in addition to the applicable
requirements of divisions (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section.
   (c)   Each personal flotation device carried aboard a vessel, including a
commercial vessel, pursuant to this section shall be Coast Guard approved and
in good and serviceable condition, of appropriate size for the wearer, and
readily accessible to each person aboard the vessel at all times, and used in
accordance with any requirements on its approval label or in accordance with
requirements in its owner’s manual if the approval label refers to such a
manual.
   (d)   A personal flotation device shall not be used in a manner that is
inconsistent with any limitations or restrictions related to federal approval
under 46 C.F.R. 160 or special instructions for use provided by the
manufacturer. Appropriate use shall be indicated on the label of an approved
personal flotation device.
   (e)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL VESSEL means any vessel used in
the carriage of any person or property for a valuable consideration whether
flowing directly or indirectly from the owner, partner, or agent or any other
person interested in the vessel. The phrase does not include any vessel that is
manufactured or used primarily for noncommercial use or that is leased, rented,
or chartered to another for noncommercial use.
(R.C. § 1547.25)
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
§ 448.24 DISTRESS SIGNAL OR FLAG REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall operate on the waters of Lake Erie or the immediately
connecting bays, harbors and anchorage areas at any time a vessel that is 16 or
more feet in length or any vessel carrying six or fewer passengers for hire
without carrying Coast Guard approved visual distress signals for both day and
night use.
   (b)   No person shall operate upon the waters of Lake Erie or the
immediately connecting bays, harbors and anchorage areas during the period from
sunset to sunrise according to local time any of the following without carrying
Coast Guard approved visual distress signals for night use:
      (1)   A vessel less than 16 feet in length;
      (2)   A vessel competing in an organized marine parade, race, regatta or
similar event;
      (3)   A manually propelled vessel;
      (4)   A sailboat less than 26 feet in length with completely open
construction and without propulsion machinery.
   (c)   No person shall operate a vessel on the waters in this state other
than Lake Erie or the immediately connecting bays, harbors and anchorage areas
unless the vessel carries either a distress flag at least two feet square and
international orange in color or a Coast Guard approved daytime distress
signal.
   (d)   No person shall display any distress signal unless a vessel or a
person is in distress and in need of help.
   (e)   Divisions (a) and (c) of this section do not apply to any of the
following:
      (1)   Vessels competing in an organized marine parade, race, regatta or
similar event;
      (2)   Manually propelled vessels;
      (3)   Sailboats less than 26 feet in length with completely open
construction and without propulsion machinery.
   (f)   The distress signals required by this section shall be in good and
serviceable condition, readily accessible, and of the type and quantities
required by regulations adopted under 46 U.S.C. 4302, as amended.
   (g)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.251)
   (h)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.25 ANCHOR REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   All watercraft, except sailboats less than 16 feet long having a
cockpit depth of less than 12 inches and except canoes, shall carry an anchor
and line of sufficient weight and length to anchor the watercraft securely. The
Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft, by rule, may exempt other types
of watercraft from this section after determining that carrying such an anchor
and line would constitute a hazard.
   (b)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any watercraft on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.26)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.26 SPECIFICATION FOR FIRE EXTINGUISHERS.
   (a)   Except those powercraft less than 26 feet in length designed for use
with an outboard motor, of open construction that is not capable of entrapping
explosive or flammable gases or vapors, and not carrying passengers for hire,
all powercraft shall carry fire extinguishers as prescribed in this section.
The fire extinguishers shall be capable of extinguishing a burning gasoline
fire, shall be in such condition as to be ready for immediate and effective
use, and shall comply with minimum or higher standards for such extinguishers
then prevailing as prescribed by the United States coast guard.
   (b)   Except for vessels subject to exemptions listed in 33 C.F.R. § 175.380
or § 175.390, any vessel not equipped with fixed fire extinguishing systems in
machinery spaces shall carry the following:
      (1)   Class A and Class 1 powercraft shall carry at least one 5-
B portable fire extinguisher.
      (2)   Class 2 powercraft shall carry at least two 5-B portable fire
extinguishers or at least one 20-B portable fire extinguisher.
      (3)   Class 3 powercraft shall carry at least three 5-B portable fire
extinguishers, or at least one 5-B portable and one 20-B portable fire
extinguishers.
      (4)   Class 4 powercraft shall carry the number and type of 20-B portable
fire extinguishers specified by gross tonnage as prescribed by 33 C.F.R. Part
175, Subpart E.
   (c)   All portable and semi-portable fire extinguishers for use on a vessel
shall:
      (1)   Be on board the vessel and be readily accessible;
      (2)   Be of an approved type;
      (3)   Not be expired or appear to have been previously used;
      (4)   Be maintained in good and serviceable working condition. As used in
division (c)(4) of this section, “good and serviceable working condition” means
all of the following:
         A.   If the fire extinguisher has a pressure gauge or indicator, the
reading or indicator is in the operable range or position;
         B.   The fire extinguisher’s lock pin is firmly in place;
         C.   The fire extinguisher’s discharge nozzle is clean and free of
obstruction;
         D.   The fire extinguisher does not show visible signs of significant
corrosion or damage.
   (d)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated on the waters in this
municipality any powercraft that does not comply with this section.
(R.C. § 1547.27)
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.27 BACKFIRE FLAME CONTROL DEVICE REQUIRED.
   (a)   Every gasoline engine installed in a vessel after April 25, 1940,
except an outboard motor, shall be equipped with an acceptable device to
control backfire flame. The device shall comply with all of the following:
      (1)   Be securely attached to the air intake with a flame-tight
connection;
      (2)   Be in proper working order;
      (3)   Be Coast Guard approved or comply with either SAE J1928 or UL 1111;
      (4)   Be marked to indicate approval or compliance under division (a)(3)
of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.28)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.28 VENTILATION REQUIREMENT ON POWERCRAFT.
   (a)   All powercraft using gasoline or other liquid fuel having a flashpoint
of less than 110° F. shall be provided with ventilation as follows:
       (1)   At least two ventilators fitted with cowls or their equivalent for
the purpose of properly and efficiently ventilating the bilges of every engine
and fuel tank compartment in order to remove any inflammable or explosive
gases;
      (2)   Any type of ventilating system approved for use by the United
States Coast Guard;
      (3)   The ventilation of the boat is not required where the greater
portion of the bilges of the engine and fuel tank compartment is open to the
natural atmosphere.
(R.C. § 1547.29)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.29 ABANDONMENT OF JUNK VESSELS OR OUTBOARD MOTORS.
   (a)   Law enforcement official may order storage of vessel or outboard motor
left on private property; towing by private dock owner.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Any organization or unit comprised of law
enforcement officers, as defined in R.C. § 2901.01.
         B.   VESSEL OR OUTBOARD MOTOR. Excludes an abandoned junk vessel or
outboard motor, as defined in division (d) of this section, or any vessel or
outboard motor under R.C. § 1547.305.
      (2)   A.   The County Sheriff, Chief of Police or other chief of a law
enforcement agency, within the Sheriff’s or Chief’s respective territorial
jurisdiction, upon complaint of any person adversely affected, may order into
storage any vessel or outboard motor that has been left on private property,
other than a private dock or mooring facility or structure, for at least 72
hours without the permission of the person having the right to the possession
of the property. The Sheriff or Chief, upon complaint of the owner of a marine
repair facility or place of storage, may order into storage any vessel or
outboard motor that has been left at the facility or place of storage for a
longer period than that agreed upon. The place of storage shall be designated
by the Sheriff or Chief. When ordering a vessel or motor into storage under
division (a)(2)A. of this section, a Sheriff or Chief, whenever possible, shall
arrange for the removal of the vessel or motor by a private tow truck operator
or towing company.
         B.   1.   Except as provided in division (a)(2)B.4. of this section,
no person, without the consent of the owner or other person authorized to give
consent, shall moor, anchor or tie a vessel or outboard motor at a private dock
or mooring facility or structure owned by another person if the owner has
posted, in a conspicuous manner, a prohibition against the mooring, anchoring
or tying of vessels or outboard motors at the dock, facility or structure by
any person not having the consent of the owner or other person authorized to
give consent.
            2.   If the owner of a private dock or mooring facility or
structure has posted at the dock, facility or structure, in a conspicuous
manner, conditions and regulations under which the mooring, anchoring or tying
of vessels or outboard motors is permitted at the dock, facility or structure,
no person, except as provided in division (a)(2)B.4. of this section, shall
moor, anchor or tie a vessel or outboard motor at the dock, facility or
structure in violation of the posted conditions and regulations.
            3.   The owner of a private dock or mooring facility or structure
may order towed into storage any vessel or outboard motor found moored,
anchored or tied in violation of division (a)(2)B.1. or (a)(2)B.2. of this
section, provided that the owner of the dock, facility or structure posts on it
a sign that states that the dock, facility or structure is private, is visible
from all entrances to the dock, facility or structure, and contains all of the
following information:
               a.   The information specified in division (a)(2)B.1. or (a)
(2)B.2. of this section, as applicable;
               b.   A notice that violators will be towed and that violators
are responsible for paying the cost of the towing;
               c.   The telephone number of the person from whom a towed vessel
or outboard motor may be recovered, and the address of the place to which the
vessel or outboard motor will be taken and the place from which it may be
recovered.
            4.   Divisions (a)(2)B.1. or (a)(2)B.2. of this section do not
prohibit a person from mooring, anchoring or tying a vessel or outboard motor
at a private dock or mooring facility or structure if either of the following
applies:
               a.   The vessel or outboard motor is disabled due to a
mechanical or structural malfunction, provided that the person immediately
removes the vessel or outboard motor from the dock, facility or structure when
the malfunction is corrected or when a reasonable attempt has been made to
correct it;
               b.   Weather conditions are creating an imminent threat to safe
operation of the vessel or outboard motor, provided that the person immediately
removes the vessel or outboard motor from the dock, facility or structure when
the weather conditions permit safe operation of the vessel or outboard motor.
            5.   A person whose vessel or outboard motor is towed into storage
under division (a)(2)B.3. of this section either shall pay the costs of the
towing of the vessel or outboard motor or shall reimburse the owner of the dock
or mooring facility or structure for the costs that the owner incurs in towing
the vessel or outboard motor.
         C.   Subject to division (a)(3) of this section, the owner of a vessel
or motor that has been removed under division (a)(2) of this section may
recover the vessel or motor only in accordance with division (a)(6) of this
section.
      (3)   If the owner or operator of a vessel or outboard motor that has
been ordered into storage under division (a)(2) of this section arrives after
the vessel or motor has been prepared for removal, but prior to its actual
removal from the property, the owner or operator shall be given the opportunity
to pay a fee of not more than one-half of the charge for the removal of vessels
or motors under division (a)(2) of this section that normally is assessed by
the person who has prepared the vessel or motor for removal, in order to obtain
release of the vessel or motor. Upon payment of that fee, the vessel or motor
shall be released to the owner or operator, and upon its release, the owner or
operator immediately shall move it so that it is not on the private property
without the permission of the person having the right to possession of the
property, or is not at the facility or place of storage without the permission
of the owner, whichever is applicable.
      (4)   The County Sheriff, Chief of Police and each other chief of a law
enforcement agency shall maintain a record of vessels or outboard motors that
are ordered into storage under division (a)(2)A. of this section. The record
shall include an entry for each such vessel or motor that identifies the
vessel’s hull identification number or serial number, if any, the vessel’s or
motor’s make, model and color, the location from which it was removed, the date
and time of its removal, the telephone number of the person from whom it may be
recovered, and the address of the place to which it has been taken and from
which it may be recovered. Any information in the record that pertains to a
particular vessel or motor shall be provided to any person who, pursuant to a
statement the person makes either in person or by telephone, is identified as
the owner or operator of the vessel or motor and requests information
pertaining to its location.
      (5)   Any person who registers a complaint that is the basis of a
Sheriff’s or Chief’s order for the removal and storage of a vessel or outboard
motor under division (a)(2)A. of this section shall provide the identity of the
law enforcement agency with which the complaint was registered to any person
who, pursuant to a statement the person makes, is identified as the owner or
operator of the vessel or motor and requests information pertaining to its
location.
      (6)   A.   The owner of a vessel or outboard motor that is ordered into
storage under division (a)(2) of this section may reclaim it upon payment of
any expenses or charges incurred in its removal, in an amount not to exceed
$200, and storage, in an amount not to exceed $5 per 24-hour period, and upon
presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of
title to the vessel or motor, certificate of United States Coast Guard
documentation, or certificate of registration if the vessel or motor is not
subject to titling under R.C. § 1548.01.
         B.   If a vessel or outboard motor that is ordered into storage under
division (a)(2)A. of this section remains unclaimed by the owner for 30 days,
the procedures established by divisions (b) and (c) of this section shall
apply.
         C.   If a vessel or outboard motor ordered into storage under division
(a)(2)B. of this section remains unclaimed for 72 hours after being stored, the
tow truck operator or towing company that removed the vessel or outboard motor
shall provide notice of the removal and storage to the County Sheriff, Chief of
Police or other chief of a law enforcement agency within whose territorial
jurisdiction the vessel or outboard motor had been moored, anchored or tied in
violation of division (a)(2)B. of this section. The notice shall be in writing
and include the vessel’s hull identification number or serial number, if any,
the vessel’s or outboard motor’s make, model and color, the location from which
it was removed, the date and time of its removal, the telephone number of the
person from whom it may be recovered, and the address of the place to which it
has been taken and from which it may be recovered.
            1.   Upon receipt of the notice, the Sheriff or Chief immediately
shall cause a search to be made of the records of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft to ascertain the owner and any lienholder of the vessel or outboard
motor, and, if known, shall send notice to the owner and lienholder, if any, at
the owner’s and lienholder’s last known address by certified mail, return
receipt requested, that the vessel or outboard motor will be declared a
nuisance and disposed of if not claimed not later than 30 days after the date
of the mailing of the notice.
            2.   If the owner or lienholder makes no claim to the vessel or
outboard motor within 30 days of the date of the mailing of the notice, the
Sheriff or Chief shall file with the Clerk of Courts of the county in which the
place of storage is located an affidavit showing compliance with the
requirements of division (a)(6)C. of this section, and the vessel or outboard
motor shall be disposed of in accordance with division (c) of this section.
      (7)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any vessel or
outboard motor from private property other than in accordance with division (a)
(2) of this section or division (b) of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.30)
   (b)   Storage of vessel or motor left in sunken, beached, drifting or docked
condition; notice; affidavit; salvage certificate.
      (1)   The County Sheriff, Chief of Police or other chief of a law
enforcement agency, within his or her respective territorial jurisdiction, or a
State Highway Patrol trooper, upon notification to the Sheriff or Chief of that
action and of the location of the place of storage, may order into storage any
vessel or outboard motor that has been left in a sunken, beached or drifting
condition for any period of time, or in a docked condition, on a public street
or other property open to the public, or upon or within the right-of-way of any
waterway, road or highway, for 48 hours or longer without notification to the
Sheriff or Chief of the reasons for leaving the vessel or motor in any such
place or condition. The Sheriff or Chief shall designate the place of storage
of any vessel or motor ordered removed by him or her.
      (2)   The Sheriff or Chief shall immediately cause a search to be made of
the records of the Division of Parks and Watercraft to ascertain the owner and
any lienholder of a vessel or outboard motor ordered into storage by the
Sheriff or Chief, and, if known, shall send notice to the owner and lienholder,
if any, at his or her last known address by certified mail, return receipt
requested, that the vessel or motor will be declared a nuisance and disposed of
if not claimed within ten days of the date of mailing of the notice. The owner
or lienholder of the vessel or motor may reclaim it upon payment of any
expenses or charges incurred in its removal and storage, and presentation of
proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of title to the
vessel or motor, certificate of United States Coast Guard documentation, or
certificate of registration if the vessel or motor is not subject to titling
under R.C. § 1548.01.
      (3)   If the owner or lienholder makes no claim to the vessel or outboard
motor within ten days of the date of mailing of the notice, and if the vessel
or motor is to be disposed of at public auction as provided in division (c) of
this section, the Sheriff or Chief shall file with the Clerk of Courts of the
county in which the place of storage is located an affidavit showing compliance
with the requirements of this division (b). Upon presentation of the affidavit,
the Clerk of Courts shall without charge issue a salvage certificate of title,
free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, to the Sheriff or Chief and shall
send a copy of the affidavit to the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft. If the vessel or motor is to be disposed of to a marine salvage
dealer or other facility as provided in division (c) of this section, the
Sheriff or Chief shall execute in triplicate an affidavit, as prescribed by the
Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft, describing the vessel or motor
and the manner in which it was disposed of, and that all requirements of this
division (b) have been complied with. The Sheriff or Chief shall retain the
original of the affidavit for his or her records and shall furnish two copies
to the marine salvage dealer or other facility. Upon presentation of a copy of
the affidavit by the marine salvage dealer or other facility, the Clerk of
Courts shall issue to such owner a salvage certificate of title, free and clear
of all liens and encumbrances.
      (4)   Whenever the marine salvage dealer or other facility receives an
affidavit for the disposal of a vessel or outboard motor as provided in this
division (b), such owner shall not be required to obtain an Ohio certificate of
title to the vessel or motor in his or her own name if the vessel or motor is
dismantled or destroyed and both copies of the affidavit are delivered to the
Clerk of Courts. Upon receipt of such an affidavit, the Clerk of Courts shall
send one copy of it to the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft.
(R.C. § 1547.301)
   (c)   Disposal of unclaimed vessel or motor.
      (1)   Unclaimed vessels or outboard motors ordered into storage under
division (a)(2) of this section or division (b) of this section shall be
disposed of at the order of the County Sheriff, the Chief of Police or another
chief of a law enforcement agency, in any of the following ways:
         A.   To a marine salvage dealer;
         B.   To any other facility owned, operated or under contract with the
state or the county, municipality, township or other political subdivision;
         C.   To a charitable organization, religious organization or similar
organization not used and operated for profit;
         D.   By sale at public auction by the Sheriff, the Chief or an
auctioneer licensed under R.C. Chapter 4707, after giving notice of the auction
by advertisement, published once a week for two consecutive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county or as provided in R.C. § 7.16.
      (2)   Any moneys accruing from the disposition of an unclaimed vessel or
motor that are in excess of the expenses resulting from the removal and storage
of the vessel or motor shall be credited to the General Revenue Fund or to the
General Fund of the county, municipality, township or other political
subdivision, as appropriate.
      (3)   As used in this division (c), CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 1716.01.
(R.C. § 1547.302)
   (d)   Disposal of abandoned vessel or motor.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division and division (e) of this section,
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
         A.   ABANDONED JUNK VESSEL OR OUTBOARD MOTOR. Any vessel or outboard
motor meeting all of the following requirements:
            1.   It has been left on private property for at least 72 hours
without the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the
property; left in a sunken, beached or drifting condition for any period of
time; or left in a docked condition, on a public street or other property open
to the public, or upon or within the right-of-way of any waterway, road or
highway, for 48 hours or longer without notification to the County Sheriff, the
Chief of Police, or other chief of a law enforcement agency having territorial
jurisdiction with respect to the location of the vessel or motor, of the
reasons for leaving the vessel or motor in any such place or condition;
            2.   It is three years old or older;
            3.   It is extensively damaged, such damage including but not
limited to any of the following: missing deck, hull, transom, gunwales, motor
or outdrive;
            4.   It is apparently inoperable;
            5.   It has a fair market value of $200 or less.
         B.   LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Any organization or unit comprised of law
enforcement officers, as defined in R.C. § 2901.01.
      (2)   The County Sheriff, Chief of Police or other chief of a law
enforcement agency, within the Sheriff’s or Chief’s respective territorial
jurisdiction, or a State Highway Patrol trooper, upon notification to the
Sheriff or Chief of such action, shall order any abandoned junk vessel or
outboard motor to be photographed by a law enforcement officer. The officer
shall record the make of vessel or motor, the hull identification number or
serial number when available, and shall also detail the damage or missing
equipment to substantiate the value of $200 or less. The Sheriff or Chief shall
thereupon immediately dispose of the abandoned junk vessel or outboard motor to
a marine salvage dealer or other facility owned, operated or under contract to
the state, the county, township or municipality for the destruction of such
vessels or motors. The records and photographs relating to the abandoned junk
vessel or outboard motor shall be retained by the law enforcement agency
ordering the disposition of the vessel or motor for a period of at least two
years. The law enforcement agency shall execute in quadruplicate an affidavit,
as prescribed by the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft, describing
the vessel or motor and the manner in which it was disposed of, and that all
requirements of this section have been complied with, and shall sign and file
the same with the Clerk of Courts of the county in which the vessel or motor
was abandoned. The Clerk of Courts shall retain the original of the affidavit
for the Clerk’s files, shall furnish one copy thereof to the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft, one copy to the marine salvage dealer or
other facility handling the disposal of the vessel or motor, and one copy to
the law enforcement agency ordering the disposal, who shall file the copy with
the records and photographs relating to the disposal. Any moneys arising from
the disposal of an abandoned junk vessel or outboard motor shall be credited to
the General Revenue Fund, or to the General Fund of the county, township,
municipality or other political subdivision, as appropriate.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (b) of this section, any vessel or
outboard motor meeting the requirements of divisions (d)(1)A.3. to (d)(1)A.5.
of this section which has remained unclaimed by the owner or lienholder for a
period of ten days or longer following notification as provided in division (b)
of this section may be disposed of as provided in this division (d).
(R.C. § 1547.303)
   (e)   Abandonment of vessel or motor without notice to law enforcement
official prohibited.
      (1)   No person shall purposely leave an abandoned junk vessel or
outboard motor on private property for more than 72 hours without the
permission of the person having the right to the possession of the property; in
a sunken, beached or drifting condition for any period of time; or in a docked
condition, on a public street or other property open to the public, or upon or
within the right-of- way of any waterway, road or highway, for 48 hours or
longer without notification to the County Sheriff, Chief of Police or other
chief of a law enforcement agency having territorial jurisdiction with respect
to the location of the vessel or motor, of the reasons for leaving the vessel
or motor in any such place or condition.
      (2)   For purposes of this division (e), the fact that an abandoned junk
vessel or outboard motor has been so left without permission or notification is
prima facie evidence of abandonment.
      (3)   Nothing in this section or R.C. §§ 1547.30, 1547.301 and 1547.303
invalidates the provisions of any ordinance of the municipality regulating or
prohibiting the abandonment of vessels or outboard motors on waterways,
beaches, docks, streets, highways, public property or private property within
the boundaries of the municipality.
(R.C. § 1547.304)
   (f)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates any provision of this section for which no penalty
is otherwise provided is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(7) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree and also shall be assessed any costs incurred
by the state or a county, township, municipal corporation, or other political
subdivision in disposing of an abandoned junk vessel or outboard motor, less
any money accruing to the state, county, township, municipal corporation or
other political subdivision from that disposal.
(R.C. § 1547.99(H))
Statutory reference:
   Alternate procedure to obtain certificate of title for unclaimed vessel or
outboard motor, see R.C. § 1547.305
§ 448.30 EXHAUST MUFFLER REQUIRED; NOISE LEVELS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Every powercraft operated on the waters in this municipality shall be
equipped at all times with a muffler or a muffler system that is in good
working order, in constant operation, and effectively installed to prevent
excessive or unusual noise.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall operate or give permission for the operation of
a powercraft on the waters in this municipality in such a manner as to exceed a
noise level of 90 decibels on the “A” scale when subjected to a stationary
sound level test as prescribed by SAE J2005.
      (2)   No person shall operate or give permission for the operation of a
powercraft on the waters in this municipality in such a manner as to exceed a
noise level of 75 decibels on the “A” scale measured as specified by SAE J1970.
Measurement of a noise level of not more than 75 decibels on the “A” scale of a
powercraft in operation does not preclude the conducting of a stationary sound
level test as prescribed by SAE J2005.
   (c)   No person shall operate or give permission for the operation of a
powercraft on the waters in this municipality that is equipped with an altered
muffler or muffler cutout, or operate or give permission for the operation of a
powercraft on the waters in this municipality in any manner that bypasses or
otherwise reduces or eliminates the effectiveness of any muffler or muffler
system installed in accordance with this section, unless the applicable
mechanism has been permanently disconnected or made inoperable.
   (d)   No person shall remove, alter or otherwise modify in any way a muffler
or muffler system in a manner that will prevent it from being operated in
accordance with this section.
   (e)   No person shall manufacture, sell or offer for sale a powercraft that
is not equipped with a muffler or muffler system that prevents noise levels in
excess of those established in division (b)(1) of this section.
   (f)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A powercraft that is designed, manufactured and sold for the sole
purpose of competing in racing events. The exception established under this
division (f)(1) shall be documented in each sale agreement and shall be
acknowledged formally by the signatures of the buyer and the seller. The buyer
and the seller shall maintain copies of the sale agreement. A copy of the sale
agreement shall be kept aboard the powercraft when it is operated. A powercraft
to which the exception established under this division (f)(1) applies shall be
operated on the waters in this municipality only in accordance with division
(f)(2) of this section.
      (2)   A powercraft that is actually participating in a sanctioned racing
event or in tune- up periods for a sanctioned racing event on the waters in
this municipality and that is being operated in accordance with this division
(f)(2). For the purposes of this division (f)(2), a “sanctioned racing event”
is a racing event that is conducted in accordance with §
448.18 or R.C. § 1547.20 or that is approved by the United States Coast Guard.
The operator of a powercraft that is operated on the waters in this
municipality for the purpose of a sanctioned racing event shall comply with §
448.18 and R.C. § 1547.20 and requirements established under it or with
requirements established by the Coast Guard, as appropriate. Failure to comply
subjects the operator to this section.
      (3)   A powercraft that is being operated on the waters in this
municipality by or for a boat or engine manufacturer for the purpose of
testing, development or both and that complies with this division (f)(3). The
operator of such a powercraft shall have aboard at all times and shall produce
on demand of a law enforcement officer a current, valid letter issued by the
Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft in accordance with rules adopted
under R.C. § 1547.31(I)(1). Failure to produce the letter subjects the operator
to this section.
   (g)   A law enforcement officer who is trained in accordance with rules
adopted under R.C. § 1547.31(I)(2) and who has reason to believe that a
powercraft is not in compliance with the noise levels established in this
section may direct the operator of the powercraft to submit it to an on-site
test to measure the level of the noise emitted by the powercraft. The operator
shall comply with that direction. The officer may remain aboard the powercraft
during the test at the officer’s discretion. If the level of the noise emitted
by the powercraft exceeds the noise levels established in this section, the
officer may direct the operator to take immediate and reasonable measures to
correct the violation, including returning the powercraft to a mooring and
keeping it at the mooring until the violation is corrected or ceases.
   (h)   A law enforcement officer who conducts powercraft noise level tests
pursuant to this section shall be trained to do so in accordance with rules
adopted under R.C. § 1547.31(I)(2).
(R.C. § 1547.31(A) - (H))
   (i)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense. On each subsequent offense, the person is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(J))
§ 448.31 SAFETY EQUIPMENT ON RENTAL VESSELS.
   (a)   No person who lets vessels for hire, or the agent or employee thereof,
shall rent, lease, charter or otherwise permit the use of a vessel, unless the
person provides the vessel with the equipment required under R.C. §§ 1547.25,
1547.251, 1547.26, 1547.27, 1547.28, 1547.29 and 1547.31 and rules, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, regarding the equipment of
vessels, and complies with the requirements of R.C. §§ 1547.24, 1547.40,
1547.53, 1547.57, and either 1547.54 or 1547.542, and rules, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, to implement and enforce those
sections.
(R.C. § 1547.38)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
§ 448.32 CAPACITY PLATE.
   (a)   Required; display.
      (1)   No person, after January 1, 1977, shall manufacture, sell or offer
for sale any watercraft propelled by machinery as its principal source of
power, or watercraft designed to be manually propelled, less than 20 feet in
length, and designed to carry two or more persons, manufactured after that
date, unless a capacity plate containing the correct information, as prescribed
by regulations adopted by the United States Coast Guard, is firmly attached to
the watercraft. The capacity plate shall be attached in such a location that it
is clearly legible from the position designed or intended to be occupied by the
operator when the watercraft is underway.
      (2)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated on the waters in
this municipality watercraft for which a capacity plate is required under this
section unless the capacity plate is attached.
      (3)   No person shall alter, remove or deface any information contained
on the capacity plate unless the manufacturer has altered the watercraft in
such a way that would require a change in the information contained on the
capacity plate.
      (4)   As used in this division (a), MANUFACTURE means to construct or
assemble a watercraft, or to alter a watercraft in such a manner as to affect
or change its weight capacity or occupant capacity.
(R.C. § 1547.39)
   (b)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated on the waters in
this municipality a watercraft to which a capacity plate is attached if the
total load exceeds the weight capacity indicated on the capacity plate, if the
number of persons aboard exceeds the occupant capacity indicated on the
capacity plate, or if the horsepower of any attached outboard motor exceeds the
maximum horsepower indicated on the capacity plate.
      (2)   When no capacity plate exists, no person shall operate or permit to
be operated on the waters in this municipality a watercraft if a reasonably
prudent person would believe that either of the following circumstances
applies:
         A.   The total load aboard the watercraft has associated with it a
risk of physical harm to persons or property;
         B.   The total horsepower of any inboard engine or attached outboard
motor has associated with it a risk of physical harm to persons or property.
(R.C. § 1547.40)
   (c)   Penalty. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
§ 448.33 DWELLINGS: SANITARY SYSTEMS.
   (a)   Watercraft dwelling unlawful if a nuisance; exception. No person shall
use any vessel for the purpose of establishing or maintaining a dwelling which
creates a nuisance of either permanent or temporary nature on any of the waters
in this state except Lake Erie, the Muskingum River, the Ohio River, and the
immediately connected harbors and anchorage facilities or in such other areas
as may be designated for the purpose.
(R.C. § 1547.32)
    (b)   Discharging sanitary systems prohibited; exception. Except on the
waters of Lake Erie, the Muskingum River or the Ohio River, no person shall
launch, moor, dock, use, operate or permit to be operated on any of the waters
in this state any vessel that contains a sink, toilet or sanitary system that
is capable of discharging urine, fecal matter, contents of a chemical commode,
kitchen wastes, laundry wastes, slop sink drainage or other household wastes
into the waters in this state. Such a sink, toilet or sanitary system shall be
removed, sealed or made to drain into a tank or reservoir that can be carried
or pumped ashore for disposal in a sewage treatment works approved by the
Director of Environmental Protection.
(R.C. § 1547.33)
   (c)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
§ 448.34 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF NEGLIGENCE.
   Violations of §§
448.02 to
448.33 and
448.39(a) and/or R.C. §§ 1547.02 to 1547.36 which result in injury to persons
or damage to property shall constitute prima facie evidence of negligence in a
civil action.
(R.C. § 1547.34)
§ 448.35 REQUIREMENTS FOR OPERATING PERSONAL WATERCRAFT.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall operate or permit the operation of a personal
watercraft unless each person on the watercraft is wearing a Coast Guard
approved wearable personal flotation device used in compliance with
manufacturer labeling.
      (2)   A person operating a personal watercraft that is equipped by the
manufacturer with a lanyard type engine cutoff switch shall attach the lanyard
to the person, the person’s clothing, or the personal flotation device as
appropriate for the specific watercraft.
      (3)   No person shall operate a personal watercraft at any time between
sunset and sunrise.
      (4)   No person who owns a personal watercraft or who has charge over or
control of a personal watercraft shall authorize or knowingly permit the
personal watercraft to be operated in violation of this chapter or R.C. Chapter
1547.
   (b)   This section does not apply to a person who is participating in a
regatta, race, marine parade, tournament or exhibition that is operated in
accordance with § 448.18 or R.C. § 1547.20 or that is United States Coast Guard
approved.
(R.C. § 1547.41)
   (c)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.36 NUMBERING.
   (a)   Every watercraft operated on the waters in this municipality shall be
numbered by this state in accordance with federal law or a federally approved
numbering system of another state. A watercraft numbered by this state shall
display the number on the watercraft as provided in R.C. § 1547.57. Watercraft
exempt from numbering by the state are:
      (1)   Those currently documented by the United States Coast Guard or its
successor;
      (2)   Those whose principal use is not on the waters in this state and
that have not been used within this state for more than 60 days and have a
valid number assigned under a federally approved numbering system by another
state if the number is displayed in accordance with the requirements of that
system and the certificate of number is available for inspection whenever the
watercraft is on waters in this state;
      (3)   Those from a country other than the United States, temporarily
using the waters in this state;
      (4)   Those whose owner is the United States, a state or a political
subdivision of a state, that fit either of the following descriptions, and that
are clearly identifiable as such:
         A.   A powercraft that principally is used for governmental purposes
other than recreational purposes;
         B.   A watercraft other than a powercraft.
      (5)   A ship’s lifeboat. As used in this division, LIFEBOAT means a
watercraft that is held aboard another vessel and used exclusively for
emergency purposes.
      (6)   Those that have been exempted from numbering by the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft after the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft has found that the numbering of the watercraft will not materially
aid in their identification and, if an agency of the United States has a
numbering system applicable to the watercraft, after the Chief of the Division
of Parks and Watercraft has further found that they also would be exempt from
numbering by the United States government if they were subject to the federal
law;
      (7)   Those temporarily using the waters in this state under a waiver
issued by the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft to an organization
sponsoring a race, regatta or special event. The Chief of the Division of Parks
and Watercraft may issue a waiver upon application by the sponsoring
organization at least 15 days before the date of the proposed race, regatta or
special event. The waiver shall be effective for ten days including the day or
days of the proposed race, regatta or special event. Such a waiver does not
obviate the need for compliance with § 448.18 or R.C. § 1547.20;
      (8)   Canoes, rowboats, and inflatable watercraft that are registered
under R.C. § 1547.54 and that an owner, in accordance with this division,
chooses not to have numbered under this section. An owner of a canoe, rowboat
or inflatable watercraft may choose to do either of the following:
         A.   Have it numbered under this section, pay a lesser registration
fee under R.C. § 1547.54(A)(2)(a), and obtain square tags under R.C. § 1547.57
(A);
         B.   Not have it numbered under this section, pay a higher
registration fee under R.C. § 1547.54(A)(2)(b), and obtain a rectangular tag
under R.C. § 1547.57(C).
(R.C. § 1547.53)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.37 REGISTRATION.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) or (b) of this section, no
person shall operate or give permission for the operation of any watercraft on
the waters in this municipality unless the watercraft is registered in the name
of the current owner in accordance with R.C. § 1547.54, and the registration is
valid and in effect.
      (2)   A.   On and after January 1, 1999, if a watercraft that is required
to be issued a certificate of title under R.C. Chapter 1548 is transferred to a
new owner, it need not be registered under R.C. § 1547.54 for 60 days following
the date of the transfer, provided that the new owner purchases a temporary
watercraft registration under division (a) of this section or holds a bill of
sale from a watercraft dealer.
         B.   For the purposes of division (a)(2) of this section, a temporary
watercraft registration or a bill of sale from a watercraft dealer shall
contain at least all of the following information:
            1.   The hull identification number or serial number of the
watercraft;
            2.   The make of the watercraft;
            3.   The length of the watercraft;
            4.   The type of propulsion, if any;
            5.   The state in which the watercraft principally is operated;
            6.   The name of the owner;
            7.   The address of the owner, including the zip code;
            8.   The signature of the owner;
            9.   The date of purchase;
            10.   A notice to the owner that the temporary watercraft
registration expires 60 days after the date of purchase of the watercraft or
that the watercraft cannot be operated on the waters in this state solely under
the bill of sale beginning 60 days after the date of purchase of the
watercraft, as applicable.
      (3)   A person may purchase a temporary watercraft registration from the
Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft or from an authorized agent
designated under R.C. § 1547.54. The Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft shall furnish forms for temporary watercraft registrations to
authorized agents. In addition to completing the registration form with the
information specified in division (a)(2) of this section, the person shall pay
one of the applicable fees required under R.C. § 1547.54(A)(2)(a) to (g) as
provided in that section. Moneys received for the payment of temporary
watercraft registrations shall be deposited to the credit of the Waterways
Safety Fund created in R.C. § 1547.75.
      (4)   In addition to the applicable fee required under division (a)(3) of
this section, the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft or an
authorized agent shall charge an additional writing fee of $3 for a temporary
watercraft registration that the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft
or the authorized agent issues. When the temporary watercraft registration is
issued by an authorized agent, the agent may retain the additional writing fee.
When the temporary watercraft registration is issued by the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft, the additional writing fee shall be deposited
to the credit of the Waterways Safety Fund.
      (5)   A person who purchases a temporary watercraft registration for a
watercraft and who subsequently applies for a registration certificate under
R.C. § 1547.54 need not pay the fee required under R.C. § 1547.54(A)(2) for the
initial registration certificate issued for that watercraft, provided that at
the time of application for the registration certificate, the person furnishes
proof of payment for the temporary watercraft registration.
      (6)   A person who purchases a temporary watercraft registration, who
subsequently applies for a registration certificate under R.C. § 1547.54, and
who is exempt from payment for the registration certificate under R.C. §
1547.54(P), may apply to the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft for
a refund of the amount paid for the temporary watercraft registration at the
time that the person applies for a registration certificate. The Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft shall refund that amount upon issuance to the
person of a registration certificate.
      (7)   All records of the Division of Parks and Watercraft made or
maintained for the purposes of divisions (a)(2) to (a)(8) of this section are
public records. The records shall be available for inspection at reasonable
hours and in a manner that is compatible with normal operations of the
division.
      (8)   Pursuant to R.C. § 1547.52(A)(1), the Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft may adopt rules establishing all of the following:
         A.   Record-keeping requirements governing the issuance of temporary
watercraft registrations and the use of bills of sale from watercraft dealers
for the purposes of division (a)(2) of this section;
         B.   Procedures and requirements for the refund of fees under division
(a)(6) of this section;
         C.   Any other procedures and requirements necessary for the
administration and enforcement of divisions (a)(2) to (a)(8) of this section.
   (b)   All of the following watercraft are exempt from registration:
      (1)   Those that are exempt from numbering by the state under R.C. §
1547.53(B) to (G);
      (2)   Those that have been issued a commercial documentation by the
United States Coast Guard or its successor and are used exclusively for
commercial purposes;
      (3)   Those that have been documented by the United States Coast Guard or
its successor as temporarily transiting, whose principal use is not on the
waters in this state, and that have not been used within this state for more
than 60 days.
   (c)   No person shall operate a watercraft documented by the United States
Coast Guard or its successor unless the certificate of documentation is valid,
is on the watercraft for which it has been issued, and is available for
inspection whenever the watercraft is in operation. In accordance with 46
C.F.R. 67, as amended, the watercraft shall display the official number, the
vessel name and the home port listed on the certificate of documentation.
   (d)   (1)   For the purposes of this section and R.C. § 1547.53, a
watercraft is principally using the waters in this state if any of the
following applies:
         A.   The owner resides in this state and declares that the watercraft
principally is using the waters in this state;
         B.   The owner resides in another state but declares that the
watercraft principally is using the waters in this state;
         C.   The watercraft is registered in another state or documented by
the United States Coast Guard and is used within this state for more than 60
days regardless of whether it has been assigned a seasonal or permanent mooring
at any public or private docking facility in this state.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (d)(1)C. of this section, a person on
active duty in the armed forces of the United States may register a watercraft
in the person’s state of permanent residence in lieu of registering it in this
state regardless of the number of days that the watercraft is used in this
state.
(R.C. § 1547.531)
   (e)   No person shall operate a watercraft in this municipality if it
displays an identification number or registration decal that is any of the
following:
      (1)   Fictitious;
      (2)   A counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any identification
number or registration decal;
      (3)   An identification number or registration decal that belongs to
another watercraft.
(R.C. § 1547.533)
   (f)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.38 ALTERING OF SERIAL NUMBERS; FALSE INFORMATION PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall deface or alter any serial number, model designation
or other identifying mark on any watercraft or motor as placed thereon by the
manufacturer thereof, or remove, deface or alter the registration number of any
watercraft as the registration number appears on the bow thereof except by
specific order of the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft.
   (b)   No person shall give purposely false information concerning any
watercraft or motor when applying for registration of the watercraft. Any
certificate issued which is found to be based on such false information is
void.
(R.C. § 1547.66)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(B))
§ 448.39 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (a)   Operator to stop and furnish information upon accident or collision.
      (1)   In case of accident to or collision with persons or property on the
waters of this municipality, due to the operation of any vessel, the operator
having knowledge of the accident or collision shall immediately stop the vessel
at the scene of the accident or collision, to the extent that it is safe and
practical, and shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until he
or she has given his or her name and address and, if he or she is not the
owner, the name and address of the owner of the vessel, together with the
registration number of the vessel, if any, to any person injured in the
accident or collision or to the operator, occupant, owner or attendant of any
vessel damaged in the accident or collision, or to any law enforcement officer
at the scene of the accident or collision.
      (2)   If the injured person is unable to comprehend and record the
information required to be given by this section, the other operator involved
in the accident or collision shall forthwith notify the nearest law enforcement
agency having authority concerning the location of the accident or collision,
and his or her name, address and the registration number, if any, of the vessel
he or she was operating, and then remain at the scene of the accident or
collision or at the nearest location from which notification is possible until
a law enforcement officer arrives, unless removed from the scene by an
emergency vehicle operated by the state or a political subdivision or by an
ambulance.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
vessel, the operator so colliding with the vessel shall securely attach the
information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a conspicuous
place in or on the unoccupied or unattended vessel.
(R.C. § 1547.10)
   (b)   Duties after collision or accident; accident reports.
      (1)   The operator of a vessel involved in a collision, accident or other
casualty, so far as the operator can do so without serious danger to the
operator’s own vessel, crew and passengers, shall render to other persons
affected by the collision, accident or other casualty such assistance as may be
practicable and as may be necessary in order to save them from or minimize any
danger caused by the collision, accident or other casualty. The operator also
shall give the operator’s name, address and identification of the operator’s
vessel in writing to any person injured and to the owner of any property
damaged in the collision, accident or other casualty.
      (2)   Any person who renders assistance at the scene of a collision,
accident or other casualty involving a vessel is not liable in a civil action
for damages or injury to persons or property resulting from any act or omission
in rendering assistance or in providing or arranging salvage, towage, medical
treatment or other assistance, except that the person is liable for willful or
wanton misconduct in rendering assistance. Nothing in this section precludes
recovery from any tortfeasor causing a collision, accident or other casualty of
damages caused or aggravated by the rendering of assistance.
      (3)   In the case of collision, accident or other casualty involving a
vessel, the operator thereof, if the collision, accident or other casualty
results in loss of life, personal injury requiring medical treatment beyond
first aid, or damage to property in excess of $1,000, or the total loss of a
vessel, shall file with the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft a
full description of the collision, accident or other casualty on a form
prescribed by the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft.
      (4)   If the operator of the vessel involved in a collision, accident or
other casualty is incapacitated, the investigating law enforcement officer
shall file the required form as prescribed by the Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft.
(R.C. § 1547.59)
   (c)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
§ 448.40 ENFORCEMENT.
   Every Sheriff, Deputy Sheriff, Marshal, Deputy Marshal, member of the
organized police department of any municipal corporation, police constable of
any township, wildlife officer, natural resources officer, conservancy district
police officer and other law enforcement officer, within the area of any such
law enforcement officer’s authority, may enforce this chapter, R.C. Chapter
1547 and rules and, in the exercise thereof, may stop and board any vessel
subject to this chapter and R.C. Chapter 1547, and rules.
(R.C. § 1547.63)
§ 448.41 CERTIFICATE OF TITLE; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   No person, except as provided in §
448.42, shall sell or otherwise dispose of a watercraft or outboard motor
without delivering to the purchaser or transferee a physical certificate of
title with an assignment on it as is necessary to show title in the purchaser
or transferee; nor shall any person purchase or otherwise acquire a watercraft
or outboard motor without obtaining a certificate of title for it in the
person’s name in accordance with R.C. Chapter 1548; however, a purchaser may
take possession of and operate a watercraft or outboard motor on the waters in
this state without a certificate of title for a period not exceeding 60 days if
the purchaser has been issued and has in the purchaser’s possession a dealer’s
dated bill of sale, or in the case of a casual sale, a notarized bill of sale.
(R.C. § 1548.03)
   (b)   Division (a) of this section and §§
448.42 and
448.43 do not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A watercraft covered by a marine document in effect that has been
assigned to it by the United States government pursuant to federal law;
      (2)   A watercraft from a country other than the United States
temporarily using the waters in this state;
      (3)   A watercraft whose owner is the United States, a state or a
political subdivision of a state;
      (4)   A ship’s lifeboat. As used in this division (b)(4), LIFEBOAT means
a watercraft that is held aboard another vessel and used exclusively for
emergency purposes.
      (5)   A canoe;
      (6)   A watercraft less than 14 feet in length without a permanently
affixed mechanical means of propulsion;
      (7)   A watercraft less than 14 feet in length with a permanently fixed
mechanical means of propulsion of less than ten horsepower as determined by the
manufacturer’s rating;
      (8)   Outboard motors of less than ten horsepower as determined by the
manufacturer’s rating.
   (c)   The various certificates, applications and assignments necessary to
provide certificates of title for watercraft and outboard motors shall be made
on appropriate forms approved by the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft.
(R.C. § 1548.01(B), (C))
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
§ 448.42 MANUFACTURER’S OR IMPORTER’S CERTIFICATE.
   (a)   No manufacturer, importer, dealer or other person shall sell or
otherwise dispose of a new watercraft or outboard motor to a dealer to be used
by the dealer for purposes of display and resale without delivering to the
dealer a manufacturer’s or importer’s certificate executed in accordance with
this section and with such assignments on it as are necessary to show title in
the name of the purchaser. No dealer shall purchase or acquire a new watercraft
or outboard motor without obtaining from the seller the manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate.
   (b)   A manufacturer’s or importer’s certificate of the origin of a
watercraft or outboard motor shall contain the following information in such
form and together with such further information as the Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft may require:
      (1)   Description of the watercraft, including the make, year, length,
series or model, if any, body type, hull identification number or serial
number, and make, manufacturer’s serial number and horsepower of any inboard
motor or motors; or description of the outboard motor, including the make,
year, series or model, if any, manufacturer’s serial number, and horsepower;
      (2)   Certification of the date of transfer of the watercraft or outboard
motor to a distributor or dealer or other transferee, and the name and address
of the transferee;
      (3)   Certification that this was the first transfer of the new
watercraft or outboard motor in ordinary trade and commerce;
      (4)   Signature and address of a representative of the transferor.
   (c)   An assignment of a manufacturer’s or importer’s certificate before a
notary public or other officer empowered to administer oaths shall be printed
on the reverse side of the manufacturer’s or importer’s certificate in the form
to be prescribed by the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft. The
assignment form shall include the name and address of the transferee, a
certification that the watercraft or outboard motor is new, and a warranty that
the title at the time of delivery is subject only to such liens and
encumbrances as are set forth and described in full in the assignment.
(R.C. § 1548.05)
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
§ 448.43 PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this municipality a watercraft for which a certificate
of title is required or a watercraft powered by an outboard motor for which a
certificate of title is required without having the certificate or a valid
temporary permit and number in accordance with R.C. Chapter 1548 or, if a
physical certificate of title has not been issued for it, operate the
watercraft or outboard motor in this state knowing that the ownership
information relating to the watercraft or outboard motor has not has not been
entered into the automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas;
      (2)   Operate in this municipality a watercraft for which a certificate
of title is required, or a watercraft powered by an outboard motor for which a
certificate of title is required, upon which the certificate of title has been
canceled;
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon cancellation of it
by the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft and notice of the
cancellation as prescribed in R.C. Chapter 1548;
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 1548, in case of the destruction or
dismantling or change of a watercraft or outboard motor in such respect that it
is not the watercraft or outboard motor described in the certificate of title;
      (5)   Violate any provision of R.C. Chapter 1548 for which no penalty is
otherwise provided, or any lawful rules adopted pursuant to R.C. Chapter 1548;
      (6)   Operate in this municipality a watercraft or outboard motor knowing
that the certificate of title to or ownership of the watercraft or outboard
motor as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has been
canceled.
(R.C. § 1548.18)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 1548.99(A))
§ 448.44 PERMANENTLY DISPLAYED HULL IDENTIFICATION NUMBER.
   (a)   A watercraft constructed on or after November 1, 1972, shall have a
hull identification number permanently displayed and affixed to it in
accordance with federal law.
   (b)   A watercraft constructed before November 1, 1972, shall have a hull
identification number assigned to it by the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft at the time of registration, at the time of application for title,
after transfer of ownership, or at the time of a change to this state as the
principal location of operation. The number shall be permanently displayed and
affixed as prescribed by rules.
   (c)   A person who builds a watercraft or imports a watercraft from another
county for personal use and not for the purpose of sale shall request a hull
identification number from the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft
and permanently display and affix the number as prescribed by rules.
   (d)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any watercraft on the
waters in this state in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.65)
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
§ 448.45 FIREARMS OFFENSES; SIGNALING DEVICES.
   (a)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ACTIVE DUTY, CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE, FIREARM, HANDGUN, and VALID
CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2923.11.
      (2)   UNLOADED. Has the same meaning meanings as in R.C. § 2923.16(K)(5)
and (K)(6), except that all references in the definition in R.C. § 2923.16(K)
(5) to “vehicle” shall be construed for purposes of this section to be
references to “vessel”.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly discharge a firearm while in or on a vessel.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded firearm in a
vessel in a manner that the firearm is accessible to the operator or any
passenger.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a vessel
unless it is unloaded and is carried in one of the following ways:
      (1)   In a closed package, box or case;
      (2)   In plain sight with the action opened or the weapon stripped, or,
if the firearm is of a type on which the action will not stay open or that
cannot easily be stripped, in plain sight.
   (e)   (1)   The affirmative defenses authorized in R.C. § 2923.12(D)(1) and
(D)(2) are affirmative defenses to a charge under division (c) or (d) of this
section that involves a firearm other than a handgun. It is an affirmative
defense to a charge under division (c) or (d) of this section of transporting
or having a firearm of any type, including a handgun, in a vessel that the
actor transported or had the firearm in the vessel for any lawful purpose and
while the vessel was on the actor’s own property, provided that this
affirmative defense is not available unless the actor, prior to arriving at the
vessel on the actor’s own property, did not transport or possess the firearm in
the vessel or in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by this section or R.C.
§ 2923.16(B) or (C) while the vessel was being operated on a waterway that was
not on the actor’s own property or while the motor vehicle was being operated
on a street, highway or other public or private property used by the public for
vehicular traffic.
      (2)   No person who is charged with a violation of division (c) or (d) of
this section shall be required to obtain a license or temporary emergency
license to carry a concealed handgun under R.C. § 2923.125 or 2923.1213 as a
condition for the dismissal of the charge.
   (f)   Divisions (b), (c) and (d) of this section do not apply to the
possession or discharge of a United States Coast Guard approved signaling
device required to be carried aboard a vessel under R.C. § 1547.251 when the
signaling device is possessed or used for the purpose of giving a visual
distress signal. No person shall knowingly transport or possess any signaling
device of that nature in or on a vessel in a loaded condition at any time other
than immediately prior to the discharge of the signaling device for the purpose
of giving a visual distress signal.
   (g)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
   (h)   (1)   This section does not apply to officers any of the following:
         A.   An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or of
the United States, or to a law enforcement officer, when authorized to carry or
have loaded or accessible firearms in a vessel and acting within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s or employee’s duties;
         B.   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in a vessel, and who is subject to
and in compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless the
appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption
provided in this division (h)(1)B. does not apply to the person;
         C.   Any person legally engaged in hunting.
      (2)   Divisions (c) and (d) of this section do not apply to a person who
transports or possesses a handgun in a vessel and who has been issued a
concealed handgun license that is valid at the time of that transportation or
possession or who, at the time of that transportation or possession, is an
active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a
valid military identification card and documentation of successful completion
of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described
in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), unless the person knowingly is in a place on the
vessel described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
   (i)   If a law enforcement officer stops a vessel for a violation of this
section or any other law enforcement purpose, if any person on the vessel
surrenders a firearm to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a
request or demand of the officer, and if the officer does not charge the person
with a violation of this section or arrest the person for any offense, the
person is not otherwise prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the
firearm is not contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person
at the termination of the stop.
   (j)   The provisions of R.C. § 2923.16(L) applies with respect to division
(a)(2) of this section, except that all references in R.C. § 2923.16(L) to
“vehicle”, to “this chapter”, or to “division (K)(5)(a) or (b) of this section”
shall be construed for purposes of this section to be, respectively, references
to “vessel”, to “this section”, and to R.C. § 2923.16(K)(5)(a) and (K)(5)(b) as
incorporated under the definition of “firearm” adopted under division (a) of
this section.
(R.C. § 1547.69)
   (k)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
§ 448.46 TAMPERING WITH NAVIGATION AID OR VESSEL PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly:
      (1)   Damage, remove or tamper with any signal, buoy or other aid to
navigation;
      (2)   Sever the mooring lines of, set adrift or tamper with any vessel
that is moored or tied up on the waters in this municipality.
(R.C. § 1547.92)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
§ 448.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates a provision of this chapter for which no penalty is
otherwise provided, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1547.99(C))
   (b)   The sentencing court, in addition to the penalty provided under this
chapter for a violation of this chapter that involves a powercraft powered by
more than ten horsepower and that, in the opinion of the court, involves a
threat to the safety of persons or property, shall order the offender to
complete successfully a boating course approved by the National Association of
State Boating Law Administrators before the offender is allowed to operate a
powercraft powered by more than ten horsepower on the waters in this state.
Violation of a court order entered under this division is punishable as
contempt under R.C. Chapter 2705.
(R.C. § 1547.99(L))
TITLE EIGHT – Parking
                  
Chap. 452.   Parking Generally.
CHAPTER 452
Parking Generally
452.01   Prohibition against parking on streets or highways.
452.02   Police may remove illegally parked vehicle.
452.03   Prohibited standing or parking places.
452.04   Manner of parallel and angle parking; privileges for persons with
disabilities.
452.05   Willfully leaving vehicles on private or public property.
452.06   Parking prohibitions on private property; private tow-away zones.
452.07   Unattended vehicles; duty to lock ignition, remove key, set brake and
the like.
452.08   Opening doors on side available to traffic.
452.09   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway.
452.10   Truck loading zones.
452.11   Bus stops and taxicab stands.
452.12   Parking in alleys and narrow streets; exceptions.
452.13   Registered owner prima facie liable for unlawful parking.
452.14   Waiver.
452.15   Emergency parking ban during snow emergency.
452.16   Definitions of abandoned junk motor vehicle, junk motor vehicle and
inoperable motor vehicle.
452.17   Release of vehicles; records; charges.
452.18   Leaving junk and other vehicles on private or public property with the
permission of the owner.
452.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Impounding; redemption, see §
404.07
   Lights on parked or stopped vehicles, see §
438.09
   Parking defined, see §
402.01
   Parking Enforcement Unit, see §
244.04
   Parking near stopped fire apparatus, see §
432.28
   Parking of bicycles; locks, see §
444.08
   Police may remove ignition key from unattended vehicle, see §
404.01
   Stop defined, see §
402.01
   Stopping and standing defined, see §
402.01
   Storage of junk vehicles, see §
660.07
§ 452.01 PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING ON STREETS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (a)   (1)   Upon any highway, no person shall stop, park or leave standing
any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled
part of the highway if it is practicable to stop, park or so leave the vehicle
off the paved or main traveled part of the highway. In every event a clear and
unobstructed portion of the highway opposite the standing vehicle shall be left
for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of the stopped vehicle
shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each direction upon the
highway.
      (2)   This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled while on the paved or improved or main traveled portion of a highway
in such manner and to the extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in that position.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.66)
§ 452.02 POLICE MAY REMOVE ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE.
   (a)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in
violation of R.C. § 4511.66 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
the officer may move the vehicle, or require the driver or other person in
charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or improved
or main traveled part of the highway.
   (b)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any
highway, bridge or causeway, or in any tunnel, where the vehicle constitutes an
obstruction to traffic, the officer may provide for the removal of the vehicle
to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
(R.C. § 4511.67)
§ 452.03 PROHIBITED STANDING OR PARKING PLACES.
   (a)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the provisions of this
title, or while obeying the directions of a police officer or a traffic-control
device, in any of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk, except as provided in division (b) of this section;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (7)   Within 30 feet of, and upon the approach to, any flashing beacon,
stop sign or traffic-control device;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by a traffic- control device;
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and, on
the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75
feet of the entrance when it is properly posted with signs;
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
the standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
      (12)   Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street;
      (13)   Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a highway, or within a
highway tunnel;
      (14)   At any place where signs prohibit stopping or parking, or at any
place that is similarly designated as a place where parking is prohibited, such
as by painted curbs;
      (15)   Within one foot of another parked vehicle;
      (16)   On the roadway portion of a freeway, expressway or thruway.
   (b)   Parking in residential subdivisions shall be prohibited on one side of
the street. The Village Administrator shall, in consultation with the Scioto
Township Fire Department and any other relevant authorities, determine which
side of the street in each residential subdivision shall be subject to this
parking prohibition. The Village Administrator, in consultation with the Scioto
Township Fire Department, shall have the authority to determine whether certain
cul-de-sacs will remain subject to the prohibition against parking on one side
of the street. The Village Administrator is authorized and directed to
designate such sides of the street, and of cul-de-sacs as appropriate, with
clear signs or other demarcations that indicate parking is prohibited on those
sides of the street or cul-de-sac subject to the parking prohibition.
   (c)   A person shall be permitted, without charge or restriction, to stand
or park on a sidewalk a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter that has an engine
not larger than 150 cubic centimeters, or a bicycle or electric bicycle,
provided that the motor-driven cycle, motor scooter, bicycle, or electric
bicycle does not impede the normal flow of pedestrian traffic. This division
does not authorize any person to operate a vehicle in violation of R.C. §
4511.711, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. 2022-22, passed 9-12-2022; Am. Ord. 2023-07, passed 6-5-2023)
§ 452.04 MANNER OF PARALLEL AND ANGLE PARKING; PRIVILEGES FOR PERSONS WITH
DISABILITIES.
   (a)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an
adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle parallel with and not more than 12 inches from the right-hand curb,
unless it is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in this case the stop
shall be made as close to the curb as possible and only for the time necessary
to discharge and receive passengers or to load or unload merchandise. Local
authorities by ordinance may permit angle parking on any roadway under their
jurisdiction, except that angle parking shall not be permitted on a state route
within the municipality unless an unoccupied roadway width of not less than 25
feet is available for free-moving traffic.
   (b)   Local authorities by ordinance may permit parking of vehicles with the
left-hand wheels adjacent to and within 12 inches of the left-hand curb of a
one-way roadway.
   (c)   (1)   A.   Except as provided in division (c)(1)B. of this section, no
vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a road or highway with the vehicle facing
in a direction other than the direction of travel on that side of the road or
highway.
         B.   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into an
angled parking space so that when the motorcycle is parked it is facing in a
direction other than the direction of travel on the side of the road or
highway.
      (2)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into a parking
space that is located on the side of, and parallel to, a road or highway. The
motorcycle may face any direction when so parked. Not more than two motorcycles
at a time shall be parked in a parking space as described in this division (c)
(2) of this section irrespective of whether or not the space is metered.
   (d)   Notwithstanding any statute or any rule, regulation, resolution or
ordinance, air compressors, tractors, trucks and other equipment, while being
used in the construction, reconstruction, installation, repair or removal of
facilities near, on, over or under a street or highway, may stop, stand or park
where necessary in order to perform the work, provided a flagperson is on duty
or warning signs or lights are displayed as may be prescribed by the Director
of Transportation.
   (e)   Accessible parking locations and privileges for persons with
disabilities that limit or impair the ability to walk shall be provided and
designated by all political subdivisions and by the state and all agencies and
instrumentalities thereof at all offices and facilities where parking is
provided, whether owned, rented or leased, and at all publicly owned parking
garages. The locations shall be designated through the posting of an elevated
sign, whether permanently affixed or movable, imprinted with the international
symbol of access and shall be reasonably close to exits, entrances, elevators
and ramps. All elevated signs posted in accordance with this division and R.C.
§ 3781.111(C) shall be mounted on a fixed or movable post, and the distance
from the ground to the bottom edge of the sign shall measure not less than five
feet. If a new sign or a replacement sign designating an accessible parking
location is posted on or after October 14, 1999, there also shall be affixed
upon the surface of that sign or affixed next to the designating sign a notice
that states the fine applicable for the offense of parking a motor vehicle in
the designated accessible parking location if the motor vehicle is not legally
entitled to be parked in that location.
   (f)   (1)   A.   No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle at
accessible parking locations provided under division (e) of this section, or at
accessible clearly marked parking locations provided in or on privately owned
parking lots, parking garages or other parking areas and designated in
accordance with that division, unless one of the following applies:
            1.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a valid removable windshield placard or accessible license plates;
or
            2.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a person with a disability and is displaying a parking card or accessible
license plates.
         B.   Any motor vehicle that is parked in an accessible marked parking
location in violation of division (f)(1)A.1. or (f)(1)A.2. of this section may
be towed or otherwise removed from the parking location by the law enforcement
agency of the municipality. A motor vehicle that is so towed or removed shall
not be released to its owner until the owner presents proof of ownership of the
motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees normally imposed by the
municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles. If the motor vehicle is a
leased vehicle, it shall not be released to the lessee until the lessee
presents proof that that person is the lessee of the motor vehicle and pays all
towing and storage fees normally imposed by the municipality for towing and
storing motor vehicles.
         C.   If a person is charged with a violation of division (f)(1)A.1. or
(f)(1)A.2. of this section, it is an affirmative defense to the charge that the
person suffered an injury not more than 72 hours prior to the time the person
was issued the ticket or citation and that, because of the injury, the person
meets at least one of the criteria contained in R.C. § 4503.44(A)(1).
      (2)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle in an area
that is commonly known as an access aisle, which area is marked by diagonal
stripes and is located immediately adjacent to an accessible parking location
provided under division (e) of this section or at an accessible clearly marked
parking location provided in or on a privately owned parking lot, parking
garage, or other parking area and designated in accordance with that division.
   (g)   When a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a
person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a removable windshield placard or accessible license plates, or when
a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a person with a
disability and is displaying a parking card or accessible license plates, the
motor vehicle is permitted to park for a period of two hours in excess of the
legal parking period permitted by local authorities, except where local
ordinances or police rules provide otherwise or where the vehicle is parked in
such a manner as to be clearly a traffic hazard.
   (h)   No owner of an office, facility or parking garage where accessible
parking locations are required to be designated in accordance with division (e)
of this section shall fail to properly mark the accessible parking locations in
accordance with that division or fail to maintain the markings of the
accessible locations, including the erection and maintenance of the fixed or
movable signs.
   (i)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a person or
organization to apply for a removable windshield placard or accessible license
plates if the parking card or accessible license plates issued to the person or
organization under prior law have not expired or been surrendered or revoked.
   (j)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ACCESSIBLE LICENSE PLATES and REMOVABLE WINDSHIELD PLACARD. Any
license plates, standard removable windshield placard, permanent removable
windshield placard, or temporary removable windshield placard issued under R.C.
§ 4503.41 or 4503.44, and also mean any substantially similar license plates or
removable windshield placard issued by a state, district, country, or
sovereignty.
      (2)   PERSON WITH A DISABILITY. Any person who has lost the use of one or
both legs or one or both arms, who is blind, deaf or unable to move without the
aid of crutches or a wheelchair, or whose mobility is restricted by a permanent
cardiovascular, pulmonary or other disabling condition.
      (3)   PERSON WITH A DISABILITY THAT LIMITS OR IMPAIRS THE ABILITY TO
WALK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4503.44.
   (k)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (a) or (c) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (f)(1)A.1. or (f)(1)A.2. of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in
division (k)(2)A. and (k)(2)B. of this section. Except as otherwise provided in
division (k)(2)A. of this section, an offender who violates division (f)(1)A.1.
or (f)(1)A.2. of this section shall be fined not less than $250 nor more than
$500. An offender who violates division (f)(1)A.1. or (f)(1)A.2. of this
section shall be fined not more than $100 if the offender, prior to sentencing,
proves either of the following to the satisfaction of the court:
            1.   At the time of the violation of division (f)(1)A.1. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a removable windshield placard that then was
valid or accessible license plates that then were valid but the offender or the
person neglected to display the placard or license plates as described in
division (f)(1)A.1. of this section.
            2.   At the time of the violation of division (f)(1)A.2. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a parking card that then was valid or accessible
license plates that then were valid but the offender or the person neglected to
display the card or license plates as described in division (f)(1)A.2. of this
section.
         B.   In no case shall an offender who violates division (f)(1)A.1. or
(f)(1)A.2. be sentenced to any term of imprisonment.
         C.   An arrest or conviction for a violation of division (f)(1)A.1. or
(f)(1)A.2. of this section does not constitute a criminal record and need not
be reported by the person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries
contained in any application for employment, license or other right or
privilege, or made in connection with the person’s appearance as a witness.
         D.   The Clerk of the Court shall pay every fine collected under
divisions (k)(2) and (k)(3) of this section to the municipality. Except as
provided in division (k)(2) of this section, the municipality shall use the
fine moneys it receives under divisions (k)(2) and (k)(3) of this section to
pay the expenses it incurs in complying with the signage and notice
requirements contained in division (e) of this section. The municipality may
use up to 50% of each fine it receives under divisions (k)(2) and (k)(3) of
this section to pay the costs of educational, advocacy, support and assistive
technology programs for persons with disabilities, and for public improvements
within the municipality that benefit or assist persons with disabilities, if
governmental agencies or nonprofit organizations offer the programs.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (f)(2) of this section shall be fined not
less than $250 nor more than $500. In no case shall an offender who violates
division (f)(2) of this section be sentenced to any term of imprisonment. An
arrest or conviction for a violation of division (f)(2) of this section does
not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries contained in any application
for employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection
with the person’s appearance as a witness.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (h) of this section shall be punished as
follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (k)(4) of this section,
the offender shall be issued a warning.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (h) of this section or of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, the offender shall
not be issued a warning but shall be fined not more than $25 for each parking
location that is not properly marked or whose markings are not properly
maintained.
(R.C. § 4511.69)
§ 452.05 WILLFULLY LEAVING VEHICLES ON PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (a)   The Police Chief, upon notification to the Police Chief of such action
and of the location of the place of storage, may order into storage any motor
vehicle, including an abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in R.C. §
4513.63, that:
      (1)   Has come into the possession of the Police chief as a result of the
performance of the Police Chief’s duties; or
      (2)   Has been left on a public street or other property open to the
public for purposes of vehicular travel, or upon or within the right-of-way of
any road or highway, for 48 hours or longer without notification to the Police
Chief of the reasons for leaving the motor vehicle in such place. However, when
such a motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic it may be ordered
into storage immediately unless either of the following applies:
         A.   The vehicle was involved in an accident and is subject to R.C. §
4513.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         B.   The vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle. If the vehicle is a
commercial motor vehicle, the Police Chief shall allow the owner or operator of
the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle
within a period of time specified by the Police Chief. If the Police Chief
determines that the vehicle cannot be removed within the specified period of
time, the Police Chief shall order the removal of the vehicle.
      (3)   Subject to division (c) of this section, the Police Chief shall
designate the place of storage of any motor vehicle so ordered removed.
   (b)   If the Police Chief issues an order under division (a) of this section
and arranges for the removal of a motor vehicle by a towing service, the towing
service shall deliver the motor vehicle to the location designated by the
Police Chief not more than two hours after the time it is removed.
   (c)   (1)   The Police Chief shall cause a search to be made of the records
of an applicable entity listed in R.C. § 4513.601(F)(1) to ascertain the
identity of the owner and any lienholder of a motor vehicle ordered into
storage by the Police Chief within five business days of the removal of the
vehicle. Upon obtaining such identity, the Police Chief shall send or cause to
be sent to the owner and any lienholder at the owner’s and any lienholder’s
last known address by certified or express mail with return receipt requested,
by certified mail with electronic tracking, or by a commercial carrier service
utilizing any form of delivery requiring a signed receipt. The notice shall
inform the owner and any lienholder that the motor vehicle will be declared a
nuisance and disposed of if not claimed within ten days of the date of the
sending of the notice.
      (2)   A.   The owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle is responsible
for payment of any expenses or charges incurred in its removal and storage and
may reclaim the motor vehicle upon payment of those expenses or charges, and
presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of
title or memorandum certificate of title to the motor vehicle, a certificate of
registration for the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement. Upon presentation of
proof of ownership evidenced as provided above, the owner of the motor vehicle
also may retrieve any personal items from the vehicle without retrieving the
vehicle and without paying any fee. However, a towing service or storage
facility may charge an after-hours retrieval fee established by the Public
Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25 if the owner
retrieves the personal items after hours, unless the towing service or storage
facility fails to provide the notice required under R.C. § 4513.69(B)(3), if
applicable. However, the owner shall not do either of the following:
            1.   Retrieve any personal item that has been determined by the
Police Chief to be necessary to a criminal investigation;
            2.   Retrieve any personal item from a vehicle if it would endanger
the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees to sign a waiver of liability.
         B.   For purposes of division (c)(2) of this section, “personal items”
do not include any items that are attached to the vehicle.
      (3)   If the owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle reclaims it after a
search of the applicable records has been conducted and after notice has been
sent to the owner and any lienholder as described in this section, and the
search was conducted by the place of storage, and the notice was sent to the
motor vehicle owner by the place of storage, the owner or lienholder shall pay
to the place of storage a processing fee of $25, in addition to any expenses or
charges incurred in the removal and storage of the vehicle.
   (d)   If the owner or lienholder makes no claim to the motor vehicle within
ten days of the date of sending the notice, and if the vehicle is to be
disposed of at public auction as provided in R.C. § 4513.62 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the Police Chief, without charge
to any party, shall file with the clerk of courts of the county in which the
place of storage is located an affidavit showing compliance with the
requirements of this section. Upon presentation of the affidavit, the clerk,
without charge, shall issue a salvage certificate of title, free and clear of
all liens and encumbrances, to the Police Chief. If the vehicle is to be
disposed of to a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility as provided in
R.C. § 4513.62 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the Police
Chief shall execute in triplicate an affidavit, as prescribed by the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles, describing the motor vehicle and the manner in which it was
disposed of, and that all requirements of this section have been complied with.
The Police Chief shall retain the original of the affidavit for the Police
Chief’s records, and shall furnish two copies to the motor vehicle salvage
dealer or other facility. Upon presentation of a copy of the affidavit by the
motor vehicle salvage dealer, the clerk of courts, within 30 days of the
presentation, shall issue a salvage certificate of title, free and clear of all
liens and encumbrances.
   (e)   Whenever a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility receives an
affidavit for the disposal of a motor vehicle as provided in this section, the
dealer or facility shall not be required to obtain an Ohio certificate of title
to the motor vehicle in the dealer’s or facility’s own name if the vehicle is
dismantled or destroyed and both copies of the affidavit are delivered to the
clerk of courts.
   (f)   No towing service or storage facility shall fail to comply with this
section.
(R.C. § 4513.61)
   (g)   Abandonment of Junk Motor Vehicle Prohibited.
      (1)   No person shall willfully leave any vehicle or an abandoned junk
motor vehicle as defined in § 452.16 on private property for more than 72
consecutive hours without the permission of the person having the right to the
possession of the property.
      (2)   No person shall wilfully leave any vehicle or an abandoned junk
motor vehicle as defined in § 452.16 on a public street or other property open
to the public for purposes of vehicular traffic or parking, or within the
right-of-way of any road or highway, for 48 consecutive hours or longer,
without notifying the Chief of Police or his or her designate of the reasons
for leaving the vehicle in such a place.
      (3)   A.   For purposes of this section, the fact that a vehicle has been
so left without permission or notification as prima facie evidence of
abandonment.
         B.   Nothing contained in this section shall invalidate the provisions
of other ordinances regulating or prohibiting the abandonment of motor vehicles
on streets, highways, public property, or private property within the
municipality.
(Ord. 97.02, passed 3-3-1997)
§ 452.06 PARKING PROHIBITIONS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; PRIVATE TOW-AWAY ZONES.
   (a)   The owner of private property may establish a private tow-away zone
only if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
      (1)   The owner posts on his or her property a sign, that is at least 18
inches by 24 inches in size, that is visible from all entrances to the property
and that contains at least all of the following information:
         A.   A notice that the property is a private tow-away zone and that
vehicles not authorized to park on the property will be towed away;
         B.   The telephone number of the person from whom a towed-away vehicle
can be recovered, and the address of the place to which the vehicle will be
taken and the place from which it may be recovered;
         C.   A statement that the vehicle may be recovered at any time during
the day or night upon the submission of proof of ownership and the payment of a
towing charge, in an amount not to exceed $70 and a storage charge, in an
amount flat to exceed $8 per 24-hour period; except that the charge for towing
shall not exceed $100, and the storage charge shall not exceed $12 per 24-hour
period, if the vehicle has a laden gross vehicle weight in excess of 15,000
pounds and is a truck, bus, or a combination of a commercial tractor and
trailer or semitrailer; and
      (2)   The place to which the towed vehicle is taken and from which it may
be recovered is conveniently located, is well lighted and is on or within a
reasonable distance of a regularly scheduled route of one or more modes of
public transportation, if any public transportation is available in the
municipality.
   (b)   If a vehicle is parked on private property that is established as a
private tow-away zone in accordance with division (a) hereof without the
consent of the owner of the property or in violation of any posted parking
condition or regulation, the owner or his or her agent may remove, or cause the
removal of the vehicle. The owner and the operator of the vehicle shall be
deemed to have consented to the removal and storage of the vehicle and to the
payment of the towing and storage charges specified in division (a) hereof, and
the owner may recover a vehicle that has been so removed only in accordance
with §
452.17.
   (c)   If an owner of private property that is established as a private tow-
away zone in accordance with division (a) hereof or the authorized agent of
such an owner removes or causes the removal of a vehicle from that property
under authority of division (b) hereof, the owner or agent promptly shall
notify the Police Department of the removal, the vehicle’s license number,
make, model and color, the location from which it was removed, the date and
time of its removal, the telephone number of the person from whom it may be
recovered, and the address of the place to which it has been taken and from
which it may be recovered.
   (d)   No owner of private property shall remove, or shall cause the removal
and storage of, any vehicle pursuant to this section by a tow truck or tow
truck operator in violation of any other municipal ordinance regulating such
truck or operator.
   (e)   This section does not affect or limit the operation of §
452.05 or R.C. §§ 4513.61 to 4513.65 as they relate to property other than
private property that is established as a private tow-away zone under this
section.
   (f)   No person shall remove or cause the removal of any vehicle from
private property that is established as a private tow-away zone under this
section other than in accordance with division (b) hereof.
(Ord. 97.03, passed 3-3-1997)
§ 452.07 UNATTENDED VEHICLES; DUTY TO LOCK IGNITION, REMOVE KEY, SET BRAKE AND
THE LIKE.
   (a)   (1)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit
it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition,
removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the parking brake, and,
when the motor vehicle is standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to
the curb or side of the highway.
      (2)   The requirements of this section relating to the stopping of the
engine, locking of the ignition, and removing the key from the ignition of a
motor vehicle do not apply to any of the following:
         A.   A motor vehicle that is parked on residential property;
         B.   A motor vehicle that is locked, regardless of where it is parked;
         C.   An emergency vehicle ;
         D.   A public safety vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.661)
§ 452.08 OPENING DOORS ON SIDE AVAILABLE TO TRAFFIC.
   (a)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.70)
§ 452.09 SELLING, WASHING OR REPAIRING VEHICLE UPON ROADWAY.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the
principal purpose of:
   (a)   Displaying the vehicle for sale; or
   (b)   Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle except repairs necessitated
by an emergency.
§ 452.10 TRUCK LOADING ZONES.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and
loading of materials, in any place marked as a truck loading zone during hours
when the provisions applicable to those zones are in effect. In no case shall
the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
§ 452.11 BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a
bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or
stand has been officially designated and appropriately posted, except that the
driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of,
and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when the
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter the zone, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes, if
the stopping is not prohibited therein by posted signs.
   (b)   No operator of a bus shall stop, stand or park the vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop so designated and posted
as such, except in case of an emergency.
   (c)   No operator of a bus shall fail to enter a bus stop on a street or
other public way in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload
passengers or baggage is in a position with the right front wheel of the
vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately
parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular
traffic.
   (d)   No operator of a taxicab shall stand or park the vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place other than in a taxicab stand so
designated and posted as such. This provision shall not prevent the operator of
a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking provisions at any place for the purpose of, and while actually engaged
in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
§ 452.12 PARKING IN ALLEYS AND NARROW STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other
than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available
less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular
traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or
unloading of passengers or when directed to by a police officer or traffic-
control signal.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle within an alley except while actually loading and unloading, and
then only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes.
§ 452.13 REGISTERED OWNER PRIMA FACIE LIABLE FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle, testimony
that a vehicle bearing a certain license plate was found unlawfully parked as
prohibited by the provisions of this traffic code, and further testimony that
the record of the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles shows that the license plate
was issued to the defendant, shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle
which was unlawfully parked, was so parked by the defendant. A certified
registration copy, showing that fact, from the Registrar shall be proof of
ownership.
§ 452.14 WAIVER.
   Any person charged with a violation of any provision of this chapter for
which payment of a prescribed fine may be made, may pay the sum in the manner
prescribed on the issued traffic ticket. This payment shall be deemed a plea of
guilty, waiver of court appearance and acknowledgment of conviction of the
alleged offense and may be accepted in full satisfaction of the prescribed
penalty for the alleged violation. Payment of the prescribed fine need not be
accepted when laws prescribe that a certain number of such offenses shall
require court appearance.
§ 452.15 EMERGENCY PARKING BAN DURING SNOW EMERGENCY.
   (a)   Snow emergency defined. A SNOW EMERGENCY is defined as that time when
there has been during any period of 24 hours or less any accumulation of sleet,
hail or ice within the village or accumulation of snow within the village to a
depth of two inches or more as determined by the United States Weather Bureau
which accumulation, in the opinion of the Mayor, creates hazardous driving
conditions and during such period of time prior to, during or after such sleet,
hail, ice or snow, the parking of motor vehicles could hinder, delay and
obstruct the safe flow of traffic and emergency vehicles as well as the proper
cleaning and clearing of snow to make safe all public streets within the
village, or when a Level 1, Level 2, or Level 3 Snow Emergency has been
declared by the Pickaway County Sheriff.
   (b)   Determination of snow emergency.
      (1)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to declare a snow emergency when, in
accordance with division (a) of this section, he or she has determined that
conditions justify the declaration of a snow emergency, even in the absence of
the declaration of a Level 1, Level 2, or Level 3 Snow Emergency by the
Pickaway County Sheriff.
      (2)   If the Mayor has declared a snow emergency and Pickaway County is
not under a Level 1, Level 2, or Level 3 Snow Emergency, such snow emergency
declared by the Mayor shall continue in effect until the Mayor determines that
any emergency no longer exists and accordingly terminates such emergency.
   (c)   No parking during snow emergency.
      (1)   During any snow emergency, no person shall park, cause or permit to
be parked or permit to remain parked, or abandoned or left unattended, any
vehicle of any kind or description upon any street, highway, thoroughfare,
alley, or public roadway in the village.
      (2)   All vehicles parked prior to the time such weather conditions
prohibit parking and a snow emergency is announced shall be removed by the
owners, operators, or other persons responsible for such vehicles.
      (3)   Any motor vehicle parked in violation of this prohibition shall
subject the owner or operator to the penalties provided herein. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner, operator or other person responsible for such
vehicle to ascertain whether weather conditions require the removal of this
vehicle from the streets designated and remove all vehicles parked in violation
of the provisions set forth in this section.
   (d)   Notification of snow emergency.
      (1)   The Mayor, or in his or her absence the Chief of Police, or in the
absence of the Chief of Police, any other village official designated by the
Mayor, is hereby authorized to announce to broadcast media within the area of
the village that a snow emergency is in effect and therefore parking on all
streets in the village is forbidden to facilitate the clearing of streets.
      (2)   The village shall make every effort to inform the public of the
existence of the weather conditions requiring the removal of parked vehicles
from the streets designated, but the owners, operators, or other persons
responsible for such vehicle parked in these areas shall have full
responsibility to determine existing weather conditions and to remove parked
vehicles if the weather conditions are such as to require the removal under the
terms of this section.
      (3)   The local broadcast media shall announce the emergency and the time
that the emergency parking regulations shall become effective, which time shall
be no sooner than three hours after the first announcement to the above named
broadcast media, or immediately upon the declaration of a Level 1, Level 2, or
Level 3 Snow Emergency by the Pickaway County Sheriff, and such announcement to
the broadcast media shall constitute notice to the general public of the
existence of the emergency period.
   (e)   Removal of vehicles parked during snow emergency.
      (1)   The Mayor or any employee under his or her direction or any member
of the Police Department shall be authorized and empowered to provide for the
removal of any vehicles parked on any of the streets, highways, thoroughfares,
alleys or public roadways in the village in areas designated for removal during
snow emergencies to be taken to such garage or other place the Mayor or other
person under his or her direction or member of the Police Department deems
appropriate.
      (2)   Any costs incurred in such removal or storage shall be paid for by
the owner, operator or other person responsible for such vehicle, in addition
to any fines imposed for a violation of this section.
   (f)   Posting of snow emergency signs.
      (1)   The Mayor, or any other village official designated by the Mayor,
is hereby directed to post signs on the major thoroughfares leading into the
village notifying the public that parking is prohibited on streets of the
village while a snow emergency is in effect so as to inform the village
residents of prohibited parking during snow emergencies.
      (2)   Snow emergency signs shall be of sufficient size and legibility and
be placed upon the streets, highways, thoroughfares, alleys or other public
roadways, or fixed to utility poles within the village, in sufficient numbers
as will in the opinion of the Mayor be proper and adequate notice to the
citizens that no vehicles may be parked in such areas during any snow
emergency.
   (g)   Penalty. Any person or persons violating the provisions of this
section with respect to failure to remove parked vehicles as required by this
section, is hereby guilty of a minor misdemeanor with each day to be a separate
violation.
(Ord. 03-1, passed 1-6-2003; Am. Ord. 2021-06, passed 4-19-2021)
§ 452.16 DEFINITIONS OF ABANDONED JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE, JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE AND
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   ABANDONED JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle which meets the
criteria of being a junk motor vehicle and is left on private or public
property under any of the circumstances set forth in §§
404.07,
404.10,
452.05(g),
452.18.
   (b)   INOPERABLE VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle which meets one of the following
requirements:
      (1)   It does not display a valid license plate and is in either wrecked,
partially wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled or discarded condition, or
is incapable of being driven; or
      (2)   It is wrecked, partially wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled,
discarded or is incapable of being driven and has remained in such condition
for a continuous period of more than 72 hours.
   (c)   JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle meeting any four or more of the
following criteria:
      (1)   Is three years old or older;
      (2)   Is extensively damaged, such damage including, but not limited to
any of the following: broken or missing window or windshield, missing wheels,
tires, motor or transmission;
      (3)   Has a fair market value equal to or less than that set forth in
R.C. § 4513.63;
      (4)   Is apparently inoperable or in an abandoned condition as defined in
this section; or
      (5)   Does not comply with all safety laws and equipment provisions for
motor vehicles as set forth under provisions of the Ohio Revised Code.
(Ord. 97.01, passed 3-3-1997)
§ 452.17 RELEASE OF VEHICLES; RECORDS; CHARGES.
   (a)   Release prior to removal.
      (1)   If the owner or operator of a motor vehicle that has been ordered
into storage pursuant to §
404.10 or of a vehicle that is being removed under authority of §
452.06 arrives after the motor vehicle or vehicle has been prepared for removal
but prior to its actual removal from the property, the owner or operator shall
be given the opportunity to pay a fee of not more than one-half of the charge
for the removal of motor vehicles under §
404.10 or of vehicles under §
452.06 whichever is applicable, that normally is assessed by the person who has
prepared the motor vehicle or vehicle for removal, in order to obtain release
of the motor vehicle or vehicle.
      (2)   Upon payment of that fee, the motor vehicle or vehicle shall be
released to the owner or operator, and upon its release, the owner or operator
immediately shall move it so that:
         A.   If the motor vehicle was ordered into storage pursuant to §
404.10, it is not on the private residential or private agricultural property
without the permission of the person having the right to possession of the
property, or is not at the garage or place of storage without the permission of
the owner, whichever is applicable;
         B.   If the vehicle was being removed under authority of §
452.06, it is not parked on the private property established as a private tow-
away zone without the consent of the owner or in violation of any posted
parking condition or regulation.
   (b)   Records.
      (1)   The Chief of Police shall maintain a record of motor vehicles that
he or she orders into storage pursuant to §
404.10 and of vehicles removed from private property in his or her jurisdiction
that is established as a private tow-away zone of which he or she has received
notice under §
452.06.
      (2)   The record shall include an entry for each such motor vehicle or
vehicle that identifies the motor vehicle’s or vehicle’s license number, make,
model and color, the location from which it was removed, the date and time of
its removal, the telephone number of the person from whom it may be recovered,
and the address of the place to which it has been taken and from which it may
be recovered.
      (3)   Any information in the record that pertains to a particular motor
vehicle or vehicle shall be provided to any person who, either in person or
pursuant to a telephone call, identifies himself or herself as the owner or
operator of the motor vehicle or vehicle and requests information pertaining to
its location.
   (c)   Removal and storage charges.
      (1)   The owner of a motor vehicle that is ordered into storage pursuant
to §
404.10 or of a vehicle that is removed under authority of §
452.06 may reclaim it upon payment of any expenses or charges incurred in its
removal, in an amount not to exceed $70, and storage, in an amount not to
exceed $8 per 24 hour period; except that the charge for towing shall not
exceed $100, and the storage charge shall not exceed $12 per 24-hour period, if
the vehicle has a laden gross vehicle weight in excess of 15,000 pounds and is
a truck, bus or a combination of a commercial tractor and trailer or
semitrailer.
      (2)   Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a
certificate of title to the motor vehicle or vehicle shall also be required for
reclamation of the vehicle.
      (3)   If a motor vehicle that is ordered into storage pursuant to §
404.10 remains unclaimed by the owner for 30 days, the procedures established
by R.C. § 4513.61 and 4513.62 shall apply.
(Ord. 97.01, passed 3-3-1997)
§ 452.18 LEAVING JUNK AND OTHER VEHICLES ON PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY WITH THE
PERMISSION OF THE OWNER.
   (a)   No person shall willfully leave a junk motor vehicle, as defined in §
452.16, uncovered in the open of private property for more than 72 consecutive
hours without the permission of the person who owns, occupies, controls or
otherwise has the right to the possession of the property, except if the person
is operating a junk yard or scrap metal processing facility licensed under the
authority of R.C. §§ 4737.05 to 4737.12, or regulated under the authority of
this municipality; or if the property on which the motor vehicle is left is not
subject to licensure or regulation by an governmental authority unless the
persons having the right to the possession of the property can establish that
the motor vehicle is part of a bonafide commercial operation, or if the motor
vehicle is a collector’s vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall willfully leave a junk motor vehicle uncovered
in the open for more than ten days after receipt of a notice as provided for in
this section.
      (2)   The fact that a junk motor vehicle is so left is prima-facie
evidence of willful failure to comply with the notice.
      (3)   A junk motor vehicle left uncovered in the open for more than ten
days after receipt of a notice as provided for in this section is declared a
nuisance and shall be abated in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (c)   This section shall not apply to vehicles stored inside a garage, in a
licensed towing service facility, in a licensed motor vehicle salvage facility,
in a licensed scrap processing yard, in a licensed auto repair garage yard, in
a licensed paint spray shop yard, in a licensed gasoline station yard, in a
licensed vehicle dealership yard, or in any other lawful storage area not
within the public view.
   (d)   (1)   In the event of a violation of this section, the village
solicitor, Mayor, Chief of Police or his or her designate, or municipal zoning
authority shall cause notice to be given to the titled owner of the motor
vehicle, or to the owner, lessee, agent or tenant having the right to
possession of such real property, if the titled owner of the motor vehicle is
unknown, to cease such violation within ten days of receipt of the notice.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, notice may be served in any manner
permitted under the Ohio Rules of Civil Procedure. If the address of the titled
owner of the motor vehicle or the owner, lessee, agent or tenant having the
right to possession of such property is unknown, it shall be sufficient to
publish the notice of the finding once in a newspaper of general circulation in
this municipality.
   (e)   The notice required to be given as set forth in division (d) above
shall state the following information:
      (1)   The nature of the public nuisance;
      (2)   The description of and location of the motor vehicle;
      (3)   A statement that the motor vehicle must be removed from the
premises within ten days after service of such notice and order of the same or
be removed;
      (4)   A statement that removal of the vehicle must be to a location
permitted by division (c) hereof;
      (5)   A statement of the penalties provided for noncompliance; and
      (6)   A statement that the property owner shall be assessed the costs
incurred by the village in removing and storing the vehicle.
   (f)   Should the person upon whom notice is served or the owner of the motor
vehicle, within ten days after receipt of the notice set forth in this section,
notify the Police Chief or his or her designate that the motor vehicle in issue
is either an abandoned motor vehicle or an abandoned junk motor vehicle which
has been left on his or her property without permission of the person having
the right to possession of the property and requests the removal thereof, the
Police Chief or his or her designate shall cause the removal of such vehicle
pursuant to §§
404.07,
404.10, or
452.05(g) respectively.
   (g)   (1)   If the owner of the motor vehicle or the person upon whom notice
is given fails to comply with this section within ten days of receipt of the
notice then, it shall be conclusively presumed that the motor vehicle in
question is a public nuisance and, in addition to any other penalty as set
forth in this chapter, the Police Chief or his or her designate, or the Mayor,
may cause such motor vehicle to be removed for the preservation of the life,
health, comfort and safety of the public by the direct employment of labor or
by authorizing another person to remove the motor vehicle on behalf of the
village and assess the cost of removal against either the owner of the motor
vehicle or the person upon whom notice was served.
      (2)   The fact that a junk motor vehicle is left on private property for
more than ten days after receipt of the notice as set forth in this section is
prima-facie evidence of willful failure to comply with the notice.
   (h)   In the event that the titled owner of the motor vehicle, or if the
titled owner of the motor vehicle is unknown, then the owner, lessee, agent or
tenant having the right to the possession of the real property upon which the
motor vehicle is situated, violates this section more than two times within any
one year period, then the notice of violation and ten day compliance period
shall not apply and such person shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this
section and shall be subject to the penalty established under this chapter.
   (i)   Any person may store or keep by unrestricted method any collectors
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4501.01(F) on private property with the permission
of the person having the right to the possession of the property, except that
such vehicle shall be concealed, by means of buildings, fences, vegetation,
terrain or other suitable obstruction, and unlicensed collectors vehicle stored
in the open.
   (h)   That in addition to the ability of the village to remove and impound
junk and other vehicles located on private or public property with the
permission of the owner, any person in violation of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor for the first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree
for each subsequent offense.
(Ord. 97.01, passed 3-3-1997; Am. Ord. 02-7, passed 7-8-2002)
§ 452.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
APPENDIX B: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Speed limits.
   
II.   Stop intersections.
   
III.   One-way traffic.
   
IV.   Heavy traffic.
CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to designate highway as included in a freeway, expressway or thruway -
see Ohio R.C. 4511.011
   Uniform system of traffic control devices - see Ohio R.C. 4511.09, 4511.11
   Placing and maintaining local traffic control devices- see Ohio R.C.
4511.10, 4511.11
   Alteration of prima facie speed limits - see Ohio R.C. 4511.21, 4511.22,
4511.23
   Power to erect stop signs at grade crossings - see Ohio R.C. 4511.61
   Designation of through streets and erection of stop or yield signs - see
Ohio R.C. 4511.65
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
 
Street       Restrictions             Speed Limit       Ord. No. Date Passed
Front Street From the village limits  25 miles per hour 00-2     - -2000
             north to 56 Front Street
 
(Ord. 00-2, passed - -2000)
SCHEDULE II. STOP INTERSECTIONS.
Stop Street Location - Intersecting Street Through Street Ord. No. Date Passed
            Where Stop Street
Stop Street     Location - Intersecting   Through Street  Ord. No. Date Passed
                Street Where Stop Street
                                          Main Street     2-7-68   7-1-1968
                                          West Alley      2-7-68   7-1-1968
South Street    At intersection with Main                 2-7-68   7-1-1968
                Street or West Alley
Hickory Alley   At intersection with Main                 2-7-68   7-1-1968
                Street or West Alley
Congress Street At intersection with Main                 2-7-68   7-1-1968
                Street or West Alley
North Alley     At intersection with Main                 2-7-68   7-1-1968
                Street or West Alley
Ostrich Street  At Sherbert Alley         Sherbert Alley  1-74     4-1-1974
Euphrates Alley At State Route 762        State Route 762 1-74     4-1-1974
Third Street    At Scioto Street          Scioto Street   1-74     4-1-1974
Sherbert Alley  At Cyrus Street           Cyrus Street    1-74     4-1-1974
 
(Ord. 2-7-68, passed 7-1-1968; Am. Ord. 1-74, passed 4-1-1974)
SCHEDULE III. ONE-WAY TRAFFIC.
Street Intersecting Streets Restriction Ord. No. Date Passed
Street Intersecting Streets                                                       Restriction Ord.  Date
                                                                                              No.   Passed
                                                                                  To permit
                                                                                  traffic to
                                                                                  proceed in
       One-way east from the point of its intersection with West Alley to its     only an
South  intersection with the Mt. Sterling and Commercial Point Road (State Route  easterly    1-67  7-3-
Street 762)                                                                       direction         1967
                                                                                  thereon the
                                                                                  entire
                                                                                  length
                                                                                  thereof
First  One-way traffic north from Harsh Alley to Scioto Street                                1-11- 11-16-
Street                                                                                        70    1970
Second One-way traffic south from Scioto Street to Harsh Alley                                1-11- 11-16-
Street                                                                                        70    1970
Harsh  One-way traffic in an easterly direction the entire length                             1-11- 11-16-
Alley                                                                                         70    1970
West   One-way south from North Alley to Community Men’s Club Drive and one-way             03-2  3-3-
Alley  south from Brown Alley to Carmel Court                                                       2003
North  One-way west from Main Street to West Alley                                            03-2  3-3-
Alley                                                                                               2003
Third  One-way going south between West Scioto Street and Harsh Street                        2024- 2-5-
Street                                                                                        01    2024
 
(Ord. 1-67, passed 7-3-1967; Am. Ord. 1-11-70, passed 11-16-1970; Am. Ord. 03-
2, passed 3-3-2003)
SCHEDULE IV: HEAVY TRAFFIC.
 
Street      Restriction
            No vehicle, including trailers, and semitrailers, designed to haul
South Alley or carry property with a gross weight of three or more tons, shall
            drive upon South Alley
 
(Ord. 10.34, passed 4-4-1960)
PART SIX: GENERAL OFFENSES CODE
                  
Chap. 606.   General Provisions.
                  
Chap. 612.   Alcoholic Beverages.
                  
Chap. 618.   Animals.
                  
Chap. 624.   Drugs.
                  
Chap. 630.   Gambling.
                  
Chap. 636.   Offenses Relating to Persons.
                  
Chap. 642.   Offenses Relating to Property.
                  
Chap. 648.   Peace Disturbances.
                  
Chap. 654.   Public Service, Administration and Enforcement.
                  
Chap. 660.   Safety, Sanitation and Health.
                  
Chap. 666.   Sex Related Offenses.
                  
Chap. 672.   Theft and Fraud.
                  
Chap. 678.   Weapons and Explosives.
                  
Chap. 698.   Penalties and Sentencing.
CHAPTER 606
General Provisions
606.02   Definitions.
606.02   Classification of offenses.
606.03   Offenses defined.
606.04   Rules of construction.
606.05   Criminal law jurisdiction.
606.06   Limitation on criminal prosecutions.
606.07   Requirements for criminal liability; voluntary intoxication.
606.08   Culpable mental states.
606.09   Organizational criminal liability.
606.10   Personal accountability for organizational conduct.
606.11   Attempts.
606.12   Complicity.
606.13   Self defense; limitations on duty to retreat prior to using force.
606.14   Curfew.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Burden and degree of proof, see R.C. § 2901.05
   Definition of “imprisoned”, see R.C. § 1.05
   Statute of limitations for income tax violations, see R.C. § 718.06
   Venue, see R.C. §§ 2901.12, 2931.29 et seq.
§ 606.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRABAND. Any property that is illegal for a person to acquire or possess
under a statute, ordinance, or rule, or that a trier of fact lawfully
determines to be illegal to possess by reason of the property’s involvement in
an offense. The term includes but is not limited to all of the following:
      (1)   Any controlled substance, as defined in R.C. § 3719.01, or any
device or paraphernalia related thereto;
      (2)   Any unlawful gambling device or paraphernalia;
      (3)   Any dangerous ordnance or obscene material.
   DANGEROUS OFFENDER. A person who has committed an offense, whose history,
character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she will be a
danger to others, and whose conduct has been characterized by a pattern of
repetitive, compulsive or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences.
   DEADLY FORCE. Any force that carries a substantial risk that it will
proximately result in the death of any person.
   FORCE. Any violence, compulsion, or constraint physically exerted by any
means upon or against a person or thing.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any of the following:
      (1)   A Sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police officer of a township
or joint police district, Marshal, deputy marshal, municipal police officer,
member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under
R.C. § 3735.31(D) or state highway patrol trooper.
      (2)   An officer, agent, or employee of the state or any of its agencies,
instrumentalities, or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, a duty to
conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the
authority to arrest violators is conferred, within the limits of such statutory
duty and authority.
      (3)   The Mayor, in a capacity as chief conservator of the peace within
the municipality.
      (4)   A member of an auxiliary police force organized by the county,
township, or municipal law enforcement authorities, within the scope of the
member’s appointment or commission.
      (5)   A person lawfully called pursuant to R.C. § 311.07 to aid a sheriff
in keeping the peace, for the purposes and during the time when the person is
called.
      (6)   A person appointed by a Mayor pursuant to R.C. § 737.10 as a
special patrolling officer during a riot or emergency, for the purposes and
during the time when the person is appointed.
      (7)   A member of the organized militia of this state or the armed forces
of the United States, lawfully called to duty to aid civil authorities in
keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence.
      (8)   A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, secret
service officer, or municipal prosecutor.
      (9)   A veterans’ home police officer appointed under R.C. § 5907.02.
      (10)   A member of a police force employed by a regional transit
authority under R.C. § 306.35(Y).
      (11)   A special police officer employed by a port authority under R.C. §
4582.04 or 4582.28.
      (12)   The House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms if the House of
Representatives Sergeant at Arms has arrest authority pursuant to R.C. §
101.311(E)(1) and an Assistant House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms.
      (13)   The Senate Sergeant at Arms and an Assistant Senate Sergeant at
Arms;
      (14)   A special police officer employed by a municipal corporation at a
municipal airport, or other municipal air navigation facility, that has
scheduled operations, as defined in 14 C.F.R. § 119.3, as amended, and that is
required to be under a security program and is governed by aviation security
rules of the Transportation Security Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation as provided in 49 C.F.R. parts 1542 and 1544, as
amended.
   NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF INSANITY. A person is “not guilty by reason of
insanity” relative to a charge of an offense only if the person proves, in the
manner specified in R.C. § 2901.05, that at the time of the commission of the
offense, he or she did not know, as a result of a severe mental disease or
defect, the wrongfulness of his or her acts.
   OFFENSE OF VIOLENCE.
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.11,
2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.15, 2903.18, 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, 2905.01,
2905.02, 2905.11, 2905.32, 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.05, 2909.02, 2909.03,
2909.24, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2917.01, 2917.02, 2917.03, 2917.31,
2917.321, 2919.25, 2921.03, 2921.04, 2921.34, or 2923.161, of division (A)(1)
of R.C. § 2903.34, of division (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of R.C. § 2911.12, or
of division (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3) or (B)(4) of R.C. § 2919.22, or felonious
sexual penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States, substantially equivalent to
any section, division or offense listed in division (1) of this definition;
      (3)   An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an existing or
former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or of the United
States, committed purposely or knowingly, and involving physical harm to
persons or a risk of serious physical harm to persons;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition;
      (5)   A violation of division (C) of R.C. § 959.131.
   PERSON.
      (1)   (a)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, as used in any
section contained in Title XIII of this code that sets forth a criminal
offense, the term includes all of the following:
            1.   An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership and association.
            2.   An unborn human who is viable.
         (b)   As used in any section contained in Title XIII of this code that
does not set forth a criminal offense, the term includes an individual,
corporation, business trust, estate, partnership and association.
         (c)   As used in division (1)A.2. of this definition, “unborn human”
means an individual organism of the species Homo sapiens from fertilization
until live birth. “Viable” means the stage of development of a human fetus at
which there is a realistic probability of maintaining and nourishing of a life
outside the womb with or without temporary artificial life-sustaining support.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (1)A. of this definition, in no case shall
the portion of the definition of the term “person” that is set forth in
division (1)A.2. of this definition be applied or construed in any section
contained in Title XIII of this code that sets forth a criminal offense in any
of the following manners:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (2)A. of this
definition, in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as
prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion
with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman
implied by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise
authorized by law to consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant
woman. An abortion that violates the conditions described in the immediately
preceding sentence may be punished as a violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02,
2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13,
2903.14, 2903.21 or 2903.22, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, as applicable. An abortion that does not violate the conditions
described in the second immediately preceding sentence but that does violate
R.C. § 2919.12, 2919.13(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of
such section, as applicable. Consent is sufficient under this division if it is
of the type otherwise adequate to permit medical treatment to the pregnant
woman, even if it does not comply with R.C. § 2919.12.
         (b)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
            1.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby;
            2.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying;
            3.   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who
dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human;
            4.   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human;
            5.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in
any other manner, an injury, illness, or other psychological illness or
condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human
that she is carrying.
   PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any injury, illness, or other physiological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
   PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any tangible or intangible damage to property
that, in any degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with its use or
enjoyment. The term does not include wear and tear occasioned by normal use.
   PRIVILEGE. An immunity, license, or right conferred by law, or bestowed by
express or implied grant, or arising out of status, position, office, or
relationship, or growing out of necessity.
   PROPERTY.
      (1)   Any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, and any
interest or license in that property. The term includes but is not limited to
cable television service, other telecommunications service, telecommunications
devices, information service, computers, data, computer software, financial
instruments associated with computers, other documents associated with
computers, or copies of the documents, whether in machine or human-readable
form, trade secrets, trademarks, copyrights, patents, and property protected by
a trademark, copyright or patent. “Financial instruments associated with
computers” include but are not limited to checks, drafts, warrants, money
orders, notes of indebtedness, certificates of deposit, letters of credit,
bills of credit or debit cards, financial transaction authorization mechanisms,
marketable securities, or any computer system representations of any of them.
      (2)   As used in this definition, “trade secret” has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 1333.61, and “telecommunications service” and “information service”
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (3)   As used in this definition and in the definition of CONTRABAND in
this section, “cable television service”, “computer”, “computer network”,
“computer software”, “computer system”, “data”, and “telecommunications device”
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   REPEAT OFFENDER. A person who has a history of persistent criminal activity
and whose character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she will
commit another offense. It is prima facie evidence that a person is a repeat
offender if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Having been convicted of one or more offenses of violence, as
defined in R.C. § 2901.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent offense of
violence;
      (2)   Having been convicted of one or more sexually oriented offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2950.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent sexually oriented
offense;
      (3)   Having been convicted of one or more theft offenses, as defined in
R.C. § 2913.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for one or more
of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent theft offense;
      (4)   Having been convicted of one or more felony drug abuse offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2925.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent felony drug abuse
offense;
      (5)   Having been convicted of two or more felonies, and having been
imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense, he or she commits a
subsequent offense;
      (6)   Having been convicted of three or more offenses of any type or
degree other than traffic offenses, alcoholic intoxication offenses, or minor
misdemeanors, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such
offense, he or she commits a subsequent offense.
   RISK. A significant possibility, as contrasted with a remote possibility,
that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances may exist.
   SCHOOL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   SCHOOL ACTIVITY. Any activity held under the auspices of a board of
education of a city, local, exempted village, joint vocational or cooperative
education school district; a governing authority of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314; a governing board of an educational
service center; or the governing body of a nonpublic school for which the
Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards under R.C. §
3301.07.
   SCHOOL BUILDING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   SCHOOL PREMISES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   SCHOOL SAFETY ZONE. Consists of a school, school building, school premises,
school activity, and school bus.
   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would normally
require hospitalization or prolonged psychiatric treatment;
      (2)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
      (3)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent incapacity, whether
partial or total, or that involves some temporary, substantial incapacity;
      (4)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent disfigurement, or
that involves some temporary, serious disfigurement;
      (5)   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of such duration as to
result in substantial suffering, or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.
   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any physical harm to property that does
either of the following:
      (1)   Results in substantial loss to the value of the property, or
requires a substantial amount of time, effort, or money to repair or replace;
      (2)   Temporarily prevents the use or enjoyment of the property, or
substantially interferes with its use or enjoyment for an extended period of
time.
   SUBSTANTIAL RISK. A strong possibility, as contrasted with a remote or
significant possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain
circumstances may exist.
(R.C. §§ 2901.01, 2921.01)
§ 606.02 CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES.
   As used in this general offenses code:
   (a)   Offenses include misdemeanors of the first, second, third and fourth
degree, minor misdemeanors and offenses not specifically classified.
   (b)   Regardless of the penalty that may be imposed, any offense
specifically classified as a misdemeanor is a misdemeanor.
   (c)   Any offense not specifically classified is a misdemeanor if
imprisonment for not more than one year may be imposed as a penalty.
   (d)   Any offense not specifically classified is a minor misdemeanor if the
only penalty that may be imposed is one of the following:
      (1)   For an offense committed prior to January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding $100;
      (2)   For an offense committed on or after January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding $150, community service under R.C. § 2929.27(D), or a financial
sanction other than a fine under R.C. § 2929.28.
(R.C. § 2901.02)
§ 606.03 OFFENSES DEFINED.
   (a)   No conduct constitutes a criminal offense against the municipality
unless it is defined as an offense in this general offenses code.
   (b)   An offense is defined when one or more sections of this general
offenses code state a positive prohibition or enjoin a specific duty, and
provide a penalty for violation of the prohibition or failure to meet that
duty.
   (c)   This section does not affect the power of a court to punish for
contempt or to employ any sanction authorized by law to enforce an order, civil
judgment or decree.
(R.C. § 2901.03)
§ 606.04 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c) or (d) of this section,
sections of this general offenses code defining offenses or penalties shall be
strictly construed against the municipality and liberally construed in favor of
the accused.
   (b)   Rules of criminal procedure and sections of this general offenses code
providing for criminal procedure shall be construed so as to effect the fair,
impartial, speedy and sure administration of justice.
   (c)   Any provision of a section of this general offenses code that refers
to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of a section of
this general offenses code, the Ohio Revised Code or a division of a section of
this general offenses code or the Ohio Revised Code shall be construed to also
refer to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a substantially
equivalent offense under an existing or former law of this municipality, state,
another state or the United States or under an existing or former municipal
ordinance.
   (d)   Any provision of this code that refers to a section, or to a division
of a section, of this code that defines or specifies a criminal offense shall
be construed to also refer to an existing or former law of this state, another
state or the United States, to an existing or former municipal ordinance, or to
an existing or former division of any such existing or former law or ordinance
that defines or specifies, or that defined or specified, a substantially
equivalent offense.
(R.C. § 2901.04)
§ 606.05 CRIMINAL LAW JURISDICTION.
   (a)   A person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality if any of the following occur:
      (1)   The person commits an offense under the laws of this municipality,
any element of which takes place in this municipality;
      (2)   While in this municipality, the person attempts to commit, or is
guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in another jurisdiction,
which offense is an offense under both the laws of this municipality and the
other jurisdiction, or, while in this municipality, the person conspires to
commit an offense in another jurisdiction, which offense is an offense under
both the laws of this municipality and the other jurisdiction, and a
substantial overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy is undertaken in this
municipality by the person or another person involved in the conspiracy,
subsequent to the person’s entrance into the conspiracy. In any case in which a
person attempts to commit, is guilty of complicity in the commission of, or
conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction as described in this
division, the person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality for the attempt, complicity or conspiracy, and for any resulting
offense that is committed or completed in the other jurisdiction;
      (3)   While out of this municipality, the person conspires or attempts to
commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in this
municipality;
      (4)   While out of this municipality, the person omits to perform a legal
duty imposed by the laws of this municipality, which omission affects a
legitimate interest of the municipality in protecting, governing or regulating
any person, property, thing, transaction or activity in this municipality;
      (5)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
retains property and subsequently brings any of the unlawfully taken or
retained property into this municipality;
      (6)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
entices another person and subsequently brings the other person into this
municipality;
      (7)   The person, by means of a computer, computer system, computer
network, telecommunication, telecommunications device, telecommunications
service or information service, causes or knowingly permits any writing, data,
image or other telecommunication to be disseminated or transmitted into this
municipality in violation of the law of this state or municipality.
   (b)   In homicide, the element referred to in division (a)(1) of this
section includes the act that causes death, the physical contact that causes
death, the death itself, or any other element that is set forth in the offense
in question. If any part of the body of a homicide victim is found in this
municipality, the death is presumed to have occurred within this municipality.
   (c)   (1)   This municipality includes the land and water within its
boundaries and the air space above that land and water, with respect to which
this municipality has either exclusive or concurrent legislative jurisdiction.
Where the boundary between this municipality and another jurisdiction is
disputed, the disputed territory is conclusively presumed to be within this
municipality for purposes of this section.
      (2)   The Courts of Common Pleas of Adams, Athens, Belmont, Brown,
Clermont, Columbiana, Gallia, Hamilton, Jefferson, Lawrence, Meigs, Monroe,
Scioto and Washington counties have jurisdiction beyond the north or northwest
shore of the Ohio River extending to the opposite shore line, between the
extended boundary lines of any adjacent counties or adjacent state. Each of
those Courts of Common Pleas has concurrent jurisdiction on the Ohio River with
any adjacent Court of Common Pleas that borders on that river and with any
court of Kentucky or of West Virginia that borders on the Ohio River and that
has jurisdiction on the Ohio River under the law of Kentucky or the law of West
Virginia, whichever is applicable, or under federal law.
   (d)   When an offense is committed under the laws of this municipality, and
it appears beyond a reasonable doubt that the offense or any element of the
offense took place either in this municipality or in another jurisdiction or
jurisdictions, but it cannot reasonably be determined in which it took place,
the offense or element is conclusively presumed to have taken place in this
municipality for purposes of this section.
   (e)   When a person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in
this municipality for an offense committed or completed outside this
municipality, the person is subject to all specifications for that offense that
would be applicable if the offense had been committed within this municipality.
   (f)   Any act, conduct or element that is a basis of a person being subject
under this section to criminal prosecution and punishment in this municipality
need not be committed personally by the person as long as it is committed by
another person who is in complicity or conspiracy with the person.
   (g)   This section shall be liberally construed, consistent with
constitutional limitations, to allow this municipality the broadest possible
jurisdiction over offenses and persons committing offenses in, or affecting,
this municipality.
   (h)   For purposes of division (a)(2) of this section, an overt act is
substantial when it is of a character that manifests a purpose on the part of
the actor that the object of the conspiracy should be completed.
   (i)   As used in this section, COMPUTER, COMPUTER SYSTEM, COMPUTER NETWORK,
INFORMATION SERVICE, TELECOMMUNICATION, TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE,
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE, DATA and WRITING have the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 2913.01.
(R.C. § 2901.11)
§ 606.06 LIMITATION ON CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), (a)(5),
or (a)(6) of this section or as otherwise provided in this section, a
prosecution shall be barred unless it is commenced within the following periods
after an offense is committed:
         A.   For a felony, six years;
         B.   For a misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor, two years;
         C.   For a minor misdemeanor, six months.
      (2)   There is no period of limitation for the prosecution of a violation
of R.C. § 2903.01 or 2903.02 or for the prosecution of a conspiracy to commit,
attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or
R.C. § 2903.02.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (b) to (j) of this
section, a prosecution of any of the following offenses shall be barred unless
it is commenced within 20 years after the offense is committed:
         A.   A violation of R.C. § 2903.03, 2903.04, 2905.01, 2905.32,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.21, 2909.02, 2909.22, 2909.23, 2909.24, 2909.26,
2909.27, 2909.28, 2909.29, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12 or 2917.02, a
violation of R.C. § 2903.11 or 2903.12 if the victim is a peace officer, a
violation of R.C. § 2903.13 that is a felony, or a violation of former R.C. §
2907.12.
         B.   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing a violation set forth in division (a)(3)A. of this section.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (d) to (l) of this
section, a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 or a
conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a
violation of either section shall be barred unless it is commenced within 25
years after the offense is committed.
      (5)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (a)(5)B. and (e) to
(i) of this section, a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2907.13 shall be
barred unless it is commenced within five years after the offense is committed.
         B.   Prosecution that would otherwise be barred under division (a)
(5)A. of this section may be commenced within five years after the date of the
discovery of the offense by either an aggrieved person or the aggrieved
person’s legal representative who is not a party to the offense.
         C.   As used in division (a)(5)B. of this section, AGGRIEVED PERSON
includes any of the following individuals with regard to a violation of R.C. §
2907.13:
            1.   A patient who was the victim of the violation;
            2.   The spouse or surviving spouse of a patient who was the victim
of the violation;
            3.   Any child born as a result of the violation.
      (6)   A prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2151.421(A)(1) or (A)(4),
which is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, or a misdemeanor of the first
degree under circumstances specified in R.C. § 2151.99, is barred unless it is
commenced within four years after the violation is committed.
   (b)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2) of this section,
if the period of limitation provided in division (a)(1) or (a)(3) of this
section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an offense of which an
element is fraud or breach of fiduciary duty within one year after discovery of
the offense either by an aggrieved person or by the aggrieved person’s legal
representative who is not a party to the offense.
      (2)   If the period of limitation provided in division (a)(1) or (a)(3)
of this section has expired, prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2913.49
shall be commenced within five years after discovery of the offense either by
an aggrieved person or the aggrieved person’s legal representative who is not a
party to the offense.
   (c)   (1)   If the period of limitation provided in division (a)(1) or (a)
(3) of this section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for the
following offenses during the following specified periods of time:
         A.   For an offense involving misconduct in office by a public servant
at any time while the accused remains a public servant, or within two years
thereafter;
         B.   For an offense by a person who is not a public servant but whose
offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of a public servant, at
any time while that public servant remains a public servant, or within two
years thereafter.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   OFFENSE IS DIRECTLY RELATED TO THE MISCONDUCT IN OFFICE OF A
PUBLIC SERVANT. The phrase includes but is not limited to a violation of R.C. §
101.71, 101.91, 121.61 or 2921.13, 102.03(F) or (H), 2921.02(A), 2921.43(A) or
(B), or 3517.13(F) or (G), that is directly related to an offense involving
misconduct in office of a public servant, or a violation of any municipal
ordinance substantially equivalent to those Ohio Revised Code sections listed
in this division (c)(2)A.
         B.   PUBLIC SERVANT has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
   (d)   (1)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal
investigation of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 is
determined to match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and if
the time of the determination is later than 25 years after the offense is
committed, prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be
commenced within five years after the determination is complete.
      (2)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal investigation
of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 is determined to
match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and if the time of
the determination is within 25 years after the offense is committed,
prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be commenced
within the longer of 25 years after the offense is committed or five years
after the determination is complete.
      (3)   As used in this division, DNA RECORD has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 109.573.
   (e)   An offense is committed when every element of the offense occurs. In
the case of an offense of which an element is a continuing course of conduct,
the period of limitation does not begin to run until the course of conduct or
the accused’s accountability for it terminates, whichever occurs first.
   (f)   A prosecution is commenced on the date an indictment is returned or an
information filed, or on the date a lawful arrest without a warrant is made, or
on the date a warrant, summons, citation or other process is issued, whichever
occurs first. A prosecution is not commenced by the return of an indictment or
the filing of an information unless reasonable diligence is exercised to issue
and execute process on the same. A prosecution is not commenced upon issuance
of a warrant, summons, citation or other process unless reasonable diligence is
exercised to execute the same.
   (g)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the corpus
delicti remains undiscovered.
   (h)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the
accused purposely avoids prosecution. Proof that the accused departed this
municipality or conceals the accused’s identity or whereabouts is prima facie
evidence of the accused’s purpose to avoid prosecution.
   (i)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time a prosecution
against the accused based on the same conduct is pending in this state, even
though the indictment, information or process that commenced the prosecution is
quashed or the proceedings on the indictment, information or process are set
aside or reversed on appeal.
   (j)   The period of limitation for a violation of this Part 6 or Title XXIX
of the Ohio Revised Code that involves a physical or mental wound, injury,
disability or condition of a nature that reasonably indicates abuse or neglect
of a child under 18 years of age or of a child with a developmental disability
or physical impairment under 21 years of age shall not begin to run until
either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The victim of the offense reaches the age of majority.
      (2)   A public children services agency, or a municipal or county peace
officer that is not the parent or guardian of the child, in the county in which
the child resides or in which the abuse or neglect is occurring or has occurred
has been notified that abuse or neglect is known, suspected or believed to have
occurred.
   (k)   As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2935.01.
   (l)   (1)   The amendments to divisions (a) and (d) of this section that
took effect on July 16, 2015, apply to a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03
committed on and after July 16, 2015, and apply to a violation of either of
those sections committed prior to July 16, 2015, if prosecution for that
violation was not barred under this section as it existed on July 16, 2015.
      (2)   The amendment to division (a)(2) of this section that took effect
on April 4, 2023, applies to a conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or
complicity in committing a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02 if the
conspiracy, attempt, or complicity is committed on or after April 4, 2023, and
applies to a conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing a violation of either of those sections if the conspiracy, attempt,
or complicity was committed prior to April 4, 2023, and prosecution for that
conspiracy, attempt, or complicity was not barred under this section as it
existed on the day prior to April 4, 2023.
(R.C. § 2901.13)
§ 606.07 REQUIREMENTS FOR CRIMINAL LIABILITY; VOLUNTARY INTOXICATION.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, a person is not
guilty of an offense unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person’s liability is based on conduct that includes either a
voluntary act, or an omission to perform an act or duty that the person is
capable of performing;
      (2)   The person has the requisite degree of culpability for each element
as to which a culpable mental state is specified by the language defining the
offense.
   (b)   When the language defining an offense does not specify any degree of
culpability, and plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict criminal
liability for the conduct described in the section, then culpability is not
required for a person to be guilty of the offense. The fact that one division
of a section plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict liability for an
offense defined in that division does not by itself plainly indicate a purpose
to impose strict criminal liability for an offense defined in other divisions
of the section that do not specify a degree of culpability.
   (c)   (1)   When language defining an element of an offense that is related
to knowledge or intent or to which mens rea could fairly be applied neither
specifies culpability nor plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict
liability, the element of the offense is established only if a person acts
recklessly.
      (2)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not apply to offenses defined
in R.C. Title XLV.
      (3)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not relieve the prosecution of
the burden of proving the culpable mental state required by any definition
incorporated into the offense.
   (d)   Voluntary intoxication may not be taken into consideration in
determining the existence of a mental state that is an element of a criminal
offense. Voluntary intoxication does not relieve a person of a duty to act if
failure to act constitutes a criminal offense. Evidence that a person was
voluntarily intoxicated may be admissible to show whether or not the person was
physically capable of performing the act with which the person is charged.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CULPABILITY. Purpose, knowledge, recklessness or negligence, as
defined in R.C. § 2901.22.
      (2)   INTOXICATION. Includes but is not limited to intoxication resulting
from the ingestion of alcohol, a drug, or alcohol and a drug.
      (3)   INVOLUNTARY ACTS. Reflexes, convulsions, body movements during
unconsciousness or sleep, and body movements that are not otherwise a product
of the actor’s volition are “involuntary acts.”
      (4)   POSSESSION. A voluntary act if the possessor knowingly procured or
received the thing possessed, or was aware of the possessor’s control of the
thing possessed for a sufficient time to have ended possession.
(R.C. § 2901.21)
§ 606.08 CULPABLE MENTAL STATES.
   (a)   A person acts purposely when it is the person’s specific intention to
cause a certain result, or, when the gist of the offense is a prohibition
against conduct of a certain nature, regardless of what the offender intends to
accomplish thereby, it is the offender’s specific intention to engage in
conduct of that nature.
   (b)   A person acts knowingly, regardless of purpose, when the person is
aware that the person’s conduct will probably cause a certain result or will
probably be of a certain nature. A person has knowledge of circumstances when
the person is aware that such circumstances probably exist. When knowledge of
the existence of a particular fact is an element of an offense, such knowledge
is established if a person subjectively believes that there is a high
probability of its existence and fails to make inquiry or acts with a conscious
purpose to avoid learning the fact.
   (c)   A person acts recklessly when, with heedless indifference to the
consequences, the person disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that
the person’s conduct is likely to cause a certain result or is likely to be of
a certain nature. A person is reckless with respect to circumstances when, with
heedless indifference to the consequences, the person disregards a substantial
and unjustifiable risk that such circumstances are likely to exist.
   (d)   A person acts negligently when, because of a substantial lapse from
due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that the person’s
conduct may cause a certain result or may be of a certain nature. A person is
negligent with respect to circumstances when, because of a substantial lapse
from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that such
circumstances may exist.
   (e)   When the section defining an offense provides that negligence suffices
to establish an element thereof, then recklessness, knowledge or purpose is
also sufficient culpability for that element. When recklessness suffices to
establish an element of an offense, then knowledge or purpose is also
sufficient culpability for that element. When knowledge suffices to establish
an element of an offense, then purpose is also sufficient culpability for that
element.
(R.C. § 2901.22)
§ 606.09 ORGANIZATIONAL CRIMINAL LIABILITY.
   (a)   An organization may be convicted of an offense under any of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   The offense is a minor misdemeanor committed by an officer, agent
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or employment, except that if the
section defining the offense designates the officers, agents or employees for
whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which
it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (2)   A purpose to impose organizational liability plainly appears in the
section defining the offense, and the offense is committed by an officer, agent
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or employment, except that if the
section defining the offense designates the officers, agents or employees for
whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which
it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (3)   The offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty
imposed by law on the organization.
      (4)   If, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for the
commission of the offense, its commission was authorized, requested, commanded,
tolerated or performed by the board of directors, trustees, partners, or by a
high managerial officer, agent or employee acting in behalf of the organization
and within the scope of such a board’s or person’s office or employment.
   (b)   If strict liability is imposed for the commission of an offense, a
purpose to impose organizational liability shall be presumed, unless the
contrary plainly appears.
   (c)   In a prosecution of an organization for an offense other than one for
which strict liability is imposed, it is a defense that the high managerial
officer, agent or employee having supervisory responsibility over the subject
matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent its commission. This
defense is not available if it plainly appears inconsistent with the purpose of
the section defining the offense.
   (d)   As used in this section, ORGANIZATION means a corporation for profit
or not for profit, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated nonprofit association, estate, trust or other commercial or
legal entity. ORGANIZATION does not include an entity organized as or by a
governmental agency for the execution of a governmental program.
(R.C. § 2901.23)
§ 606.10 PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY FOR ORGANIZATIONAL CONDUCT.
   (a)   An officer, agent or employee of an organization, as defined in R.C. §
2901.23, may be prosecuted for an offense committed by the organization, if he
or she acts with the kind of culpability required for the commission of the
offense, and any of the following apply:
      (1)   In the name of the organization or in its behalf, he or she engages
in conduct constituting the offense, or causes another to engage in that
conduct, or tolerates that conduct when it is of a type for which he or she has
direct responsibility;
      (2)   He or she has primary responsibility to discharge a duty imposed on
the organization by law, and the duty is not discharged.
   (b)   When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of this section, he
or she is subject to the same penalty as if he or she had acted in his or her
own behalf.
(R.C. § 2901.24)
§ 606.11 ATTEMPTS.
   (a)   No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or knowledge is
sufficient culpability for the commission of an offense, shall engage in
conduct that, if successful, would constitute or result in the offense.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in retrospect,
commission of the offense that was the object of the attempt was either
factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances, if that
offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the
actor believed them to be.
   (c)   No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense, of
complicity in the commission of an offense or of conspiracy to commit an
offense, shall be convicted of an attempt to commit the same offense in
violation of this section.
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor abandoned his or her effort to commit the offense or otherwise prevented
its commission, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary
renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt to commit an
offense. An attempt to commit aggravated murder, murder or an offense for which
the maximum penalty is imprisonment for life is a felony of the first degree,
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to commit a drug abuse
offense for which the penalty is determined by the amount or number of unit
doses of the controlled substance involved in the drug abuse offense is an
offense of the same degree as the drug abuse offense attempted would be if that
drug abuse offense had been committed and had involved an amount or number of
unit doses of the controlled substance that is within the next lower range of
controlled substance amounts than was involved in the attempt. An attempt to
commit any other offense is an offense of the next lesser degree than the
offense attempted. In the case of an attempt to commit an offense other than a
violation of R.C. Chapter 3734 that is not specifically classified, an attempt
is a misdemeanor of the first degree if the offense attempted is a felony, and
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the offense attempted is a misdemeanor.
In the case of an attempt to commit a violation of any provision of R.C.
Chapter 3734, other than R.C. § 3734.18, that relates to hazardous wastes, an
attempt is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to
commit a minor misdemeanor, or to engage in conspiracy, is not an offense under
this section.
   (f)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
      (2)   MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
(R.C. § 2923.02)
§ 606.12 COMPLICITY.
   (a)   No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for the
commission of an offense, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Solicit or procure another to commit the offense;
      (2)   Aid or abet another in committing the offense;
      (3)   Conspire with another to commit the offense in violation of R.C. §
2923.01;
      (4)   Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the offense.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person with
whom the accused was in complicity has been convicted as a principal offender.
   (c)   No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section unless
an offense is actually committed, but a person may be convicted of complicity
in an attempt to commit an offense in violation of R.C. § 2923.02 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against the
defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with complicity in the
commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an attempt to commit an
offense, or an offense, the court shall charge the jury in accordance with R.C.
§ 2923.03(D).
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that,
prior to the commission of or attempt to commit the offense, the actor
terminated his or her complicity, under circumstances manifesting a complete
and voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the
commission of an offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished as if he or she
were a principal offender. A charge of complicity may be stated in terms of
this section, or in terms of the principal offense.
(R.C. § 2923.03)
§ 606.13 SELF DEFENSE; LIMITATIONS ON DUTY TO RETREAT PRIOR TO USING FORCE.
   (a)   As used in this section, RESIDENCE has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2901.05.
   (b)   For purposes of any section of this code that sets forth a criminal
offense, a person has no duty to retreat before using force in self-defense,
defense of another, or defense of that person’s residence if that person is in
a place in which the person lawfully has a right to be.
   (c)   A trier of fact shall not consider the possibility of retreat as a
factor in determining whether or not a person who used force in self-defense,
defense of another, or defense of that person’s residence reasonably believed
that the force was necessary to prevent injury, loss, or risk to life or
safety.
(R.C. § 2901.09)
§ 606.14 CURFEW.
   There is hereby established a curfew for children under the age of 18 years
within the village limits which shall read as follows.
   (a)   No minor under the age of 18 years shall loiter, idle, wander, stroll,
or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, public
buildings places of amusement and entertainment, or vacant lots, between the
hours of 10.30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, official village time.
The provisions of this section, however, do not apply to a minor accompanied by
his or her parent, guardian, or other person having the care and custody of the
minor, or when the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business
directed by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care
and custody of the minor.
   (b)   No parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody
of the minor under the age of 18 years shall knowingly permit such minor to
loiter idle, wander, stroll, or play in or upon the public streets, highways,
roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or public grounds, public places, and public
buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, or vacant lots, between the
hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, office village time.
The provisions of this section, however, do not apply when the minor
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the
care and custody of the minor, or if the minor is upon an emergency errand or
legitimate business directed by his or her parent, guardian, or other person
having the care and custody of the minor.
   (c)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty
of minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 99-10, passed 9-7-1999)
CHAPTER 612
Alcoholic Beverages
612.01   Definitions.
612.02   Sales to underage persons; prohibitions and misrepresentations.
612.03   Sales to intoxicated persons.
612.04   Consumption in motor vehicle.
612.05   Permit required.
612.06   Posting age and firearm warning signs.
612.07   Open container prohibited.
612.08   Hours of sale or consumption.
612.09   Conveying intoxicating liquor or cash onto grounds of detention
facilities or other specified governmental facilities.
612.10   Sales of low-alcohol beverages to underage persons; prohibitions and
misrepresentations.
612.11   Alcohol vaporizing devices prohibited.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Liquor Control Law, see R.C. Ch. 4301
   Liquor permits, see R.C. Ch. 4303
   Local option, see R.C. § 4303.29
   Suspension of alcohol sales during emergency, see R.C. § 4301.251
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Disorderly conduct while voluntarily intoxicated, see §
648.04
   Driving or physical control while intoxicated, see §
434.01
   Effect of voluntary intoxication on criminal liability, see §
606.07
   Using weapons while intoxicated, see §
678.04
§ 612.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, whether rectified or diluted with water or not,
whatever its origin may be, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol. The term does
not include denatured alcohol and wood alcohol.
   AT RETAIL. For use or consumption by the purchaser and not for resale.
   BEER.
      (1)   Includes all beverages brewed or fermented wholly or in part from
malt products and containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
      (2)   Beer, regardless of the percent of alcohol by volume, is not
intoxicating liquor for purposes of this code, the Ohio Revised Code, or any
rules adopted under it.
   CIDER. All liquids that are fit to use for beverage purposes that contain
0.5% of alcohol by volume, but not more than 6% of alcohol by weight that are
made through the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of sound, ripe
apples, including, without limitation, flavored, sparkling, or carbonated cider
and cider made from pure condensed apple must.
   CLUB. A corporation or association of individuals organized in good faith
for social, recreational, benevolent, charitable, fraternal, political,
patriotic, or athletic purposes, which is the owner, lessor, or occupant of a
permanent building or part of a permanent building operated solely for such
purposes, membership in which entails the prepayment of regular dues, and
includes the place so operated.
   COMMUNITY FACILITY. Means either of the following:
      (1)   Any convention, sports or entertainment facility or complex, or any
combination of these, that is used by or accessible to the general public and
that is owned or operated in whole or in part by the state, a state agency, or
a political subdivision of the state or that is leased from, or located on
property owned by or leased from, the state, a state agency, a political
subdivision of the state, or a convention facilities authority created pursuant
to R.C. § 351.02;
      (2)   An area designated as a community entertainment district pursuant
to R.C. § 4301.80.
   CONTROLLED ACCESS ALCOHOL AND BEVERAGE CABINET. A closed container, either
refrigerated, in whole or in part, or nonrefrigerated, access to the interior
of which is restricted by means of a device that requires the use of a key,
magnetic card, or similar device and from which beer, intoxicating liquor,
other beverages, or food may be sold.
   HOTEL. The same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01, subject to the exceptions
mentioned in R.C. § 3731.03.
   INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR. All liquids and compounds, other than beer,
containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume which are fit to use for beverage
purposes, from whatever source and by whatever process produced, by whatever
name called, and whether they are medicated, proprietary, or patented. The
terms include cider and alcohol, and all solids and confections which contain
0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
   LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGE. Any brewed or fermented malt product or any product
made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other agricultural
products that contains either no alcohol or less than 0.5% of alcohol by
volume. The beverages described in this definition do not include a soft drink
such as root beer, birch beer, or ginger beer.
   MANUFACTURE. All processes by which beer or intoxicating liquor is produced,
whether by distillation, rectifying, fortifying, blending, fermentation,
brewing, or in any other manner.
   MANUFACTURER. Any person engaged in the business of manufacturing beer or
intoxicating liquor.
   MIXED BEVERAGES. Include bottled and prepared cordials, cocktails,
highballs, and solids and confections that are obtained by mixing any type of
whiskey, neutral spirits, brandy, gin or other distilled spirits with, or over,
carbonated or plain water, pure juices from flowers and plants, and other
flavoring materials. The completed product shall contain not less than 0.5% of
alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume. The phrase
includes the contents of a pod.
   NIGHTCLUB. A place habitually operated for profit, where food is served for
consumption on the premises, and one or more forms of amusement are provided or
permitted for a consideration that may be in the form of a cover charge or may
be included in the price of the food and beverages, or both, purchased by
patrons.
   PERSON. Includes firms and corporations.
   PHARMACY. An establishment as defined in R.C. § 4729.01, that is under the
management or control of a licensed pharmacist in accordance with R.C. §
4729.27.
   POD. Means a sealed capsule made from plastic, glass, aluminum, or a
combination thereof to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The capsule contains intoxicating liquor of more than 21% of
alcohol by volume.
      (2)   The capsule also contains a concentrated flavoring mixture.
      (3)   The contents of the capsule are not readily accessible or intended
for consumption unless certain manufacturer’s processing instructions are
followed.
      (4)   The instructions include releasing the contents of the capsule
through a machine specifically designed to process the contents.
      (5)   After being properly processed according to the manufacturer’s
instructions, the final product produced from the capsule contains not less
than 0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume.
   RESTAURANT. A place located in a permanent building provided with space and
accommodations wherein, in consideration of the payment of money, hot meals are
habitually prepared, sold, and served at noon and evening, as the principal
business of the place. The term does not include pharmacies, confectionery
stores, lunch stands, nightclubs, and filling stations.
   SALE and SELL. The exchange, barter, gift, offer for sale, sale,
distribution, and delivery of any kind, and the transfer of title or possession
of beer and intoxicating liquor either by constructive or actual delivery by
any means or devices whatever, including the sale of beer or intoxicating
liquor by means of a controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet pursuant to
R.C. § 4301.21. Such terms do not include the mere solicitation of orders for
beer or intoxicating liquor from the holders of permits issued by the Division
of Liquor Control authorizing the sale of the beer or intoxicating liquor, but
no solicitor shall solicit any orders until the solicitor has been registered
with the Division pursuant to R.C. § 4303.25.
   SALES AREA OR TERRITORY. An exclusive geographic area or territory that is
assigned to a particular A or B permit holder and that either has one or more
political subdivisions as its boundaries or consists of an area of land with
readily identifiable geographic boundaries. The term does not include, however,
any particular retail location in an exclusive geographic area or territory
that had been assigned to another A or B permit holder before April 9, 2001.
   SEALED CONTAINER. Any container having a capacity of not more than 128 fluid
ounces, the opening of which is closed to prevent the entrance of air.
   SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR. All intoxicating liquors containing more than 21% of
alcohol by volume. The phrase does not include the contents of a pod.
   VEHICLE. All means of transportation by land, by water, or by air, and
everything made use of in any way for such transportation.
   WHOLESALE DISTRIBUTOR and DISTRIBUTOR. A person engaged in the business of
selling to retail dealers for purposes of resale.
   WINE. All liquids fit to use for beverage purposes containing not less than
0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume, that is
made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other agricultural
products. The term includes cider, except as used in R.C. §§ 4301.13, 4301.421,
4301.422, 4301.432, and 4301.44, and, for purposes of determining the rate of
the tax that applies, R.C. § 4301.43(B), the term does not include cider.
(R.C. §§ 4301.01, 4301.244)
§ 612.02 SALES TO UNDERAGE PERSONS; PROHIBITIONS AND MISREPRESENTATIONS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor to an underage person, shall
buy beer or intoxicating liquor for an underage person, or shall furnish it to
an underage person unless given by a physician in the regular line of the
physician’s practice or given for established religious purposes or unless the
underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage
person, or legal guardian. In proceedings before the Liquor Control Commission,
no permit holder, or no employee or agent of a permit holder, charged with a
violation of this division shall be charged, for the same offense, with a
violation of R.C. § 4301.22(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (b)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private place
shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place while
possessing or consuming beer or intoxicating liquor, unless the intoxicating
liquor or beer is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that
person’s parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian and
the parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present
at the time of the person’s possession or consumption of the beer or
intoxicating liquor. An owner of a public or private place is not liable for
acts or omissions in violation of this division that are committed by a lessee
of that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s acts
or omissions.
   (c)   No person shall engage or use accommodations at a hotel, inn, cabin,
campground or restaurant when the person knows or has reason to know either of
the following:
      (1)   That beer or intoxicating liquor will be consumed by an underage
person on the premises of the accommodations that the person engages or uses,
unless the person engaging or using the accommodations is the spouse of the
underage person and who is not an underage person, or is the parent or legal
guardian of all of the underage persons, who consume beer or intoxicating
liquor on the premises and that person is on the premises at all times when
beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by an underage person.
      (2)   That a drug of abuse will be consumed on the premises of the
accommodations by any person, except a person who obtained the drug of abuse
pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professionals authorized
to prescribe drugs and has the drug of abuse in the original container in which
it was dispensed to the person.
   (d)   (1)   No person is required to permit the engagement of accommodations
at any hotel, inn, cabin or campground by an underage person or for an underage
person, if the person engaging the accommodations knows or has reason to know
that the underage person is intoxicated, or that the underage person possesses
any beer or intoxicating liquor and is not supervised by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person, or legal guardian who is or will be present at all
times when the beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by the underage
person.
      (2)   No underage person shall knowingly engage or attempt to engage
accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin or campground by presenting
identification that falsely indicates that the underage person is 21 years of
age or older for the purpose of violating this section.
   (e)   (1)   No underage person shall knowingly order, pay for, share the
cost of, attempt to purchase, possess or consume any beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public or private place. No underage person shall knowingly be
under the influence of any beer or intoxicating liquor in any public place. The
prohibitions set forth in this division against an underage person knowingly
possessing, consuming or being under the influence of any beer or intoxicating
liquor shall not apply if the underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse
who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or the beer or intoxicating
liquor is given by a physician in the regular line of the physician’s practice
or given for established religious purposes.
      (2)   A.   If a person is charged with violating division (e)(1) of this
section in a complaint filed under R.C. § 2151.27, the court may order the
child into a diversion program specified by the court and hold the complaint in
abeyance pending successful completion of the diversion program. A child is
ineligible to enter into a diversion program under this division if the child
previously has been diverted pursuant to this division. If the child completes
the diversion program to the satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss
the complaint and order the child’s record in the case sealed under R.C. §§
2151.356 through 2151.358. If the child fails to satisfactorily complete the
diversion program, the court shall proceed with the complaint.
         B.   If a person is charged in a criminal complaint with violating
division (e)(1) of this section, R.C. § 2935.36 shall apply to the offense,
except that a person is ineligible for diversion under that section if the
person previously has been diverted pursuant to divisions (e)(2)A. or (e)(2)B.
of this section. If the person completes the diversion program to the
satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss the complaint and order the
record in the case sealed under R.C. § 2953.33. If the person fails to
satisfactorily complete the diversion program, the court shall proceed with the
complaint.
   (f)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
a minor shall knowingly permit the minor to violate this section or R.C. §
4301.63, 4301.633 or 4301.634, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (g)   The operator of any hotel, inn, cabin or campground shall make the
provisions of this section available in writing to any person engaging or using
accommodations at the hotel, inn, cabin or campground.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
      (2)   HOTEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01.
      (3)   LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS and
PRESCRIPTION. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
      (4)   MINOR. A person under the age of 18 years.
      (5)   UNDERAGE PERSON. A person under the age of 21 years.
(R.C. § 4301.69)
   (i)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person under the age of 21 years shall purchase beer or intoxicating liquor.
(R.C. § 4301.63)
   (j)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the name, age or
other identification of any person under 21 years of age, for the purpose of
obtaining, or with the intent to obtain, beer or intoxicating liquor for a
person under 21 years of age, by purchase or as a gift.
(R.C. § 4301.633)
   (k)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person under the age of 21 years shall knowingly show or give false
information concerning his or her name, age or other identification for the
purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining beer or intoxicating liquor in any
place in this municipality where beer or intoxicating liquor is sold under a
permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control, or sold by the Division of
Liquor Control.
(R.C. § 4301.634)
   (l)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor, shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, and in
addition to the fine, may be imprisoned for a definite term of not more than
six months.
(R.C. § 4301.99(I))
   (m)   Whoever violates division (b), (c), (d),(f), (g) or (j) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
   (n)   Whoever violates division (e)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If an offender who violates division (e)(1) of
this section was under the age of 18 years at the time of the offense and the
offense occurred while the offender was the operator of or a passenger in a
motor vehicle, the court, in addition to any other penalties it imposes upon
the offender, shall suspend the offender’s temporary instruction permit or
probationary driver’s license for a period of not less than six months and not
more than one year. If the offender is 15 years and six months of age or older
and has not been issued a temporary instruction permit or probationary driver’s
license, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or
permit for a period of six months. If the offender has not attained the age of
15 years and six months, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a
temporary instruction permit until the offender attains the age of 16 years.
(R.C. § 4301.99(D))
   (o)   Whoever violates division (i) of this section shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $100. The court imposing a fine for a violation of this
section may order that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at a
reasonable hour rate established by the court. The court shall designate the
time within which the public work shall be completed.
(R.C. § 4301.99(E))
   (p)   (1)   Whoever violates division (k) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If, in committing a first violation of
division (k), the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $250 and not
more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more
than six months.
      (2)   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the offender
presented to the permit holder or his or her employee or agent a false,
fictitious or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver’s
license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s license issued by any
state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, and
may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months. The
court also may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operation privilege from
the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
      (3)   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or
subsequent time, the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more
than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than
six months. Except as provided in this division, the court also may impose a
class six suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that the suspension or denial remain in
effect until the offender attains the age of 21 years. The court, in lieu of
suspending the offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s
license, or driver’s license, instead may order the offender to perform a
determinate number of hours of community service, with the court determining
the actual number of hours and the nature of the community service the offender
shall perform.
(R.C. § 4301.99(F))
§ 612.03 SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS.
   (a)   No permit holder and no agent or employee of a permit holder shall
sell or furnish beer or intoxicating liquor to an intoxicated person.
(R.C. § 4301.22(B))
   (b)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(D), (H))
§ 612.04 CONSUMPTION IN MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (a)   No person shall consume any beer or intoxicating liquor in a motor
vehicle. This section does not apply to persons described in R.C. § 4301.62(D)
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 4301.64)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If an offender who violates this section was under the age of 18 years
at the time of the offense, the court, in addition to any other penalties it
imposes upon the offender, may suspend the offender’s temporary instruction
permit, probationary driver’s license or driver’s license for a period of not
less than six months and not more than one year. In lieu of suspending the
offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or
driver’s license, the court instead may require the offender to perform
community service for a number of hours determined by the court. If the
offender is 15 years and six months of age or older and has not been issued a
temporary instruction permit or probationary driver’s license, the offender
shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or permit for a period of six
months. If the offender has not attained the age of 15 years and six months,
the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a temporary instruction permit
until the offender attains the age of 16 years.
(R.C. § 4301.99(B))
§ 612.05 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   (1)   No person personally or by the person’s clerk, agent or
employee, shall manufacture, manufacture for sale, offer, keep or possess for
sale, furnish or sell, or solicit the purchase or sale of any beer or
intoxicating liquor in this state, or transport, import or cause to be
transported or imported any beer, intoxicating liquor or alcohol in or into
this municipality for delivery, use or sale, unless the person has fully
complied with R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or is the holder of a permit issued
by the Division of Liquor Control and in force at the time.
      (2)   No manufacturer, supplier, wholesale distributor, broker or
retailer of beer or intoxicating liquor, or other person shall employ, retain
or otherwise utilize any person in this state to act as an employee, agent,
solicitor or salesperson, or act in any other representative capacity to sell,
solicit, take orders or receive offers to purchase or expressions of interest
to purchase beer or intoxicating liquor from any person, at any location other
than a liquor permit premises, except as specifically authorized by R.C.
Chapter 4301 or Chapter 4303 or rules adopted thereunder. No function, event or
party shall take place at any location other than a liquor permit premises
where any person acts in any manner to sell, solicit, take orders or receive
offers to purchase or expressions of intent to purchase beer or intoxicating
liquor to or from any person, except as specifically authorized by R.C. Chapter
4301 or Chapter 4303 or rules adopted thereunder.
(R.C. § 4303.25)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 612.06 POSTING AGE AND FIREARM WARNING SIGNS.
   (a)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4301.691, every place in
this municipality where beer, intoxicating liquor or any low-alcohol beverage
is sold for beverage purposes shall display at all times, in a prominent place
on the premises thereof, a printed card, which shall be furnished by the
Division of Liquor Control and which shall read substantially as follows:
   WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER AGE
   If you are under the age of 21
   Under the statutes of the State of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the
cost of or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public place, or furnish false information as to name, age or
other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $1,000, or
imprisonment up to 6 months, or both.
   If you are under the age of 18
   Under the statutes of the State of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the
cost of or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume, any type of beer or wine
that contains either no alcohol or less than one-half of one percent of alcohol
by volume in any public place, or furnish false information as to the name,
age, or other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $250 or to
imprisonment up to 30 days, or both.
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Department or the Liquor Control Commission for failing
to display this card. No permit issued by the Department shall be suspended,
revoked or canceled because of the failure of the permit holder to display this
card.
   (b)   (1)   Every place in this municipality for which a D permit has been
issued under R.C. Chapter 4303 shall be issued a printed card by the Division
of Liquor Control that shall read substantially as follows:
   WARNING
   If you are carrying a firearm
   Under the statutes of Ohio, if you possess a firearm in any room in which
liquor is being dispensed in premises for which a D permit has been issued
under Chapter 4303 of the Revised Code, you may be guilty of a felony and may
be subjected to a prison term of up to one year.
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Division of Liquor Control or the Liquor Control
Commission for failing to display this card. No permit issued by the Department
shall be suspended, revoked or canceled because of the failure of the permit
holder to display this card.
(R.C. § 4301.637)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.70, 4301.99(A))
§ 612.07 OPEN CONTAINER PROHIBITED.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE. A vehicle registered under R.C. § 4503.24.
      (2)   STREET, HIGHWAY, and MOTOR VEHICLE. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 4511.01.
   (b)   No person shall have in the person’s possession an opened container of
beer or intoxicating liquor in any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(1)E. of this section, in a State
liquor store;
      (2)   Except as provided in division (c) or (j) of this section, on the
premises of the holder of any permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control;
      (3)   In any other public place;
      (4)   Except as provided in division (d) or (e) of this section while
operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on any street, highway
or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking;
      (5)   Except as provided in division (d) or (e) of this section while
being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on any street, highway or other
public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking.
   (c)   (1)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened container
of any of the following:
         A.   Beer or intoxicating liquor that has been lawfully purchased for
consumption on the premises where bought from the holder of an A-1-A, A-2, A-
2f, A-3a, D-1, D-2, D-3, D-3a, D-4, D-4a, D-5, D-5a, D-5b, D-5c, D-5d, D-5e, D-
5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-5j, D-5k, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, D-7, D-8, D-9, E, F,
F-2, F-5, F-7, F-8, or F-9 permit;
         B.   Beer, wine, or mixed beverages served for consumption on the
premises by the holder of an F-3 permit, wine served as a tasting sample by an
A-2, A-2f, S-1, or S-2 permit holder for consumption on the premises of a
farmers market for which an F-10 permit has been issued, or wine served for
consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-4 or F-6 permit;
         C.   Beer or intoxicating liquor consumed on the premises of a
convention facility as provided in R.C. § 4303.201;
         D.   Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed during tastings and
samplings approved by rule of the Liquor Control Commission;
         E.   Spiritous liquor to be consumed for purposes of a tasting sample,
as defined in R.C. § 4301.171;
         F.   Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed in an outdoor area
described in R.C. § 4303.188(B)(1).
      (2)   A person may have in the person’s possession on an F liquor permit
premises an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not
purchased from the holder of the F permit if the premises for which the F
permit is issued is a music festival and the holder of the F permit grants
permission for that possession on the premises during the period for which the
F permit is issued. As used in this division (c)(2), MUSIC FESTIVAL means a
series of outdoor live musical performances extending for a period of at least
three consecutive days and located on an area of land of at least 40 acres.
      (3)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on a D-2 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of wine that was not purchased
from the holder of the D-2 permit if the premises for which the D-2 permit is
issued is an outdoor performing arts center, the person is attending an
orchestral performance, and the holder of the D-2 permit grants permission for
the possession and consumption of wine in certain predesignated areas of the
premises during the period for which the D-2 permit is issued.
         B.   As used in division (c)(3)A. of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
            1.   ORCHESTRAL PERFORMANCE. A concert comprised of a group of not
fewer than 40 musicians playing various musical instruments.
            2.   OUTDOOR PERFORMING ARTS CENTER. An outdoor performing arts
center that is located on not less than 150 acres of land and that is open for
performances from the first day of April to the last day of October of each
year.
      (4)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened or unopened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location at which the
person is attending an orchestral performance as defined in division (c)(3)B.
of this section if the person with supervision and control over the performance
grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating
liquor in certain predesignated areas of that outdoor location.
      (5)   A person may have in the person’s possession on an F-9 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
that was not purchased from the holder of the F-9 permit if the F-9 permit
holder grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or
intoxicating liquor in certain predesignated areas of the premises during the
period for which the F-9 permit is issued.
      (6)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of an outdoor motorsports facility an opened or unopened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the owner of the facility if
both of the following apply:
            1.   The person is attending a racing event at the facility; and
            2.   The owner of the facility grants permission for the possession
and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor on the property of the facility.
         B.   As used in division (c)(6)A. of this section:
            1.   OUTDOOR MOTORSPORTS FACILITY. An outdoor racetrack to which
all of the following apply:
               a.   It is 2.4 miles or more in length.
               b.   It is located on 200 acres or more of land.
               c.   The primary business of the owner of the facility is the
hosting and promoting of racing events.
               d.   The holder of a D-1, D-2, or D-3 permit is located on the
property of the facility.
            2.   RACING EVENT. A motor vehicle racing event sanctioned by one
or more motor racing sanctioning organizations.
      (7)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location within an
outdoor refreshment area created under R.C. § 4301.82 if the opened container
of beer or intoxicating liquor was purchased from an A-1, A-1-A, A-1c, A-2, A-
2f, D class, or F class permit holder to which both of the following apply:
            1.   The permit holder’s premises is located within the outdoor
refreshment area.
            2.   The permit held by the permit holder has an outdoor
refreshment area designation.
         B.   Division (c)(7) of this section does not authorize a person to do
either of the following:
            1.   Enter the premises of an establishment within an outdoor
refreshment area while possessing an opened container of beer or intoxicating
liquor acquired elsewhere;
            2.   Possess an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
while being in or on a motor vehicle within an outdoor refreshment area, unless
the possession is otherwise authorized under division (d) or (e) of this
section.
         C.   As used in division (c)(7) of this section, “D class permit
holder” does not include a D-6 or D-8 permit holder.
      (8)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of a market, within a defined F-8 permit premises, an opened container of beer
or intoxicating liquor that was purchased from a D permit premises that is
located immediately adjacent to the market if both of the following apply:
            1.   The market grants permission for the possession and
consumption of beer and intoxicating liquor within the defined F-8 permit
premises;
            2.   The market is hosting an event pursuant to an F-8 permit and
the market has notified the division of liquor control about the event in
accordance with R.C. § 4303.208(A)(3).
         B.   As used in division (c)(8) of this section, MARKET means a
market, for which an F-8 permit is held, that has been in operation since 1860.
   (d)   This section does not apply to a person who pays all or a portion of
the fee imposed for use of a chauffeured limousine pursuant to a prearranged
contract or the guest of the person, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person or guest is a passenger in the limousine.
      (2)   The person or guest is located in the limousine, but is not
occupying a seat in the front compartment of the limousine where the operator
of the limousine is located.
      (3)   The limousine is located on any street, highway or other public or
private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking.
   (e)   An opened bottle of wine that was purchased from the holder of a
permit that authorizes the sale of wine for consumption on the premises where
sold is not an opened container for the purposes of this section if both of the
following apply:
      (1)   The opened bottle of wine is securely resealed by the permit holder
or an employee of the permit holder before the bottle is removed from the
premises. The bottle shall be secured in such a manner that it is visibly
apparent if the bottle has been subsequently opened or tampered with.
      (2)   The opened bottle of wine that is resealed in accordance with
division (e)(1) of this section is stored in the trunk of a motor vehicle or,
if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk, behind the last upright seat or in
an area not normally occupied by the driver or passengers and not easily
accessible by the driver.
   (f)   (1)   Except if an ordinance or resolution is enacted or adopted under
division (f)(2) of this section, this section does not apply to a person who,
pursuant to a prearranged contract, is a passenger riding on a commercial
quadricycle when all of the following apply:
         A.   The person is not occupying a seat in the front of the commercial
quadricycle where the operator is steering or braking.
         B.   The commercial quadricycle is being operated on a street,
highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking.
         C.   The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle
an opened container of beer or wine.
         D.   The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle
not more than either 36 ounces of beer or 18 ounces of wine.
      (2)   The Legislative Authority may enact an ordinance or adopt a
resolution, as applicable, that prohibits a passenger riding on a commercial
quadricycle from possessing an opened container of beer or wine.
      (3)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL QUADRICYCLE means a vehicle
that has fully-operative pedals for propulsion entirely by human power and that
meets all of the following requirements:
         A.   It has four wheels and is operated in a manner similar to a
bicycle.
         B.   It has at least five seats for passengers.
         C.   It is designed to be powered by the pedaling of the operator and
the passengers.
         D.   It is used for commercial purposes.
         E.   It is operated by the vehicle owner or an employee of the owner.
   (g)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person that has in the person’s
possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor on the premises
of a market if the beer or intoxicating liquor has been purchased from a D
liquor permit holder that is located in the market.
      (2)   As used in division (g) of this section, MARKET means an
establishment that:
         A.   Leases space in the market to individual vendors, not less than
50% of which are retail food establishments or food service operations licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3717;
         B.   Has an indoor sales floor area of not less than 22,000 square
feet;
         C.   Hosts a farmer’s market on each Saturday from April through
December.
   (h)   (1)   As used in this section, ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 4303.185.
      (2)   An alcoholic beverage in a closed container being transported under
R.C. § 4303.185 to its final destination is not an opened container for the
purposes of this section if the closed container is securely sealed in such a
manner that it is visibly apparent if the closed container has been
subsequently opened or tampered with after sealing.
   (i)   This section does not apply to a person who has in the person’s
possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor in a public-use
airport, as described in R.C. § 4303.181(D)(2)(a)(iii), when both of the
following apply:
      (1)   Consumption of the opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
occurs in the area of the airport terminal that is restricted to persons taking
flights to and from the airport; and
      (2)   The consumption is authorized under R.C. § 4303.181(D)(2)(a).
   (j)   This section does not apply to a person that has in the person’s
possession an opened container of homemade beer or wine that is served in
accordance with R.C. § 4301.201(E).
(R.C. § 4301.62)
   (k)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.99(A))
§ 612.08 HOURS OF SALE OR CONSUMPTION.
   (a)   This section shall apply to the retail sale of beer, wine, mixed
beverages or spirituous liquor.
   (b)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1, A-1C, A-2, B-1, B-2, B-4, B-5, C-1, C-2, C-2X, D-1, D-2,
D-2X, D-3 when issued without a D-3A, D-3X, D-4, D-5H, D-5K, D-8, F, F-1, F-2,
F-3, F-4, F-5, F-6, F-7, F-8, F-9, G, or I permit holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30
a.m.
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and Sunday midnight,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise.
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (c)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1A, D-3 when issued with a D-3A, D-4A, D-5, D-5A, D-5B, D-5C,
D-5D, D-5E, D-5F, D-5G, D-5I, D-5J, D-5L, D-5M, D-5N, D-5O, or D-7 permit
holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30
a.m.
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and Sunday midnight,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise.
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (d)   Permit holders authorized to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages or
spirituous liquor at retail who are not specifically identified in divisions
(b) or (c) above shall be subject to the provisions of division (b), unless
statutorily authorized otherwise.
   (e)   The hours on Sunday during which sales, delivery or consumption of
alcoholic beverages may take place are established by statute, but in no event
shall they begin prior to 5:30 a.m.
(O.A.C. 4301:1-1-49)
   (f)   No association, corporation, local unit of an association or
corporation or D permit holder who holds an F-2 permit shall sell beer or
intoxicating liquor beyond the hours of sale allowed by the permit. This
division imposes strict liability on the holder of the permit and on any
officer, agent or employee of the permit holder.
(R.C. § 4303.202(D)(2))
   (g)   No F-8 permit holder shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor beyond the
hours of sale allowed by the permit. This division imposes strict liability on
the holder of an F-8 permit and on any officer, agent or employee of that
permit holder.
(R.C. § 4303.208(C))
   (h)   Whoever violates divisions (f) or (g) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4303.99(D))
§ 612.09 CONVEYING INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR CASH ONTO GROUNDS OF DETENTION
FACILITIES OR OTHER SPECIFIED GOVERNMENTAL FACILITIES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly convey, or attempt to convey, onto the
grounds of a detention facility or of an institution, office building or other
place that is under the control of the Department of Mental Health and
Addiction Services, the Department of Developmental Disabilities, the
Department of Youth Services or the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction, any of the following items:
      (1)   Any deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance, as defined in R.C. §
2923.11, or any part of or ammunition for use in the deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance.
      (2)   Any drug of abuse, as defined in R.C. § 3719.011.
      (3)   Any intoxicating liquor, as defined in R.C. § 4301.01, except for
small amounts of wine for sacramental purposes when the person engaging in the
specified conduct is a cleric, as defined in R.C. § 2317.02.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any person who conveys
or attempts to convey an item onto the grounds of a detention facility or of an
institution, office building or other place under the control of the Department
of Mental Health and Addiction Services, the Department of Developmental
Disabilities, the Department of Youth Services or the Department of
Rehabilitation and Correction, with written authorization of the person in
charge of the detention facility or the institution and in accordance with the
written rules of the detention facility or the institution, office building or
other place.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, to a prisoner who is temporarily released from confinement
for a work assignment, or to any patient in an institution under the control of
the Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services, or the Department of
Developmental Disabilities, any item listed in division (a).
   (d)   No person shall knowingly deliver or attempt to deliver cash to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment.
   (e)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment a cellular telephone, two-way radio or other
electronic communications device.
   (f)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a)(1)
of this section that the weapon or dangerous ordnance in question was being
transported in a motor vehicle for any lawful purpose, that it was not on the
actor’s person, and if the weapon or dangerous ordnance was a firearm, that it
was unloaded and was being carried in a closed package, box or case or in a
compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (c) of this
section that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from delivering the
item to the confined person, the child, the prisoner or the patient and that
either of the following applies:
         A.   The actor was permitted by the written rules of the detention
facility or the institution, office building or other place to deliver the item
to the confined person or the patient.
         B.   The actor was given written authorization by the person in charge
of the detention facility or the institution, office building or other place to
deliver the item to the confined person or the patient.
   (g)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section or commits a
violation of division (c) of this section involving any item listed in division
(a)(1) of this section is guilty of illegal conveyance of weapons onto the
grounds of a specified governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section or commits a
violation of division (c) of this section involving any drug of abuse is guilty
of illegal conveyance of drugs of abuse onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (a)(3) of this section or commits a
violation of division (c) of this section involving any intoxicating liquor is
guilty of illegal conveyance of intoxicating liquor onto the grounds of a
specified governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of illegal
conveyance of cash onto the grounds of a detention facility, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (d) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, illegal conveyance of cash onto
the grounds of a detention facility is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section is guilty of illegal
conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (e)
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
illegal conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a detention
facility is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.36)
§ 612.10 SALES OF LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGES TO UNDERAGE PERSONS; PROHIBITIONS AND
MISREPRESENTATIONS.
   (a)   As used in this section, UNDERAGE PERSON means a person under 18 years
of age.
   (b)   No underage person shall purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (c)   No underage person shall order, pay for, share the cost of or attempt
to purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the
name, age or other identification of any underage person for the purpose of
obtaining or with the intent to obtain any low- alcohol beverage for an
underage person, by purchase or as a gift.
   (e)   No underage person shall knowingly show or give false information
concerning his or her name, age or other identification for the purpose of
purchasing or otherwise obtaining any low- alcohol beverage in any place in
this municipality.
   (f)   No person shall sell or furnish any low-alcohol beverage to, or buy
any low-alcohol beverage for, an underage person, unless given by a physician
in the regular line of his or her practice or given for established religious
purposes, or unless the underage person is accompanied by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person, or legal guardian.
   (g)   (1)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private
place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place
while possessing or consuming any low-alcohol beverage, unless the low-alcohol
beverage is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that person’s
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, and the
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present when
the person possesses or consumes the low-alcohol beverage.
      (2)   An owner of a public or private place is not liable for acts or
omissions in violation of division (g)(1) that are committed by a lessee of
that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s acts or
omissions.
   (h)   No permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control shall be suspended,
revoked or cancelled because of a violation of either division (f) or (g).
   (i)   No underage person shall knowingly possess or consume any low-alcohol
beverage in any public or private place, unless he or she is accompanied by a
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or unless the
low-alcohol beverage is given by a physician in the regular line of his or her
practice or given for established religious purposes.
   (j)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
an underage person shall knowingly permit the underage person to violate this
section.
(R.C. § 4301.631)
   (k)   No low-alcohol beverage shall be sold to any person under 18 years of
age.
(R.C. § 4301.22(A)(2))
   (l)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $100. The court imposing a fine for a violation of
division (b) of this section may order that the fine be paid by the performance
of public work at a reasonable hour rate established by the court. The court
shall designate the time within which the public work shall be completed.
(R.C. § 4301.99(E))
   (m)   Whoever violates divisions (c) through (k) hereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(B))
§ 612.11 ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (a)   As used in this section, ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICE means a machine or
other device that mixes beer or intoxicating liquor with pure oxygen or any
other gas to produce a vaporized product for the purpose of consumption by
inhalation.
   (b)   No person shall sell or offer for sale an alcohol vaporizing device.
   (c)   No person shall purchase or use an alcohol vaporizing device.
(R.C. § 4301.65)
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
misdemeanor of the third degree. For a second or subsequent violation occurring
within a period of five consecutive years after the first violation, a person
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(J))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.99(A))
CHAPTER 618
Animals
618.01   Dogs and other animals running at large; nuisance, dangerous and
vicious dogs; hearings.
618.02   Abandoning animals.
618.03   Killing or injuring animals.
618.04   Poisoning animals.
618.05   Cruelty to animals; cruelty to companion animals.
618.06   Coloring rabbits and baby poultry; sale or display of poultry.
618.07   Barking or howling dogs.
618.08   Registration of dogs required.
618.09   Hindering capture of unregistered dog.
618.10   Dogs required to wear tags.
618.11   Unlawful tags.
618.12   Rabies quarantine.
618.13   Hunting prohibited.
618.14   Nuisance conditions prohibited.
618.15   Impounding and disposition; records.
618.16   Restrictions on dog ownership for certain convicted felons.
618.17   Sexual conduct with an animal.
618.18   Dangerous animals.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to restrain and impound animals, see R.C. § 715.23
   Possession of dangerous wild animals and restricted snakes, requirements and
licensing, see R.C. Chapter 935
   Assaulting police dog or horse or assistance dog, see §
642.12
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Driving animals upon roadway, see §§
404.05,
412.05
   Offensive odors from places where animals are kept or fed, see §
660.04
§ 618.01 DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE; NUISANCE, DANGEROUS AND
VICIOUS DOGS; HEARINGS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   DANGEROUS DOG.
         A.   A dog that, without provocation, and subject to division B. of
this definition, has done any of the following:
            1.   Caused injury, other than killing or serious injury, to any
person;
            2.   Killed another dog;
            3.   Been the subject of a third or subsequent violation of R.C. §
955.22(C) or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         B.   DANGEROUS DOG does not include a police dog that has caused
injury, other than killing or serious injury, to any person or has killed
another dog while the police dog is being used to assist one or more law
enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties.
      (2)   MENACING FASHION. A dog that would cause any person being chased or
approached to reasonably believe that the dog will cause physical injury to
that person.
      (3)   NUISANCE DOG.
         A.   Subject to division B. of this definition, NUISANCE DOG means a
dog that without provocation and while off the premises of its owner, keeper,
or harborer has chased or approached a person in either a menacing fashion or
an apparent attitude of attack or has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger
any person.
         B.   NUISANCE DOG does not include a police dog that, while being used
to assist one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of official
duties, has chased or approached a person in either a menacing fashion or an
apparent attitude of attack or has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger any
person.
      (4)   POLICE DOG. A dog that has been trained and may be used to assist
one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of their official
duties.
      (5)   SERIOUS INJURY. Any of the following:
         A.   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
         B.   Any physical harm that involves a permanent incapacity, whether
partial or total, or a temporary, substantial incapacity;
         C.   Any physical harm that involves a permanent disfigurement or a
temporary, serious disfigurement;
         D.   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering or any degree of prolonged or intractable
pain.
      (6)   VICIOUS DOG.
         A.   A dog that, without provocation and subject to division B. of
this definition, has killed or caused serious injury to any person.
         B.   VICIOUS DOG does not include either of the following:
            1.   A police dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any
person while the police dog is being used to assist one or more law enforcement
officers in the performance of their official duties;
            2.   A dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any person
while a person was committing or attempting to commit a trespass or other
criminal offense on the property of the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog.
      (7)   WITHOUT PROVOCATION. A dog acts “without provocation” when it was
not teased, tormented or abused by a person, or it was not coming to the aid or
the defense of a person who was not engaged in illegal or criminal activity and
who was not using the dog as a means of carrying out the activity.
(R.C. § 955.11(A))
   (b)   No person, who is the owner or keeper of horses, mules, cattle, bison,
sheep, goats, swine, llamas, alpacas, or poultry, shall permit them to run at
large in the public road, highway, street, lane, or alley, or upon unenclosed
land, or cause the animals to be herded, kept, or detained for the purpose of
grazing on premises other than those owned or lawfully occupied by the owner or
keeper of the animals.
(R.C. § 951.02)
   (c)   No owner, keeper or harborer of any female dog shall permit it to go
beyond the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer at any time the dog is in
heat unless the dog is properly in leash.
   (d)   Except when a dog is lawfully engaged in hunting and accompanied by
the owner, keeper, harborer, or handler of the dog, no owner, keeper or
harborer of any dog shall fail at any time to do either of the following:
      (1)   Keep the dog physically confined or restrained upon the premises of
the owner, keeper or harborer by a leash, tether, adequate fence, supervision
or secure enclosure to prevent escape;
      (2)   Keep the dog under the reasonable control of some person.
   (e)   Except when a dangerous dog is lawfully engaged in hunting or training
for the purpose of hunting and is accompanied by the owner, keeper, harborer,
or handler of the dog, no owner, keeper or harborer of a dangerous dog shall
fail to do either of the following:
      (1)   While the dog is on the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer,
securely confine it at all times in a locked pen that has a top.
      (2)   While the dog is off the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer,
keep that dog on a chain-link leash or tether that is not more than six feet in
length and additionally do at least one of the following: keep the dog in a
locked pen that has a top, locked fenced yard or other locked enclosure that
has a top; have the leash or tether controlled by a person who is of suitable
age and discretion or securely attach, tie or affix the leash or tether to the
ground or a stationary object or fixture so that the dog is adequately
restrained and station a person in close enough proximity to that dog so as to
prevent it from causing injury to any person; or muzzle that dog.
   (f)   No person who has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of division (d) of this section involving the same dog and no owner,
keeper, or harborer of a dangerous dog shall fail to do the following:
      (1)   Obtain liability insurance with an insurer authorized to write
liability insurance in this state providing coverage in each occurrence because
of damage or bodily injury to or death of a person caused by the dangerous dog
if so ordered by a court and provide proof of that liability insurance upon
request to any law enforcement officer, county dog warden, or public health
official charged with enforcing this section;
      (2)   Obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate from the County
Auditor pursuant to division (j) of this section, affix a tag that identifies
the dog as a dangerous dog to the dog’s collar, and ensure that the dog wears
the collar and tag at all times;
      (3)   Notify the local dog warden immediately if any of the following
occurs:
         A.   The dog is loose or unconfined.
         B.   The dog bites a person, unless the dog is on the property of the
owner of the dog, and the person who is bitten is unlawfully trespassing or
committing a criminal act within the boundaries of that property.
         C.   The dog attacks another animal while the dog is off the property
of the owner of the dog.
      (4)   If the dog is sold, given to another person, or dies, notify the
County Auditor within ten days of the sale, transfer, or death.
   (g)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Debark or surgically silence a dog that the person knows or has
reason to believe is a dangerous dog;
      (2)   Possess a dangerous dog if the person knows or has reason to
believe that the dog has been debarked or surgically silenced;
      (3)   Falsely attest on a waiver form provided by the veterinarian under
division (h) of this section that the person’s dog is not a dangerous dog or
otherwise provide false information on that written waiver form.
   (h)   Before a veterinarian debarks or surgically silences a dog, the
veterinarian may give the owner of the dog a written waiver form that attests
that the dog is not a dangerous dog. The written waiver form shall include all
of the following:
      (1)   The veterinarian’s license number and current business address;
      (2)   The number of the license of the dog if the dog is licensed;
      (3)   A reasonable description of the age, coloring and gender of the dog
as well as any notable markings on the dog;
      (4)   The signature of the owner of the dog attesting that the owner’s
dog is not a dangerous dog;
      (5)   A statement that R.C. § 955.22(F) prohibits any person from doing
any of the following:
         A.   Debarking or surgically silencing a dog that the person knows or
has reason to believe is a dangerous dog;
         B.   Possessing a dangerous dog if the person knows or has reason to
believe that the dog has been debarked or surgically silenced;
         C.   Falsely attesting on a waiver form provided by the veterinarian
under R.C. § 955.22(G) that the person’s dog is not a dangerous dog or
otherwise provide false information on that written waiver form.
   (i)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of division
(g) of this section that the veterinarian who is charged with the violation
obtained, prior to debarking or surgically silencing the dog, a written waiver
form that complies with division (h) of this section and that attests that the
dog is not a dangerous dog.
   (j)   (1)   The County Auditor shall issue a dangerous dog registration
certificate to a person who is the owner of a dog, who is 18 years of age or
older, and who provides the following to the County Auditor:
         A.   A fee of $50;
         B.   The person’s address, phone number, and other appropriate means
for the local dog warden or County Auditor to contact the person;
         C.   With respect to the person and the dog for which the registration
is sought, all of the following:
            1.   Either satisfactory evidence of the dog’s current rabies
vaccination or a statement from a licensed veterinarian that a rabies
vaccination is medically contraindicated for the dog;
            2.   Either satisfactory evidence of the fact that the dog has been
neutered or spayed or a statement from a licensed veterinarian that neutering
or spaying of the dog is medically contraindicated;
            3.   Satisfactory evidence of the fact that the person has posted
and will continue to post clearly visible signs at the person’s residence
warning both minors and adults of the presence of a dangerous dog on the
property;
            4.   Satisfactory evidence of the fact that the dog has been
permanently identified by means of a microchip and the dog’s microchip number.
      (2)   Upon the issuance of a dangerous dog registration certificate to
the owner of a dog, the County Auditor shall provide the owner with a uniformly
designed tag that identifies the animal as a dangerous dog. The owner shall
renew the certificate annually for the same fee and in the same manner as the
initial certificate was obtained. If a certificate holder relocates to a new
county, the certificate holder shall follow the procedure in division (j)(3)B.
of this section and, upon the expiration of the certificate issued in the
original county, shall renew the certificate in the new county.
      (3)   A.   If the owner of a dangerous dog for whom a registration
certificate has previously been obtained relocates to a new address within the
same county, the owner shall provide notice of the new address to the County
Auditor within ten days of relocating to the new address.
         B.   If the owner of a dangerous dog for whom a registration
certificate has previously been obtained relocates to a new address within
another county, the owner shall do both of the following within ten days of
relocating to the new address:
            1.   Provide written notice of the new address and a copy of the
original dangerous dog registration certificate to the County Auditor of the
new county;
            2.   Provide written notice of the new address to the County
Auditor of the county where the owner previously resided.
      (4)   The owner of a dangerous dog shall present the dangerous dog
registration certificate upon being requested to do so by any law enforcement
officer, dog warden, or public health official charged with enforcing this
section.
(R.C. § 955.22)
   (k)   Hearing.
      (1)   The municipal court or county court that has territorial
jurisdiction over the residence of the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog
shall conduct any hearing concerning the designation of the dog as a nuisance
dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog.
      (2)   If a person who is authorized to enforce this chapter has
reasonable cause to believe that a dog in the person’s jurisdiction is a
nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, the person shall notify the owner,
keeper, or harborer of that dog, by certified mail or in person, of both of the
following:
         A.   That the person has designated the dog a nuisance dog, dangerous
dog, or vicious dog, as applicable;
         B.   That the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog may request a
hearing regarding the designation in accordance with this division (k). The
notice shall include instructions for filing a request for a hearing in the
county in which the dog’s owner, keeper, or harborer resides.
      (3)   If the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog disagrees with the
designation of the dog as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, as
applicable, the owner, keeper, or harborer, not later than ten days after
receiving notification of the designation, may request a hearing regarding the
determination. The request for a hearing shall be in writing and shall be filed
with the municipal court or county court that has territorial jurisdiction over
the residence of the dog’s owner, keeper, or harborer. At the hearing, the
person who designated the dog as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog
has the burden of proving, by clear and convincing evidence, that the dog is a
nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog. The owner, keeper, or harborer of
the dog or the person who designated the dog as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog,
or vicious dog may appeal the court’s final determination as in any other case
filed in that court.
      (4)   A court, upon motion of an owner, keeper, or harborer or an
attorney representing the owner, keeper, or harborer, may order that the dog
designated as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog be held in the
possession of the owner, keeper, or harborer until the court makes a final
determination under this section or during the pendency of an appeal, as
applicable. Until the court makes a final determination and during the pendency
of any appeal, the dog shall be confined or restrained in accordance with the
provisions of division (e) that apply to dangerous dogs regardless of whether
the dog has been designated as a vicious dog or a nuisance dog rather than a
dangerous dog. The owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog shall not be required
to comply with any other requirements established in this Code or the Ohio
Revised Code that concern a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, as
applicable, until the court makes a final determination and during the pendency
of any appeal.
      (5)   If a dog is finally determined under this division (k), or on
appeal as described in this division (k), to be a vicious dog, R.C. § 955.11(D)
and divisions (e) to (j) of this section apply with respect to the dog and the
owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog as if the dog were a dangerous dog, and §
618.16 applies with respect to the dog as if it were a dangerous dog, and the
court shall issue an order that specifies that those provisions apply with
respect to the dog and the owner, keeper, or harborer in that manner. As part
of the order, the court shall require the owner, keeper, or harborer to obtain
the liability insurance required under division (f)(1) in an amount described
in division (l)(5)B. of this section.
      (6)   As used in this division (k), NUISANCE DOG, DANGEROUS DOG, and
VICIOUS DOG have the same meanings as in R.C. § 955.11.
(R.C. § 955.222)
   (l)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever recklessly violates division (b) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 951.99)
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (c) of this section or commits a
violation of division (d) of this section that involves a dog that is not a
nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog shall be fined not less than $25 or
more than $100 on a first offense, and on each subsequent offense shall be
fined not less than $75 or more than $250 and may be imprisoned for not more
than 30 days.
         B.   In addition to the penalties prescribed in division (l)(2)A. of
this section, if the offender is guilty of a violation of division (c) of this
section or a violation of division (d) of this section that involves a dog that
is not a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, the court may order the
offender to personally supervise the dog that the offender owns, keeps, or
harbors, to cause that dog to complete dog obedience training, or to do both.
(R.C. § 955.99(E))
      (3)   A.   Whoever commits a violation of division (d) of this section
that involves a nuisance dog is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first
offense and of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on each subsequent offense
involving the same dog. Upon a person being convicted of or pleading guilty to
a third violation of division (d) of this section involving the same dog, the
court shall require the offender to register the involved dog as a dangerous
dog.
         B.   In addition to the penalties prescribed in division (l)(2)A. of
this section, if a violation of division (d) of this section involves a
nuisance dog, the court may order the offender to personally supervise the
nuisance dog that the offender owns, keeps, or harbors, to cause that dog to
complete dog obedience training, or to do both.
(R.C. § 955.99(F))
      (4)   Whoever commits a violation of division (d) of this section that
involves a dangerous dog, or a violation of division (e) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and of a
misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense. Additionally, the
court may order the offender to personally supervise the dangerous dog that the
offender owns, keeps, or harbors, to cause that dog to complete dog obedience
training, or to do both, and the court may order the offender to obtain
liability insurance pursuant to division (f) of this section. The court, in the
alternative, may order the dangerous dog to be humanely destroyed by a licensed
veterinarian, the county dog warden, or the county humane society at the
owner’s expense. With respect to a violation of division (d) of this section
that involves a dangerous dog, until the court makes a final determination and
during the pendency of any appeal of a violation of that division and at the
discretion of the dog warden, the dog shall be confined or restrained in
accordance with division (e) of this section or at the county dog pound at the
owner’s expense.
(R.C. § 955.99(G))
      (5)   A.   Whoever commits a violation of division (d) of this section
that involves a vicious dog is guilty of one of the following:
            1.   A felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the
dog kills or seriously injures a person. Additionally, the court shall order
that the vicious dog be humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the
county dog warden, or the county humane society at the owner’s expense.
            2.   A misdemeanor of the first degree if the dog causes serious
injury to a person. Additionally, the court may order the vicious dog to be
humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the county dog warden, or the
county humane society at the owner’s expense.
         B.   If the court does not order the vicious dog to be destroyed under
division (l)(5)A.2. of this section, the court shall issue an order that
specifies that R.C. § 955.11(D) and divisions (e) to (j) of this section apply
with respect to the dog and the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog as if the
dog were a dangerous dog and that § 618.16 applies with respect to the dog as
if it were a dangerous dog. As part of the order, the court shall order the
offender to obtain the liability insurance required under division (f)(1) of
this section in an amount, exclusive of interest and costs, that equals or
exceeds $100,000. Until the court makes a final determination and during the
pendency of any appeal of a violation of division (d) of this section and at
the discretion of the dog warden, the dog shall be confined or restrained in
accordance with the provisions described in division (e) of this section or at
the county dog pound at the owner’s expense.
(R.C. § 955.99(H))
      (6)   Whoever violates division (f)(2) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 955.99(J))
      (7)   Whoever violates division (g)(1), (g)(2), or (g)(3) of this section
is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
Additionally, the court shall order that the dog involved in the violation be
humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the county dog warden, or the
county humane society. Until the court makes a final determination and during
the pendency of any appeal of a violation of division (g)(1), (g)(2), or (g)(3)
of this section and at the discretion of the dog warden, the dog shall be
confined or restrained in accordance with the provisions of division (e) of
this section or at the county dog pound at the owner’s expense.
(R.C. § 955.99(L))
      (8)   Whoever violates division (f)(1), (f)(3), or (f)(4) of this section
is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(M))
      (9)   Whoever violates division (j)(4) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(N))
      (10)   A.   If a dog is confined at the county dog pound pursuant to
division (l)(4), (l)(5), or (l)(7) of this section, the county dog warden shall
give written notice of the confinement to the owner of the dog. If the county
dog warden is unable to give the notice to the owner of the dog, the county dog
warden shall post the notice on the door of the residence of the owner of the
dog or in another conspicuous place on the premises at which the dog was
seized. The notice shall include a statement that a security in the amount of
$100 is due to the county dog warden within ten days to secure payment of all
reasonable expenses, including medical care and boarding of the dog for 60
days, expected to be incurred by the county dog pound in caring for the dog
pending the determination. The county dog warden may draw from the security any
actual costs incurred in caring for the dog.
         B.   If the person ordered to post security under division (l)(10)A.
of this section does not do so within ten days of the confinement of the
animal, the dog is forfeited, and the county dog warden may determine the
disposition of the dog unless the court issues an order that specifies
otherwise.
         C.   Not more than ten days after the court makes a final
determination under division (l)(4), (l)(5), or (l)(7) of this section, the
county dog warden shall provide the owner of the dog with the actual cost of
the confinement of the dog. If the county dog warden finds that the security
provided under division (l)(10)A. of this section is less than the actual cost
of confinement of the dog, the owner shall remit the difference between the
security provided and the actual cost to the county dog warden within 30 days
after the court’s determination. If the county dog warden finds that the
security provided under division (l)(10)A. of this section is greater than that
actual cost, the county dog warden shall remit the difference between the
security provided and the actual cost to the owner within 30 days after the
court’s determination.
(R.C. § 955.99(P))
      (11)   As used in this division (l), NUISANCE DOG, DANGEROUS DOG, and
VICIOUS DOG have the same meanings as in R.C. § 955.11.
(R.C. § 955.99(Q))
§ 618.02 ABANDONING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No owner or keeper of a dog, cat or other domestic animal shall
abandon the animal.
(R.C. § 959.01)
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
first degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 959.99(E)(3))
§ 618.03 KILLING OR INJURING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, kill or injure a dog, cat or any other domestic animal that is the
property of another. This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian
acting in an official capacity.
(R.C. § 959.02)
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
If the value of the animal killed or the injury done amounts to $300 or more,
whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 959.99(B))
§ 618.04 POISONING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, administer poison, except a licensed veterinarian acting in that
capacity, to a dog, cat or any other domestic animal that is the property of
another; and no person shall, willfully and without the consent of the owner,
place any poisoned food where it may be easily found and eaten by any such
animal, either upon his or her own lands or the lands of another.
(R.C. § 959.03)
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 959.99(C))
§ 618.05 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; CRUELTY TO COMPANION ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Torture an animal, deprive one of necessary sustenance,
unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill, or impound or
confine an animal without supplying it during the confinement with a sufficient
quantity of good wholesome food and water;
      (2)   Impound or confine an animal without affording it, during the
confinement, access to shelter from wind, rain, snow or excessive direct
sunlight, if it can reasonably be expected that the animal would otherwise
become sick or in some other way suffer. This division does not apply to
animals impounded or confined prior to slaughter. For the purpose of this
section, SHELTER means an artificial enclosure, windbreak, sunshade or natural
windbreak or sunshade that is developed from the earth’s contour, tree
development or vegetation;
      (3)   Carry or convey an animal in a cruel or inhuman manner;
      (4)   Keep animals other than cattle, poultry or fowl, swine, sheep or
goats in an enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air, nor feed
cows on food that produces impure or unwholesome milk;
      (5)   Detain livestock in railroad cars or compartments longer than 28
hours after they are so placed without supplying them with necessary food,
water and attention, nor permit the stock to be so crowded as to overlie,
crush, wound or kill each other.
   (b)   Upon the written request of the owner or person in custody of any
particular shipment of livestock, which written request shall be separate and
apart from any printed bill of lading or other railroad form, the length of
time in which the livestock may be detained in any cars or compartment without
food, water, and attention may be extended to 36 hours without penalty
therefor. Division (a) of this section does not prevent the dehorning of
cattle.
   (c)   All fines collected for violations of division (a) of this section
shall be paid to the Society or Association for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals, if there is one in the municipality; otherwise, all fines shall be
paid to the General Fund.
(R.C. § 959.13)
   (d)   Cruelty to companion animals.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   ANIMAL RESCUE FOR DOGS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 956.01.
         B.   BOARDING KENNEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 956.01.
         C.   CAPTIVE WHITE-TAILED DEER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
1531.01.
         D.   COMPANION ANIMAL. Any animal that is kept inside a residential
dwelling and any dog or cat regardless of where it is kept, including a pet
store as defined in R.C. § 956.01. “Companion animal” does not include
livestock or any wild animal.
         E.   CRUELTY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         F.   DOG KENNEL. Means an animal rescue for dogs, a boarding kennel,
or a training kennel.
         G.   FEDERAL ANIMAL WELFARE ACT. The “Laboratory Animal Act of 1966”,
Pub. L. No. 89-544, 80 Stat. 350 (1966), 7 U.S.C. §§ 2131 et seq., as amended
by the “Animal Welfare Act of 1970”, Pub. L. No. 91-579, 84 Stat. 1560 (1970),
the “Animal Welfare Act Amendments of 1976”, Pub. L. No. 94-279, 90 Stat. 417
(1976), and the “Food Security Act of 1985”, Pub. L. No. 99-198, 99 Stat. 1354
(1985), and as it may be subsequently amended.
         H.   LIVESTOCK. Means horses, mules, and other equidae; cattle, sheep,
goats, and other bovidae; swine and other suidae; poultry; alpacas; llamas;
captive white-tailed deer; and any other animal that is raised or maintained
domestically for food or fiber.
         I.   PRACTICE OF VETERINARY MEDICINE. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 4741.01.
         J.   RESIDENTIAL DWELLING. A structure or shelter or the portion of a
structure or shelter that is used by one or more humans for the purpose of a
habitation.
         K.   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Means any of the following:
            1.   Physical harm that carries an unnecessary or unjustifiable
substantial risk of death;
            2.   Physical harm that involves either partial or total permanent
incapacity;
            3.   Physical harm that involves acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.
         L.   TORMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         M.   TORTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         N.   TRAINING KENNEL. Means an establishment operating for profit that
keeps, houses, and maintains dogs for the purpose of training the dogs in
return for a fee or other consideration.
         O.   WILD ANIMAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or
maim, cruelly beat, poison, needlessly kill or commit an act of cruelty against
a companion animal.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly cause serious physical harm to a
companion animal.
      (4)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a
companion animal shall negligently do any of the following:
         A.   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty against the
companion animal;
         B.   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it can reasonably be
expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way
as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement;
         C.   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected
that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a
result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (5)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a
companion animal shall recklessly deprive the companion animal of necessary
sustenance or confine the companion animal without supplying it during the
confinement with sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water.
      (6)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall knowingly do any of the
following:
         A.   Torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or maim, cruelly beat,
poison, needlessly kill, or commit an act of cruelty against the companion
animal;
         B.   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it is reasonably
expected that the companion animal would die or experience unnecessary or
unjustifiable pain or suffering as a result of the deprivation or confinement;
         C.   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it is reasonably expected
that the companion animal would die or experience unnecessary or unjustifiable
pain or suffering as a result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (7)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall negligently do any of
the following:
         A.   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty against the
companion animal;
         B.   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it can reasonably be
expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way
as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement;
         C.   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected
that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a
result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (8)   Divisions (d)(2), (d)(3), (d)(4), (d)(5), (d)(6), and (d)(7) of
this section do not apply to any of the following:
         A.   A companion animal used in scientific research conducted by an
institution in accordance with the federal animal welfare act and related
regulations;
         B.   The lawful practice of veterinary medicine by a person who has
been issued a license, temporary permit, or registration certificate to do so
under R.C. Chapter 4741;
         C.   Dogs being used or intended for use for hunting or field trial
purposes, provided that the dogs are being treated in accordance with usual and
commonly accepted practices for the care of hunting dogs;
         D.   The use of common training devices, if the companion animal is
being treated in accordance with usual and commonly accepted practices for the
training of animals;
         E.   The administering of medicine to a companion animal that was
properly prescribed by a person who has been issued a license, temporary
permit, or registration certificate under R.C. Chapter 4741.
      (9)   Notwithstanding any section of the Ohio Revised Code that otherwise
provides for the distribution of fine moneys, the Clerk of Court shall forward
all fines the Clerk collects that are so imposed for any violation of this
division (d) to the Treasurer of the municipality, whose county humane society
or law enforcement agency is to be paid the fine money as determined under this
division. The Treasurer shall pay the fine moneys to the county humane society
or the county, township, municipal corporation, or state law enforcement agency
in this state that primarily was responsible for or involved in the
investigation and prosecution of the violation. If a county humane society
receives any fine moneys under this division, the county humane society shall
use the fine moneys either to provide the training that is required for humane
society agents under R.C. § 1717.061 or to provide additional training for
humane society agents.
(R.C. § 959.131)
   (e)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree. In addition, the court may order the offender
to forfeit the animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition,
including but not limited to the sale of the animal or livestock. If an animal
or livestock is forfeited and sold pursuant to this division, the proceeds from
the sale first shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard to the
care of the animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the former
owner. The balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the
former owner of the animal.
(R.C. § 959.99(D))
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (d)(2) or (d)(5) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (d)(3) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (d)(4) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
first degree on each subsequent offense.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d)(6) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (d)(7) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   A.   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (d) of this section to forfeit to an
impounding agency, as defined in R.C. § 959.132, any or all of the companion
animals in that person’s ownership or care. The court also may prohibit or
place limitations on the person’s ability to own or care for any companion
animals for a specified or indefinite period of time.
         B.   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a violation of division (a) of this section or division (d) of this section
to reimburse an impounding agency for the reasonably necessary costs incurred
by the agency for the care of a companion animal that the agency impounded as a
result of the investigation or prosecution of the violation, provided that the
costs were not otherwise paid under R.C. § 959.132.
      (7)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of division (d) of this section has a mental or
emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may impose as a
community control sanction or as a condition of probation a requirement that
the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling. The court shall
order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or counseling.
(R.C. § 959.99(E))
Statutory reference:
   Impoundment of companion animals; notice and hearing, see R.C. § 959.132
§ 618.06 COLORING RABBITS AND BABY POULTRY; SALE OR DISPLAY OF POULTRY.
   (a)   No person shall dye or otherwise color any rabbit or baby poultry,
including but not limited to chicks and ducklings. No person shall sell, offer
for sale, expose for sale, raffle or give away any rabbit or baby poultry which
has been dyed or otherwise colored. No poultry younger than four weeks of age
may be sold, given away or otherwise distributed to any person in lots of less
than three. Stores, shops, vendors and others offering young poultry for sale
or other distribution shall provide and operate brooders or other heating
devices that may be necessary to maintain poultry in good health, and shall
keep adequate food and water available to the poultry at all times.
(R.C. § 925.62)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense; each subsequent offense is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(R.C. § 925.99(B))
§ 618.07 BARKING OR HOWLING DOGS.
   (a)   No person shall own, harbor or keep in custody a dog which disturbs
the peace by barking, yelping, howling or making other loud noises to the
annoyance and/or discomfort of any person. Continuous barking, yelping, howling
and/or making other loud noises for 15 consecutive minutes by the dog, whether
confined inside a residence or building or to the outside area, shall be deemed
to have disturbed the peace and to have caused the annoyance and discomfort of
persons; provided, that at the time of the complaint, no person or persons were
trespassing or threatening to trespass upon the private property of the owner,
and provided that the dog was not being teased or provoked in any manner.
   (b)   Any person who shall allow any dog habitually to remain, be lodged or
fed within any dwelling, building, yard or enclosure owned or occupied by the
person shall be considered as harboring or keeping the dog.
   (c)   Upon an initial complaint, an enforcement officer shall warn the
person in writing of the violation. Upon a second such complaint within 30
days, the enforcement officer shall charge the person with a violation of this
section.
   (d)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to owners, operators or
employees of licensed veterinary hospitals, licensed kennels or licensed animal
boarding establishments, nor does this section apply to blind, deaf or hearing
impaired, or mobility impaired persons when the dog serves as an assistance
dog.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 618.08 REGISTRATION OF DOGS REQUIRED.
   (a)   No owner, keeper or harborer of a dog more than three months of age,
nor owner of a dog kennel, shall fail to file an application for registration
required by R.C. § 955.01, nor shall he or she fail to pay the legal fee
therefor.
(R.C. § 955.21)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $25 nor
more than $100 on a first offense, and on each subsequent offense shall be
fined not less than $75 nor more than $250 and may be imprisoned for not more
than 30 days.
(R.C. § 955.99(E))
§ 618.09 HINDERING CAPTURE OF UNREGISTERED DOG.
   (a)   No person shall obstruct or interfere with anyone lawfully engaged in
capturing an unlicensed dog or making an examination of a dog wearing a tag.
(R.C. § 955.24)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(B))
§ 618.10 DOGS REQUIRED TO WEAR TAGS.
   (a)   No owner of a dog, except a dog constantly confined to a dog kennel
registered under R.C. Chapter 955 or one licensed under R.C. Chapter 956, shall
fail to require the dog to wear, at all times, a valid tag issued in connection
with a certificate of registration. A dog found not wearing at any time a valid
tag shall be prima-facie evidence of lack of registration and shall subject any
dog found not wearing such a tag to impounding, sale, or destruction.
(R.C. § 955.10)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(B))
§ 618.11 UNLAWFUL TAGS.
   (a)   No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog wearing a fictitious,
altered or invalid registration tag or a registration tag not issued by the
County Auditor in connection with the registration of that animal.
(R.C. § 955.25)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(B))
§ 618.12 RABIES QUARANTINE.
   (a)   No person having knowledge of the existence of rabies in an animal, or
knowledge that an animal has exhibited symptoms or behavior suggestive of
rabies, or knowledge that an animal has bitten any person, shall fail to
immediately report that information to the Mayor or the Chief of Police.
   (b)   Whenever it is established by the Mayor or Chief of Police that any
animal has bitten any person or exhibits symptoms or behavior suggestive of
rabies, the person who owns, harbors or otherwise cares for the animal shall
confine it in close quarantine and isolation or shall place the animal in the
establishment of a veterinarian until, in either case, it is determined by the
County Board of Health that the animal is not afflicted with rabies. The
isolation and quarantine period hereby required shall be not less than ten days
from the date the person was bitten. If the animal has, or develops, any
symptoms suspicious of rabies during the ten-day period, the County Board of
Health shall be notified immediately. All expenses incurred for the keeping of
the animal, or the necessary tests to determine whether rabies exists, shall be
borne exclusively by the person who owns, harbors or otherwise cares for the
animal.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 618.13 HUNTING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   The hunting of animals or fowl within the municipality is prohibited.
No person shall hunt, kill or attempt to kill any animal or fowl by the use of
firearms or any other means. However, nothing in this section shall be deemed
to prohibit the killing of rats and other undesirable rodents authorized to be
killed by the Chief of Police using means for this killing which are also
authorized by the Chief.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 618.14 NUISANCE CONDITIONS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall keep or harbor any animal or fowl in the municipality
so as to create noxious or offensive odors or unsanitary conditions which are a
menace to the health, comfort or safety of the public.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 618.15 IMPOUNDING AND DISPOSITION; RECORDS.
   (a)   A police officer or animal warden may impound every dog or other
animal found in violation of §
618.01. If the impounded dog is not wearing a valid registration tag, the dog
shall forthwith be turned over to an officer charged by law with the custody
and disposal of such dogs. If the dog is wearing a valid registration tag or
the identity of the owner or harborer is otherwise established, notice shall
immediately be given to the owner or harborer that the dog has been impounded.
Notice may be by telephone or by ordinary mail to the last known address of the
owner or harborer. The dog shall not be released except upon the payment of
reasonable expenses for its taking and keeping. Any dog not redeemed within
three days of the time it is seized or impounded may be sold or otherwise
disposed of as provided by R.C. § 955.16.
   (b)   A record of all dogs impounded, the disposition of the same, the
owner’s name and address, if known, and a statement of any costs or receipts
involving the dog shall be kept.
§ 618.16 RESTRICTIONS ON DOG OWNERSHIP FOR CERTAIN CONVICTED FELONS.
   (a)   No person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a felony offense of
violence committed on or after May 22, 2012 or a felony violation of any
provision of R.C. Chapter 959, R.C. Chapter 2923 or R.C. Chapter 2925 committed
on or after May 22, 2012 shall knowingly own, possess, have custody of, or
reside in a residence with either of the following for a period of three years
commencing either upon the date of release of the person from any period of
incarceration imposed for the offense or violation or, if the person is not
incarcerated for the offense or violation, upon the date of the person’s final
release from the other sanctions imposed for the offense or violation:
      (1)   An unspayed or unneutered dog older than 12 weeks of age;
      (2)   Any dog that has been determined to be a dangerous dog under R.C.
Chapter 955 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (b)   A person described in division (a) of this section shall microchip for
permanent identification any dog owned, possessed by, or in the custody of the
person.
   (c)   (1)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any person who is
confined in a correctional institution of the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction.
      (2)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any person with
respect to any dog that the person owned, possessed, had custody of, or resided
in a residence with prior to May 22, 2012.
(R.C. § 955.54)
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 955.99(O))
§ 618.17 SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH AN ANIMAL.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   ANIMAL. Means a nonhuman mammal, bird, reptile, or amphibian,
either dead or alive.
      (2)   OFFENSE. Means a violation of this section or an attempt, in
violation of R.C. § 2923.02, to violate this section.
      (3)   OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 959.132.
      (4)   SEXUAL CONDUCT. Means either of the following committed for the
purpose of sexual gratification:
         A.   Any act done between a person and animal that involves contact of
the penis of one and the vulva of the other, the penis of one and the penis of
the other, the penis of one and the anus of the other, the mouth of one and the
penis of the other, the mouth of one and the anus of the other, the vulva of
one and the vulva of the other, the mouth of one and the vulva of the other,
any other contact between a reproductive organ of one and a reproductive organ
of the other, or any other insertion of a reproductive organ of one into an
orifice of the other;
         B.   Without a bona fide veterinary or animal husbandry purpose to do
so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of a person’s body or any
instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal, anal, or reproductive
opening of an animal.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly engage in sexual conduct with an animal or
knowingly possess, sell, or purchase an animal with the intent that it be
subjected to sexual conduct.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly organize, promote, aid, or abet in the
conduct of an act involving any sexual conduct with an animal.
(R.C. § 959.21)
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree. In addition, the court may order the offender to forfeit the
animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition including but not
limited to the sale of the animal or livestock. If an animal or livestock is
forfeited and sold pursuant to this division, the proceeds from the sale first
shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard to the care of the
animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the former owner. The
balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the former
owner of the animal.
(R.C. § 959.99(D))
      (2)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of this section suffers from a mental or
emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may impose as a
community control sanction or as a condition of probation a requirement that
the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling. The court shall
order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or counseling.
(R.C. § 959.99(E)(7))
§ 618.18 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (a)   Prohibited or dangerous animals.
      (1)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person, officer, agent or
employee of an organization or business, to keep, maintain or have in his or
her possession or under his or her control within the village corporate limits
any living animal as defined by this division or any living dangerous animal
designated by this division.
      (2)   Definitions. For the purposes of this division, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any living wild mammal, reptile, fowl or other
vertebrate and invertebrate species which is not naturally tame or gentle, but
is of a wild nature or disposition, and which because its characteristics may
constitute a danger to human life, or property if it escaped from secure
quarters. DANGEROUS ANIMAL also includes any living domestic reptile, fowl,
mammal or other vertebrate or invertebrate species which because of its size or
vicious propensity or other characteristics would constitute a danger to human
life or property if it escaped from secure quarters.
         B.   DOMESTIC ANIMALS. Animals that are indigenous to the North
American continent which are not normally tamed.
         C.   DOMESTICATED. Animals which are normally tame for the purpose of
household pets.
         D.   PROHIBITED ANIMALS. Except as provided in this division, it shall
be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, in his or her possession or under
his or her control within the village any of the following animals:
            1.   Any animal which has been declared to be protected or
endangered by the U.S. Department of the Interior, the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, the Ohio Revised Code, the Ohio Administrative Code or Commercial
Point resolutions and ordinances;
            2.   All poisonous animals, including rear fang snakes;
            3.   Badgers;
            4.   Bears;
            5.   Beavers;
            6.   Canids, that is, wolves, foxes, coyotes, jackals, dingos;
            7.   Civet, that is, any of various catlike animals related to the
mongoose, native to the warmer regions of Africa, Europe, and Asia, having a
narrow head, a pointed muzzle, and a slender body;
            8.   Constrictor snakes;
            9.   Crocodilians, that is, alligators, crocodiles, caimans,
cavils;
            10.   Eagles, hawks, owls;
            11.   Edenata, that is, anteaters, tamandvas, sloths, armadillos;
            12.   Emus;
            13.   Felids, that is, lions, tigers, leopards, cheetahs, jaguars,
pumas, lynx, ocelots;
            14.   Game cocks and other fighting birds;
            15.   Hyenas;
            16.   Marsupials, that is, opossums, tasmaininan wolf, kangaroos,
koalas, wombats;
            17.   Muskrats;
            18.   Ostriches;
            19.   Porcupines;
            20.   Primates (non-human), that is, apes, monkeys, baboons,
chimpanzees gibbons, gorillas, orangutans, siamangs;
            21.   Procuonids, that is, raccoons, coatis, kinkajous, ring tailed
cats, pandas;
            22.   Rats;
            23.   Rheas;
            24.   Skunks;
            25.   Squirrels;
            26.   Swine;
            27.   Ungulates;
            28.   Water buffalo;
            29.   Wart hogs;
            30.   Weasels;
            31.   Wolverines;
            32.   Woodchucks;
            33.   Bats; and
            34.   Exotic and domestic venomous spiders.
      (3)   Hybrid animals. No person shall raise, breed any of the
aforementioned animals with normally tame domestic animals for the purpose of
sale or possession. Any animal with any part of the animals listed above shall
be considered a dangerous animal.
      (4)   Violations.
         A.   Whoever violates any provisions of this division (a) is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $150 plus costs.
         B.   Each day the violation continues shall be treated as a separate
offense.
         C.   If a person has been previously convicted of a violation of this
division, the subsequent violation shall constitute a misdemeanor of the first
degree with all maximum fines and penalties.
      (5)   Current animals in village limits.
         A.   1.   No owner, keeper or harborer of a dangerous animal shall
fail to secure personal injury and property damage liability insurance with an
insurer authorized to write liability insurance in this state providing
coverage in each occurrence subject to a limit, exclusive of interest and
costs, of not less than $100,000 because of damage or bodily injury to or death
of a person caused by the dangerous animal.
            2.   A certificate of insurance shall be filed with the village by
any owner, keeper or harborer of a dangerous animal.
            3.   It shall contain a provision or commitment from the insurer
that the village will be notified by the insurer if coverage is cancelled.
         B.   Secured quarters or caged pen shall be constructed so as to
assure that the animal will not escape nor will unauthorized persons be able to
enter. A cage, pen or other housing containing such animal shall be enclosed on
all sides and the top with a gate locked with a padlock or other locking device
requiring a key to open. The bottom of the cage or pen shall be constructed of
concrete, blacktop or other material sufficient to prevent the animal from
digging itself out of the enclosure. Transportation of animal shall be by
secured cage to and from its secured quarters.
      (6)   Commercial exhibitors. Commercial exhibitors who have complied with
the rules and licensing requirements established by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, C.F.R., pt. 9, are exempt from this division.
   (b)   Owning or harboring of vicious dogs.
      (1)   No person shall own, keep, or harbor a vicious dog within the
municipal limits of the Village of Commercial Point.
      (2)   A VICIOUS DOG, as the term is used in this division means:
         A.   Any dog that has killed any person or another domestic animal
without provocation; or
         B.   Any dog which attacks and causes serious injury to a human being
or another domestic animal one or more times without provocation.
      (3)   This division is a necessary control to eliminate the risk of
attack by vicious dogs on human beings in the Village of Commercial Point,
which have become a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the public in
all areas of the Village of Commercial Point; and the lack of knowledge or lack
of intent to injure is eliminated as a defense to any violation thereof.
      (4)   A.   Whosoever violates the provisions of divisions (b)(1) through
(b)(3) of this section shall be fined not more than $1,000.
         B.   When any person is found guilty of a second offense of this
division, such person shall be fined $1,000, which fine shall be mandatory, and
shall not be suspended or remitted.
         C.   In addition to the foregoing penalties, any person who is found
guilty of violating this division shall pay all expenses, including shelter,
food, veterinary expenses for identification or certification of the breed of
the animal or boarding and veterinary expenses necessitated by the seizure of
any dog for the protection of the public, and such other expenses as may be
required for the elimination of any such dog.
      (5)   No owner, keeper or person in charge of any animal shall allow or
permit such animal to void urine or excrement on any public or private property
other than the property of the owner, keeper or person in charge of such
animal, except that animals may be allowed or permitted to void urine or
excrement between the curbs of public streets or alleys and on vacant,
unoccupied and unused public or private land, provided the owner of such unused
private land does not publicly and prominently post notice thereon that such
acts are prohibited.
      (6)   No owner, keeper or person in charge of any animal shall fail to
pick up and properly dispose of any fecal matter left by his or her animal on
any public or private property.
      (7)   Whoever violates divisions (b)(5) or (b)(6) of this section
pertaining to voiding animal excrement shall be fined no more than $100.
(Ord. 11-89.2, passed 11-6-1989; Am. Ord. 11-92-1, passed - -1992; Am. Ord.
2008-01, passed 1-14-2008; Am. Ord. 2021-09, passed 4-5-2021)
CHAPTER 624
Drugs
624.01   Definitions.
624.02   Adult use cannabis control; limitations on conduct by individuals.
624.03   Cultivation of marihuana.
624.04   Drug possession offenses.
624.05   Possession of drug abuse instruments.
624.06   Permitting drug abuse.
624.07   Use or possession of paraphernalia.
624.08   Abusing harmful intoxicants.
624.09   Improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide.
624.10   Possessing nitrous oxide in motor vehicles.
624.11   Illegal dispensing of drug samples.
624.12   Counterfeit controlled substances.
624.13   Controlled substance or prescription labels.
624.14   Possession, sale and disposal of hypodermics.
624.15   Evidence.
624.16   Double jeopardy.
624.17   Controlled substance schedules.
624.18   Sale of pseudoephedrine.
624.19   Sale of pure caffeine product.
624.20   Sale of dextromethorphan.
624.21   Sale of toxic glue.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Administration of epinephrine, exemption from prosecution, see R.C. §
2925.64
   Treatment of drug dependent persons in lieu of conviction, see R.C. §
2951.041
   Alcoholic beverages, see Ch.
612
   Disorderly conduct while voluntarily intoxicated, see §
648.04
   Driving or physical control while under the influence, see §
434.01
   Effect of voluntary intoxication on criminal liability, see §
606.07
   Intoxicated pedestrians, see §
416.10
   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection, see §
636.16
   Using weapons while intoxicated, see §
678.04
§ 624.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words,
terms and phrases and their derivatives used in this chapter which are not
defined in this section shall have the meanings given to them in the Ohio
Revised Code.
   ADMINISTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   ADULTERATE. To cause a drug to be adulterated as described in R.C. §
3715.63.
   ALCOHOL AND DRUG ADDICTION SERVICES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5119.01.
   BULK AMOUNT. Of a controlled substance means any of the following:
      (1)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in
Schedule I, Schedule II, or Schedule III, with the exception of any controlled
substance analog, marihuana, cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, any fentanyl-related
compound, and hashish and except as provided in division (2), (5), or (6) of
this definition, whichever of the following is applicable:
         (a)   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams or 25 unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule I opiate or opium derivative;
         (b)   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams of a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of raw or gum
opium;
         (c)   An amount equal to or exceeding 30 grams or ten unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule I hallucinogen other than tetrahydrocannabinol or lysergic acid
amide, or a Schedule I stimulant or depressant;
         (d)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II opiate or opium
derivative;
         (e)   An amount equal to or exceeding five grams or ten unit doses of
a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount
of phencyclidine;
         (f)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II stimulant that is in
a final dosage form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal
drug abuse control laws, as defined in this section, that is or contains any
amount of a Schedule II depressant substance or a Schedule II hallucinogenic
substance;
         (g)   An amount equal to or exceeding three grams of a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule
II stimulant, or any of its salts or isomers, that is not in a final dosage
form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal drug abuse
control laws;
      (2)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III or IV substance other than an anabolic
steroid or a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (3)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (4)   An amount equal to or exceeding 250 milliliters or 250 grams of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule V substance;
      (5)   An amount equal to or exceeding 200 solid dosage units, 16 grams,
or 16 milliliters of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III anabolic steroid;
      (6)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is a
combination of a fentanyl-related compound and any other compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V,
if the defendant is charged with a violation of R.C. § 2925.11 and the
sentencing provisions set forth in R.C. § 2925.11(C)(10)(b) and (C)(11) will
not apply regarding the defendant and the violation, the bulk amount of the
controlled substance for purposes of the violation is the amount specified in
division (1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) of this definition for the other Schedule
III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance that is combined with the
fentanyl- related compound.
   CERTIFIED GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE. A duly constituted and organized committee of
the Ohio State Bar Association or of one or more local bar associations of the
state that complies with the criteria set forth in Rule V, Section 6 of the
Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   COCAINE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A cocaine salt, isomer, or derivative, a salt of a cocaine isomer
or derivative, or the base form of cocaine.
      (2)   Coca leaves or a salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of coca
leaves, including ecgonine, a salt, isomer, or derivative of ecgonine, or a
salt of an isomer or derivative of ecgonine.
      (3)   A salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of a substance
identified in division (1) or (2) of this definition that is chemically
equivalent to or identical with any of those substances, except that the
substances shall not include decocainized coca leaves or extraction of coca
leaves if the extractions do not contain cocaine or ecgonine.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A JUVENILE. An offense is “committed in the
vicinity of a juvenile” if the offender commits the offense within 100 feet of
a juvenile or within the view of a juvenile, regardless of whether the offender
knows the age of the juvenile, whether the offender knows  the offense is being
committed within 100 feet of or within view of the juvenile, or whether the
juvenile actually views the commission of the offense.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. An offense is “committed in the
vicinity of a school” if the offender commits the offense on school premises,
in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of any school
premises, regardless of whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed on school premises, in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the
boundaries of any school premises.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER OR A
RECOVERING ADDICT. An offense is “committed in the vicinity of a substance
addiction services provider or a recovering addict” if either of the following
apply:
      (1)   The offender commits the offense on the premises of a substance
addiction services provider’s facility, including a facility licensed prior to
June 29, 2019, under R.C. § 5119.391 to provide methadone treatment or an
opioid treatment program licensed on or after that date under R.C. § 5119.37,
or within 500 feet of the premises of a substance addiction services provider’s
facility and the offender knows or should know that the offense is being
committed within the vicinity of the substance addiction services provider’s
facility.
      (2)   The offender sells, offers to sell, delivers, or distributes the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog to a person who is
receiving treatment at the time of the commission of the offense, or received
treatment within 30 days prior to the commission of the offense, from a
substance addiction services provider and the offender knows that the person is
receiving or received that treatment.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any drug that bears, or whose container or label bears, a
trademark, trade name, or other identifying mark used without authorization of
the owner of rights to the trademark, trade name, or identifying mark.
      (2)   Any unmarked or unlabeled substance that is represented to be a
controlled substance manufactured, processed, packed, or distributed by a
person other than the person that manufactured, processed, packed, or
distributed it.
      (3)   Any substance that is represented to be a controlled substance but
is not a controlled substance or is a different controlled substance.
      (4)   Any substance other than a controlled substance that a reasonable
person would believe to be a controlled substance because of its similarity in
shape, size, and color, or its markings, labeling, packaging, distribution, or
the price for which it is sold or offered for sale.
   CULTIVATE. Includes planting, watering, fertilizing or tilling.
   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   DECEPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL. The disciplinary counsel appointed by the Board of
Commissioners on Grievances and Discipline of the Ohio Supreme Court under the
Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   DISPENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   DISTRIBUTE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2913.02(A) that constitutes theft of drugs,
or any violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, 2925.04, 2925.041, 2925.05,
2925.06, 2925.11, 2925.12, 2925.13, 2925.22, 2925.23, 2925.24, 2925.31,
2925.32, 2925.36, or 2925.37.
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former law of a municipality, state
or any other state or of the United States, that is substantially equivalent to
any section listed in division (1) of this definition.
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former law of a municipality, state
or any other state, or of the United States, of which planting, cultivating,
harvesting, processing, making, manufacturing, producing, shipping,
transporting, delivering, acquiring, possessing, storing, distributing,
dispensing, selling, inducing another to use, administering to another, using,
or otherwise dealing with a controlled substance is an element.
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing or attempting to commit, any offense under division (1), (2), or (3)
of this definition.
   DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
   FELONY DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any drug abuse offense that would constitute a
felony under the laws of this state, any other state, or the United States.
   FENTANYL-RELATED COMPOUND. Any of the following:
      (1)   Fentanyl;
      (2)   Alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1-(alpha-methyl-beta-phenyl)ethyl-4-
piperidyl] propionanilide; 1-(1-methyl-2-phenylethyl)-4-(N-propanilido)
piperidine);
      (3)   Alpha-methylthiofentanyl (N-[1-methyl-2-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylpropanamide);
      (4)   Beta-hydroxyfentanyl (N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-phenethyl-4-piperidinyl]-N-
phenylpropanamide);
      (5)   Beta-hydroxy-3-methylfentanyl (other name: N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-
phenethyl)-3- methyl-4-piperidinyl]-N-phenylpropanamide);
      (6)   3-methylfentanyl (N-[3-methyl-1-(2-phenylethyl)-4-piperidyl]-N-
phenylpropanamide);
      (7)   3-methylthiofentanyl (N-[3-methyl-1-[2-(thienyl)ethyl]-4-
piperidinyl]-– phenylpropanamide);
      (8)   Para-fluorofentanyl (N-(4-fluorophenyl)-N-[1-(2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]propanamide;
      (9)   Thiofentanyl (N-phenyl-N-[1-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-piperidinyl]-
propanamide;
      (10)   Alfentanil;
      (11)   Carfentanil;
      (12)   Remifentanil;
      (13)   Sufentanil;
      (14)   Acetyl-alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1-(1-methyl-2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylacetamide); and
      (15)   Any compound that meets all of the following fentanyl
pharmacophore requirements to bind at the mu receptor, as identified by a
report from an established forensic laboratory, including acetylfentanyl,
furanylfentanyl, valerylfentanyl, butyrylfentanyl, isobutyrylfentanyl, 4-
methoxybutyrylfentanyl, para-fluorobutyrylfentanyl, acrylfentanyl, and ortho-
fluorofentanyl:
         (a)   A chemical scaffold consisting of both of the following:
            1.   A five, six, or seven member ring structure containing a
nitrogen, whether or not further substituted;
            2.   An attached nitrogen to the ring, whether or not that nitrogen
is enclosed in a ring structure, including an attached aromatic ring or other
lipophilic group to that nitrogen.
         (b)   A polar functional group attached to the chemical scaffold,
including but not limited to a hydroxyl, ketone, amide, or ester;
         (c)   An alkyl or aryl substitution off the ring nitrogen of the
chemical scaffold; and
         (d)   The compound has not been approved for medical use by the United
States food and drug administration.
   HARMFUL INTOXICANT. Does not include beer or intoxicating liquor, but means
any of the following:
      (1)   Any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance the gas, fumes, or
vapor of which when inhaled can induce intoxication, excitement, giddiness,
irrational behavior, depression, stupefaction, paralysis, unconsciousness,
asphyxiation, or other harmful physiological effects, and includes but is not
limited to any of the following:
         (a)   Any volatile organic solvent, plastic cement, model cement,
fingernail polish remover, lacquer thinner, cleaning fluid, gasoline, or other
preparation containing a volatile organic solvent.
         (b)   Any aerosol propellant.
         (c)   Any fluorocarbon refrigerant.
         (d)   Any anesthetic gas.
      (2)   Gamma Butyrolactone;
      (3)   1,4 Butanediol.
   HASHISH.
      (1)   A resin or a preparation of a resin to which both of the following
apply:
         (a)   It is contained in or derived from any part of the plant of the
genus cannabis, whether in solid form or in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract, or liquid distillate form.
         (b)   It has a delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of more than
0.3%.
      (2)   The term does not include a hemp byproduct in the possession of a
licensed hemp processor under R.C. Chapter 928, provided that the hemp
byproduct is being produced, stored, and disposed of in accordance with rules
adopted under R.C. § 928.03.
   HYPODERMIC. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   JUVENILE. A person under 18 years of age.
   LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   L.S.D. Lysergic acid diethylamide.
   MAJOR DRUG OFFENDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   MANUFACTURE. To plant, cultivate, harvest, process, make, prepare, or
otherwise engage in any part of the production of a drug, by propagation,
extraction, chemical synthesis, or compounding, or any combination of the same,
and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling, and other activities incident to
production.
   MANUFACTURER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   MARIHUANA. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01, except that it does
not include hashish.
   METHAMPHETAMINE. Methamphetamine, any salt, isomer, or salt of an isomer of
methamphetamine, or any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance containing
methamphetamine or any salt, isomer, or salt of an isomer of methamphetamine.
   MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE. Either of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it exists on and after July 1,
1996, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that is a misdemeanor
or a felony of the fifth degree.
   OFFICIAL WRITTEN ORDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   PERSON WITH A DRUG DEPENDENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
   PHARMACIST. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   PHARMACY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   POSSESS or POSSESSION. Having control over a thing or substance but may not
be inferred solely from mere access to the thing or substance through ownership
or occupation of the premises upon which the thing or substance is found.
   PREMISES OF A SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER'S FACILITY. Means the
parcel of real property on which any substance addiction service provider’s
facility is situated.
   PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   PRESUMPTION FOR A PRISON TERM or PRESUMPTION THAT A PRISON TERM SHALL BE
IMPOSED. A presumption as described in R.C. § 2929.13(D) that a prison term is
a necessary sanction for a felony in order to comply with the purposes and
principles of sentencing under R.C. § 2929.11.
   PROFESSIONAL LICENSE. Any license, permit, certificate, registration,
qualification, admission, temporary license, temporary permit, temporary
certificate, or temporary registration that is described in R.C. § 2925.01(W)
(1) through (W)(37) and that qualifies a person as a professionally licensed
person.
   PROFESSIONALLY LICENSED PERSON. Any of the following:
      (1)   A person who has received a certificate or temporary certificate as
a certified public accountant or who has registered as a public accountant
under R.C. Chapter 4701 and who holds an Ohio permit issued under that chapter;
      (2)   A person who holds a certificate of qualification to practice
architecture issued or renewed and registered under R.C. Chapter 4703;
      (3)   A person who is registered as a landscape architect under R.C.
Chapter 4703 or who holds a permit as a landscape architect issued under that
chapter;
      (4)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4707;
      (5)   A person who has been issued a barber’s license, barber
instructor’s license, assistant barber instructor’s license, or independent
contractor’s license under R.C. Chapter 4709;
      (6)   A person licensed and regulated to engage in the business of a debt
pooling company by a legislative authority, under authority of R.C. Chapter
4710;
      (7)   A person who has been issued a cosmetologist’s license, hair
designer’s license, manicurist’s license, esthetician’s license, natural hair
stylist’s license, advanced license to practice cosmetology, advanced license
to practice hair design, advanced license to practice manicuring, advanced
license to practice esthetics, advanced license to practice natural hair
styling, cosmetology instructor’s license, hair design instructor’s license,
manicurist instructor’s license, esthetics instructor’s license, natural hair
style instructor’s license, independent contractor’s license, or tanning
facility permit under R.C. Chapter 4713;
      (8)   A person who has been issued a license to practice dentistry, a
general anesthesia permit, a conscious sedation permit, a limited resident’s
license, a limited teaching license, a dental hygienist’s license, or a dental
hygienist’s teacher’s certificate under R.C. Chapter 4715;
      (9)   A person who has been issued an embalmer’s license, a funeral
director’s license, a funeral home license, or a crematory license, or who has
been registered for an embalmer’s or funeral director’s apprenticeship under
R.C. Chapter 4717;
      (10)   A person who has been licensed as a registered nurse or practical
nurse, or who has been issued a certificate for the practice of nurse-midwifery
under R.C. Chapter 4723;
      (11)   A person who has been licensed to practice optometry or to engage
in optical dispensing under R.C. Chapter 4725;
      (12)   A person licensed to act as a pawnbroker under R.C. Chapter 4727;
      (13)   A person licensed to act as a precious metals dealer under R.C.
Chapter 4728;
      (14)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a pharmacist or
pharmacy intern or registered under that chapter as a registered pharmacy
technician, certified pharmacy technician, or pharmacy technician trainee;
      (15)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a manufacturer of
dangerous drugs, outsourcing facility, third-party logistics provider,
repackager of dangerous drugs, wholesale distributor of dangerous drugs, or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
      (16)   A person who is authorized to practice as a physician assistant
under R.C. Chapter 4730;
      (17)   A person who has been issued a license to practice medicine and
surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric medicine and surgery
under R.C. Chapter 4731 or has been issued a certificate to practice a limited
branch of medicine under that chapter;
      (18)   A person licensed as a psychologist, independent school
psychologist, or school psychologist under R.C. Chapter 4732;
      (19)   A person registered to practice the profession of engineering or
surveying under R.C. Chapter 4733;
      (20)   A person who has been issued a license to practice chiropractic
under R.C. Chapter 4734;
      (21)   A person licensed to act as a real estate broker or real estate
salesperson under R.C. Chapter 4735;
      (22)   A person registered as a registered environmental health
specialist under R.C. Chapter 3776;
      (23)   A person licensed to operate or maintain a junkyard under R.C.
Chapter 4737;
      (24)   A person who has been issued a motor vehicle salvage dealer’s
license under R.C. Chapter 4738;
      (25)   A person who has been licensed to act as a steam engineer under
R.C. Chapter 4739;
      (26)   A person who has been issued a license or temporary permit to
practice veterinary medicine or any of its branches, or who is registered as a
graduate animal technician under R.C. Chapter 4741;
      (27)   A person who has been issued a hearing aid dealer’s or fitter’s
license or trainee permit under R.C. Chapter 4747;
      (28)   A person who has been issued a class A, class B, or class C
license or who has been registered as an investigator or security guard
employee under R.C. Chapter 4749;
      (29)   A person licensed to practice as a nursing home administrator
under R.C. Chapter 4751;
      (30)   A person licensed to practice as a speech-language pathologist or
audiologist under R.C. Chapter 4753;
      (31)   A person issued a license as an occupational therapist or physical
therapist under R.C. Chapter 4755;
      (32)   A person who is licensed as a licensed professional clinical
counselor, licensed professional counselor, social worker, independent social
worker, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage and family
therapist, or registered as a social work assistant under R.C. Chapter 4757;
      (33)   A person issued a license to practice dietetics under R.C. Chapter
4759;
      (34)   A person who has been issued a license or limited permit to
practice respiratory therapy under R.C. Chapter 4761;
      (35)   A person who has been issued a real estate appraiser certificate
under R.C. Chapter 4763;
      (36)   A person who has been issued a home inspector license under R.C.
Chapter 4764;
      (37)   A person who has been admitted to the bar by order of the Ohio
Supreme Court in compliance with its prescribed and published rules;
      (38)   A person who has been issued a license to practice as a certified
mental health assistant under R.C. Chapter 4772.
   PUBLIC PREMISES. Any hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other
place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort.
   SALE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   SAMPLE DRUG. A drug or pharmaceutical preparation that would be hazardous to
health or safety if used without the supervision of a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs, or a drug of abuse, and that, at
one time, had been placed in a container plainly marked as a sample by a
manufacturer.
   SCHEDULE I, SCHEDULE II, SCHEDULE III, SCHEDULE IV or SCHEDULE V. Have the
same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   SCHOOL. Any school operated by a board of education, any community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or any nonpublic school for which the
Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards under R.C. §
3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or training
provided by the school is being conducted at the time a criminal offense is
committed.
   SCHOOL BUILDING. Any building in which any of the instruction,
extracurricular activities, or training provided by a school is conducted,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
   SCHOOL PREMISES. Either of the following:
      (1)   The parcel of real property on which any school is situated,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted on the premises at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
      (2)   Any other parcel of real property that is owned or leased by a
board of education of a school, the governing authority of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or the governing body of a nonpublic
school for which the Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum
standards under R.C. § 3301.07 and on which some of the instruction,
extracurricular activities or training of the school is conducted, whether or
not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the
school is being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a criminal
offense is committed.
   STANDARD PHARMACEUTICAL REFERENCE MANUAL. The current edition, with
cumulative changes if any, of references that are approved by the State Board
of Pharmacy.
   SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Means an agency, association,
corporation or other legal entity, individual, or program that provides one or
more of the following at a facility:
      (1)   Either alcohol addiction services, or drug addiction services, or
both such services that are certified by the Ohio Director of Mental Health and
Addiction Services under R.C. § 5119.36;
      (2)   Recovery supports that are related to either alcohol addiction
services, or drug addiction services, or both such services and paid for with
federal, state, or local funds administered by the Ohio Department of Mental
Health and Addiction Services or a board of alcohol, drug addiction, and mental
health services.
   UNIT DOSE. An amount or unit or a compound, mixture, or preparation
containing a controlled substance that is separately identifiable and in a form
that indicates that it is the amount or unit by which the controlled substance
is separately administered to or taken by an individual.
   WHOLESALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
(R.C. § 2925.01)
§ 624.02 ADULT USE CANNABIS CONTROL; LIMITATIONS ON CONDUCT BY INDIVIDUALS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780 and notwithstanding
any conflicting provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, an adult use
consumer, may do the following:
      (1)   Use adult use cannabis;
      (2)   Possess, transfer without remuneration to another adult consumer,
or transport adult use cannabis, subject to division (b) of this section; and
      (3)   Purchase adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary per day in
amounts that do not exceed the possession limits set forth in division (b)(1)
of this section.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3796:
      (1)   The amount of cannabis that may be possessed by an adult use
consumer shall not exceed:
         A.   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         B.   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
      (2)   The amount of cannabis that may be transferred by an adult use
consumer without remuneration and not advertised or promoted to the public
shall not exceed:
         A.   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         B.   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
      (3)   The amount of cannabis that may be transported by an adult use
consumer shall not exceed:
         A.   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         B.   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, an adult use
consumer shall not be subject to arrest, criminal prosecution, or civil penalty
for engaging in any of the activities authorized under R.C. Chapter 3780,
including:
      (1)   Obtaining, using, possessing, or transporting adult use cannabis;
      (2)   Performing conduct authorized under R.C. § 3780.29;
      (3)   Acquiring, possessing, using, purchasing, manufacturing, selling,
or transporting paraphernalia; and
      (4)   Assisting another adult use consumer, or allowing property to be
used, in any of the acts authorized by R.C. Chapter 3780.
   (d)   (1)   An individual is prohibited from operating a vehicle, motor
vehicle, streetcar, trackless trolley, bike, watercraft, or aircraft while
using adult use cannabis or while under the influence of adult use cannabis and
is subject to R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance
for any violation of this division.
      (2)   An individual is prohibited from smoking, vaporizing, or using any
other combustible adult use cannabis product while in a vehicle, motor vehicle,
streetcar, trackless trolley, bike, watercraft, or aircraft and is subject to
R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for any
violation of this division.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, no individual under
21 years of age shall knowingly show or give false information concerning the
individual’s name, age, or other identification for the purpose of purchasing
adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter
3780.
   (f)   Nothing in R.C. Chapter 3780 is intended to permit the transfer or
sale of adult use cannabis, with or without remuneration, to an individual
under 21 years of age, or to allow an individual under 21 years of age to
purchase, possess, use, process, transport, or cultivate cannabis except where
authorized by R.C. Chapter 3796.
   (g)   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly permit their
residence, any other private property under their control, or any vehicle,
conveyance, or watercraft under their control to be used by an invitee of the
parent’s child or the guardian’s ward, if the invitee is under 21 years of age,
in a manner that constitutes a violation of R.C. Chapter 3780.
      (1)   A parent or guardian is deemed to have knowingly permitted their
residence, any other private property under their control, or any vehicle,
conveyance, or watercraft under their control to be used in violation of R.C.
Chapter 3780 if they knowingly authorize or permit consumption of cannabis by
underage invitees.
      (2)   Where the residence or other property has an owner and a tenant or
lessee, the trier of fact may infer that the residence or other property is
occupied only by the tenant or lessee.
(R.C. § 3780.36)
   (h)   Penalties.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3796, R.C. § 2925.11
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall apply when an adult use
consumer possesses an amount of cannabis greater than the limits set forth in
division (b)(1) of this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, an adult use
consumer who uses adult use cannabis in public areas, or who violates division
(d)(2) of this section as a passenger, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   A.   An individual under 21 years of age who knowingly shows or
gives false information concerning the individual’s name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining adult use
cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter 3780 is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If, in committing a first
violation, the offender presented to an adult use dispensary licensed under
R.C. Chapter 3780 a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $250 and not
more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more
than six months.
         B.   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the offender
presented to an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter 3780 a false,
fictitious, or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver’s
license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s license issued by any
state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, and
may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months. The
court also may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from
the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7). The court, in lieu of suspending
the offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or
driver’s license, instead may order the offender to perform a determinate
number of hours of community service, with the court determining the actual
number of hours and the nature of the community service the offender shall
perform.
         C.   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or
subsequent time, the offender presented to an adult use dispensary licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3780 a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a
false or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a
driver’s license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than
$500 nor more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of
not more than six months. Except as provided in this division, the court also
may impose a class six suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that the suspension
or denial remain in effect until the offender attains the age of 21 years. The
court, in lieu of suspending the offender’s temporary instruction permit,
probationary driver’s license, or driver’s license, instead may order the
offender to perform a determinate number of hours of community service, with
the court determining the actual number of hours and the nature of the
community service the offender shall perform.
      (4)   An individual who is under 21 years of age and who solicits another
individual to purchase adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3780 is guilty of:
         A.   For a first violation, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; and
         B.   For a second or subsequent violation, a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
      (5)   An employee or agent of an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C.
Chapter 3780 who knowingly sells cannabis to an individual under 21 years of
age is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   Any individual who violates R.C. § 3780.10(A), or R.C. § 3780.29
(F), is guilty of the illegal trafficking in drugs under R.C. § 2925.03 and the
illegal manufacture of drugs under R.C. § 2925.04.
      (7)   Any individual who violates division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this
section guilty of the illegal trafficking in drugs under R.C. § 2925.03.
      (8)   Any individual who violates R.C. § 3780.20(B) is guilty of illegal
dispensing of drug samples under R.C. § 2925.36 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
      (9)   A.   An individual who violates division (g) of this section is
guilty of:
            1.   For a first violation, a misdemeanor of the third degree; and
            2.   For a second or subsequent violation, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
         B.   If a violation of division (g) of this section directly or
indirectly results in great bodily harm or death to any individual, the
individual violating division (g) is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 3780.99)
Statutory reference:
   Felony drug trafficking offenses, see R.C. § 2925.03(C)
§ 624.03 CULTIVATION OF MARIHUANA.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cultivate marihuana.
   (b)   This section does not apply to any person listed in R.C. § 2925.03(B)
(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to
the extent and under the circumstances described in that division.
   (c)   Whoever commits a violation of division (a) of this section is guilty
of illegal cultivation of marihuana.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in the following divisions, illegal
cultivation of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor or, if the offense was
committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 100 grams but
is less than 200 grams, illegal cultivation of marihuana is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree or, if the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school
or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
illegal cultivation of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
(R.C. § 2925.04(A), (B), (C)(5), (G))
§ 624.04 DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly obtain, possess or use a controlled
substance or a controlled substance analog.
   (b)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         A.   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
4741, and 4772.
         B.   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is
conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an
anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration.
         C.   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses or
administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is
expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other
nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act, and is sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed or
administered for that purpose in accordance with that Act.
         D.   Any person who obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs if the prescription was issued for a legitimate medical purpose and not
altered, forged, or obtained through deception or commission of a theft
offense. As used in this division (b)(1)D., DECEPTION and THEFT OFFENSE have
the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (2)   A.   As used in division (b)(2) of this section:
            1.   COMMUNITY ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 5119.01.
            2.   COMMUNITY CONTROL SANCTION. Has the same meanings as in R.C. §
2929.01
            3.   HEALTH CARE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2919.16.
            4.   MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE. A violation of this section or
R.C. § 2925.11 that is a misdemeanor or a felony of the fifth degree.
            5.   PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
            6.   POST-RELEASE CONTROL SANCTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2967.28.
            7.   PUBLIC AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2930.01.
            8.   QUALIFIED INDIVIDUAL. A person who is acting in good faith who
seeks or obtains medical assistance for another person who is experiencing a
drug overdose, a person who experiences a drug overdose and who seeks medical
assistance for that overdose, or a person who is the subject of another person
seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that overdose as described in
division (b)(2)B. of this section.
            9.   SEEK OR OBTAIN MEDICAL ASSISTANCE. Includes, but is not
limited to making a 9-1-1 call, contacting in person or by telephone call an
on-duty peace officer, or transporting or presenting a person to a health care
facility.
         B.   Subject to division (b)(2)E. of this section, a qualified
individual shall not be arrested, charged, prosecuted, convicted, or penalized
pursuant to this chapter for a minor drug possession offense or a violation of
R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141 if all of the
following apply:
            1.   The evidence of the obtaining, possession, or use of the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog, drug abuse instruments, or
drug paraphernalia that would be the basis of the offense was obtained as a
result of the qualified individual seeking the medical assistance or
experiencing an overdose and needing medical assistance.
            2.   Subject to division (b)(2)F. of this section, within 30 days
after seeking or obtaining the medical assistance, the qualified individual
seeks and obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment from a
community addiction services provider or a properly credentialed addiction
treatment professional.
            3.   Subject to division (b)(2)F. of this section, the qualified
individual who obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment under
division (b)(2)B.2. of this section, upon the request of any prosecuting
attorney, submits documentation to the prosecuting attorney that verifies that
the qualified individual satisfied the requirements of that division. The
documentation shall be limited to the date and time of the screening obtained
and referral received.
         C.   If a person who is serving a community control sanction or is
under a sanction on post-release control acts pursuant to division (b)(2)B. of
this section, then R.C. § 2929.141(B), R.C. § 2929.15(B)(2), R.C. § 2929.25(D)
(3), or R.C. § 2967.28(F)(3) applies to the person with respect to any
violation of the sanction or post-release control sanction based on a minor
drug possession offense, as defined in R.C. § 2925.11, or a violation of R.C. §
2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141.
         D.   Nothing in division (b)(2)B. of this section shall be construed
to do any of the following:
            1.   Limit the admissibility of any evidence in connection with the
investigation or prosecution of a crime with regards to a defendant who does
not qualify for the protections of division (b)(2)B. of this section or with
regards to any crime other than a minor drug possession offense or a violation
of R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141 committed by a
person who qualifies for protection pursuant to division (b)(2)B. of this
section;
            2.   Limit any seizure of evidence or contraband otherwise
permitted by law;
            3.   Limit or abridge the authority of a peace officer to detain or
take into custody a person in the course of an investigation or to effectuate
an arrest for any offense except as provided in that division;
            4.   Limit, modify, or remove any immunity from liability available
pursuant to law in effect prior to September 13, 2016 to any public agency or
to an employee of any public agency.
         E.   Division (b)(2)B. of this section does not apply to any person
who twice previously has been granted an immunity under division (b)(2)B. of
this section. No person shall be granted an immunity under division (b)(2)B. of
this section more than two times.
         F.   Nothing in this section shall compel any qualified individual to
disclose protected health information in a way that conflicts with the
requirements of the “Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996”, 104 Pub. L. No. 191, 110 Stat. 2021, 42 U.S.C. §§ 1320d et seq., as
amended, and regulations promulgated by the United States Department of Health
and Human Services to implement the act or the requirements of 42 C.F.R. Part
2.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of one of the
following:
      (1)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II, with the
exception of marihuana or hashish, whoever violates division (a) of this
section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V,
whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of possession of drugs.
The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2)B. of this
section, possession of drugs is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the
offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         B.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds the bulk
amount, possession of drugs is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is marihuana or a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance containing marihuana other than hashish,
whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of possession of
marihuana. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3)B. or (c)(3)C. of
this section, possession of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 100 grams
but is less than 200 grams, possession of marihuana is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
         C.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
possession of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (4)   If the drug involved in the violation is hashish or a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance containing hashish, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of possession of hashish. The penalty
for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(4)B. or (c)(4)C. of
this section, possession of hashish is a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds five grams
but is less than ten grams of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds one
gram but is less than two grams of hashish in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
         C.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds ten grams of
hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds two grams of hashish in a liquid
concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and marihuana, one of the following applies:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(5)B. of this
section, the offender is guilty of possession of marihuana and shall be
punished as provided in division (c)(3) of this section. Except as otherwise
provided in division (c)(5)B. of this section, the offender is not guilty of
possession of a fentanyl-related compound under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) and shall
not be charged with, convicted of, or punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) for
possession of a fentanyl-related compound.
         B.   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11).
      (6)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and any Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance that is
not a fentanyl-related compound, one of the following applies:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(6)B. of this
section, the offender is guilty of possession of drugs and shall be punished as
provided in division (c)(2) of this section. Except as otherwise provided in
division (c)(6)B. of this section, the offender is not guilty of possession of
a fentanyl-related compound under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) and shall not be
charged with, convicted of, or punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) for
possession of a fentanyl-related compound.
         B.   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11).
   (d)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
   (e)   In addition to any prison term or jail term authorized or required by
division (c) of this section and R.C. §§ 2929.13, 2929.14, 2929.22, 2929.24,
and 2929.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and in
addition to any other sanction that is imposed for the offense under this
section, R.C. §§ 2929.11 through 2929.18, or R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, if applicable, the court
shall also do the following:
      (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
   (f)   (1)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
      (2)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (f) of this section, the
sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.11)
Statutory reference:
   Felony drug possession offenses, see R.C. § 2925.11(C)
§ 624.05 POSSESSION OF DRUG ABUSE INSTRUMENTS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make, obtain, possess or use any instrument,
article or thing the customary and primary purpose of which is for the
administration or use of a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, when the
instrument involved is a hypodermic or syringe, whether or not of crude or
extemporized manufacture or assembly, and the instrument, article or thing
involved has been used by the offender to unlawfully administer or use a
dangerous drug, other than marihuana, or to prepare a dangerous drug, other
than marihuana, for unlawful administration or use.
   (b)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies
and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719,
4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, and 4772.
      (2)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of this section when a person seeks or obtains medical assistance for
another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a person experiences a drug
overdose and seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or a person is the
subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that
overdose.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing drug abuse
instruments, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, violation of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (d)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.12)
§ 624.06 PERMITTING DRUG ABUSE.
   (a)   No person who is the owner, operator or person in charge of a
locomotive, watercraft, aircraft or other vehicle, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, shall knowingly permit the vehicle to be used for the commission of a
felony drug abuse offense.
   (b)   No person, who is the owner, lessee or occupant, or who has custody,
control or supervision of premises, or real estate, including vacant land,
shall knowingly permit his or her premises, or real estate, including vacant
land, to be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse offense by another
person.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting drug abuse.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, permitting
drug abuse is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Permitting drug abuse is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the felony drug abuse offense in question is a
violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, or 2925.04, or if the felony drug abuse
offense in question is a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 and the offender had
actual knowledge, at the time the offender permitted the vehicle, premises, or
real estate to be used as described in division (a) or (b) of this section,
that the person who assembled or possessed the chemicals in question in
violation of R.C. § 2925.041 had assembled or possessed them with the intent to
manufacture a controlled substance in Schedule I or Schedule II in violation of
R.C. § 2925.04.
   (d)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that
arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (d)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the clerk of
the court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the requirements of R.C. §
2925.03(F). The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as specified
in R.C. § 2925.03(F).
   (f)   Any premises or real estate that is permitted to be used in violation
of division (b) of this section constitutes a nuisance subject to abatement
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2925.13)
§ 624.07 USE OR POSSESSION OF PARAPHERNALIA.
   (a)   As used in this section, DRUG PARAPHERNALIA means any equipment,
product or material of any kind that is used by the offender, intended by the
offender for use or designed for use in propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the
human body, a controlled substance in violation of this chapter. “Drug
paraphernalia” includes but is not limited to any of the following equipment,
products or materials that are used by the offender, intended by the offender
for use, or designed by the offender for use, in any of the following manners:
      (1)   A kit for propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting any
species of a plant that is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived.
      (2)   A kit for manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing or preparing a controlled substance.
      (3)   Any object, instrument or device for manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing or preparing methamphetamine.
      (4)   An isomerization device for increasing the potency of any species
of a plant that is a controlled substance.
      (5)   Testing equipment for identifying, or analyzing the strength,
effectiveness, or purity of, a controlled substance, except for those exempted
in division (d)(4) of this section;
      (6)   A scale or balance for weighing or measuring a controlled
substance.
      (7)   A diluent or adulterant, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose or lactose, for cutting a controlled substance.
      (8)   A separation gin or sifter for removing twigs and seeds from, or
otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana.
      (9)   A blender, bowl, container, spoon or mixing device for compounding
a controlled substance.
      (10)   A capsule, balloon, envelope or container for packaging small
quantities of a controlled substance.
      (11)   A container or device for storing or concealing a controlled
substance.
      (12)   A hypodermic syringe, needle or instrument for parenterally
injecting a controlled substance into the human body.
      (13)   An object, instrument or device for ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing into the human body, marihuana, cocaine, hashish or
hashish oil, such as a metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic
pipe, with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head or punctured
metal bowl; water pipe; carburetion tube or device; smoking or carburetion
mask; roach clip or similar object used to hold burning material, such as a
marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the
hand; miniature cocaine spoon, or cocaine vial; chamber pipe; carburetor pipe;
electric pipe; air driver pipe; chillum; bong; or ice pipe or chiller.
   (b)   In determining if any equipment, product or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, the following:
      (1)   Any statement by the owner or by anyone in control of the
equipment, product or material, concerning its use.
      (2)   The proximity in time or space of the equipment, product or
material, or of the act relating to the equipment, product or material, to a
violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2925.
      (3)   The proximity of the equipment, product or material to any
controlled substance.
      (4)   The existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the
equipment, product or material.
      (5)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of
anyone in control, of the equipment, product or material, to deliver it to any
person whom he or she knows intends to use the equipment, product or material
to facilitate a violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter
2925. A finding that the owner or anyone in control of the equipment, product
or material is not guilty of a violation of any other provision of this chapter
or R.C. Chapter 2925 does not prevent a finding that the equipment, product or
material was intended or designed by the offender for use as drug
paraphernalia.
      (6)   Any oral or written instruction provided with the equipment,
product or material concerning its use.
      (7)   Any descriptive material accompanying the equipment, product or
material and explaining or depicting its use.
      (8)   National or local advertising concerning the use of the equipment,
product or material.
      (9)   The manner and circumstances in which the equipment, product or
material is displayed for sale.
      (10)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of the sales of the
equipment, product or material to the total sales of the business enterprise.
      (11)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the equipment,
product or material in the community.
      (12)   Expert testimony concerning the use of the equipment, product or
material.
   (c)   (1)   Subject to divisions (d)(2), (d)(3), and (d)(4) of this section,
no person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, drug
paraphernalia.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly sell, or possess or manufacture with
purpose to sell, drug paraphernalia, if he or she knows or reasonably should
know that the equipment, product or material will be used as drug
paraphernalia.
      (3)   No person shall place an advertisement in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill or other publication that is published and printed and circulates
primarily within this state, if he or she knows that the purpose of the
advertisement is to promote the illegal sale in this municipality or in this
state of the equipment, product or material that the offender intended or
designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
   (d)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies
and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, and 4772. This section shall not be construed to
prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C. §
3719.172.
      (2)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not apply to a person’s use,
or possession with purpose to use, any drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a
product, or material of any kind that is used by the person, intended by the
person for use, or designed for use in storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body
marihuana.
      (3)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of division (c)(1) of this section when a person seeks or obtains
medical assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a
person experiences a drug overdose and seeks medical assistance for that
overdose, or a person is the subject of another person seeking or obtaining
medical assistance for that overdose.
      (4)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not apply to a person’s use,
or possession with purpose to use, any drug testing strips to determine the
presence of fentanyl or a fentanyl-related compound.
   (e)   Notwithstanding R.C. Chapter 2981, any drug paraphernalia that was
used, possessed, sold or manufactured in violation of this section shall be
seized, after a conviction for that violation, shall be forfeited, and upon
forfeiture shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 2981.12(B).
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (c)(1) of this section is guilty of
illegal use or possession of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (f)(3) of this section, whoever
violates division (c)(2) of this section is guilty of dealing in drug
paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (c)(2) of this section by selling drug
paraphernalia to a juvenile is guilty of selling drug paraphernalia to
juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (c)(3) of this section is guilty of
illegal advertising of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (g)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33.
      (3)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (g)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.14)
   (h)   Illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia.
      (1)   As used in this division (h), DRUG PARAPHERNALIA has the same
meaning as in division (a) of this section.
      (2)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, all factors identified in division (b) of this
section.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, any
drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a product, or material of any kind that
is used by the person, intended by the person for use, or designed for use in
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body marihuana.
      (4)   This division (h) does not apply to any person identified in
division (d)(1) of this section, and it shall not be construed to prohibit the
possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C. § 3719.172.
      (5)   A.   Division (e) of this section applies with respect to any drug
paraphernalia that was used or possessed in violation of division (h) of this
section.
         B.   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of this division (h) when a person seeks or obtains medical
assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a person
experiences a drug overdose and seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or
a person is the subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical
assistance for that overdose.
      (6)   A.   Whoever violates division (h)(3) of this section is guilty of
illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia, a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   Arrest or conviction for a violation of division (h)(3) of this
section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the
person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s
criminal record, including any inquiries contained in any application for
employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with
the person’s appearance as a witness.
      (7)   A.   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for
a violation of division (h) of this section, the court shall do the following,
if applicable:
            1.   If the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or
the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of
circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit for not more than five years.
            2.   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
         B.   1.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under division (h)
of this section prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the
sentencing court requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an
offender who pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another
state or the United States that arose out of the same set of circumstances as
the violation for which the offender’s license or permit was suspended under
division (h) of this section shall not file such a motion.
            2.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (h)(7)B. of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.141)
§ 624.08 ABUSING HARMFUL INTOXICANTS.
   (a)   Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental or veterinary
purposes, no person, with purpose to induce intoxication or similar
physiological effects, shall obtain, possess or use a harmful intoxicant.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abusing harmful
intoxicants, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, abusing harmful intoxicants is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to the September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (c)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.31)
§ 624.09 IMPROPERLY DISPENSING OR DISTRIBUTING NITROUS OXIDE.
   (a)   No person who dispenses or distributes nitrous oxide in cartridges
shall fail to comply with either of the following:
      (1)   The record-keeping requirements established under division (c) of
this section.
      (2)   The labeling and transaction identification requirements
established under division (d) of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is guilty
of improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide, a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (c)   Beginning July 1, 2001, a person who dispenses or distributes nitrous
oxide shall record each transaction involving the dispensing or distribution of
the nitrous oxide on a separate card. The person shall require the purchaser to
sign the card and provide a complete residence address. The person dispensing
or distributing the nitrous oxide shall sign and date the card. The person
shall retain the card recording a transaction for one year from the date of the
transaction. The person shall maintain the cards at the person’s business
address and make them available during normal business hours for inspection and
copying by officers or employees of the State Board of Pharmacy or of other law
enforcement agencies that are authorized to investigate violations of this
code, R.C. Chapter 2925, Chapter 3719 or Chapter 4729, or federal drug abuse
control laws. The cards used to record each transaction shall inform the
purchaser of the following:
      (1)   That nitrous oxide cartridges are to be used only for purposes of
preparing food;
      (2)   That inhalation of nitrous oxide can have dangerous health effects;
and
      (3)   That it is a violation of state law to distribute or dispense
cartridges of nitrous oxide to any person under age 21, punishable as a felony
of the fifth degree.
   (d)   (1)   Each cartridge of nitrous oxide dispensed or distributed in this
municipality shall bear the following printed warning: “Nitrous oxide
cartridges are to be used only for purposes of preparing food. Nitrous oxide
cartridges may not be sold to persons under age 21. Do not inhale contents.
Misuse can be dangerous to your health.”
      (2)   Each time a person dispenses or distributes one or more cartridges
of nitrous oxide, the person shall mark the packaging containing the cartridges
with a label or other device that identifies the person who dispensed or
distributed the nitrous oxide and the person’s business address.
(R.C. § 2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G))
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking in harmful intoxicants, felony offenses, see R.C. § 2925.32
§ 624.10 POSSESSING NITROUS OXIDE IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   As used in this section, MOTOR VEHICLE, STREET and HIGHWAY have the
same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (b)   Unless authorized by these Codified Ordinances or by state law, no
person shall possess an open cartridge of nitrous oxide in either of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   While operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on a
street, highway or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking.
      (2)   While being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on a street,
highway or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular traffic or parking.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing nitrous oxide in
a motor vehicle, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (d)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for
possessing nitrous oxide in a motor vehicle, the court may suspend for not more
than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit.
(R.C. § 2925.33)
§ 624.11 ILLEGAL DISPENSING OF DRUG SAMPLES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly furnish a sample drug to another person.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to manufacturers,
wholesalers, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, licensed health professionals
authorized to prescribe drugs, and other persons whose conduct is in accordance
with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4725, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, and 4722.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal dispensing of
drug samples.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the offense is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II, with the
exception of marihuana, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the offense is a dangerous drug or a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule
IV or Schedule V, or is marihuana, the penalty for the offense shall be
determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in the following division, illegal
dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
         B.   If the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in
the vicinity of a juvenile, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (d)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that
arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (d)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the clerk of
the court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the requirements of R.C. §
2925.03(F). The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as specified
in R.C. § 2925.03(F).
(R.C. § 2925.36(A) - (D), (F))
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 2925.36(C)(2)
§ 624.12 COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly possess any counterfeit controlled
substance.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section shall be guilty of
possession of counterfeit controlled substances, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2925.37(A), (G))
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking, other felony counterfeit controlled substance offenses, see
R.C. § 2925.37(H) - (M)
§ 624.13 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE OR PRESCRIPTION LABELS.
   (a)   Whenever a manufacturer sells a controlled substance, and whenever a
wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility sells a controlled substance in
a package the wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility has prepared, the
manufacturer or the wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility, as the
case may be, shall securely affix to each package in which the controlled
substance is contained a label showing in legible English the name and address
of the vendor and the quantity, kind, and form of controlled substance
contained therein. No person, except a pharmacist for the purpose of dispensing
a controlled substance upon a prescription shall alter, deface, or remove any
label so affixed. As used in this division, REPACKAGER and OUTSOURCING FACILITY
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (b)   No person shall alter, deface or remove any label affixed pursuant to
R.C. § 3719.08 as long as any of the original contents remain.
(R.C. § 3719.08(A), (E))
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, or R.C. § 3719.07 or § 3719.08, or a drug abuse offense, a violation
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If
the violation involves the sale, offer to sell, or possession of a Schedule I
or Schedule II controlled substance, with the exception of marihuana, and if
the offender, as a result of the violation, is a major drug offender, then R.C.
§ 3719.99(D) applies.
(R.C. § 3719.99(C))
§ 624.14 POSSESSION, SALE AND DISPOSAL OF HYPODERMICS.
   (a)   Possession of a hypodermic is authorized for the following:
      (1)   A manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in hypodermics, or
medication packaged in hypodermics, and any authorized agent of employee of
that manufacturer, distributor or dealer, in the regular course of business;
      (2)   A terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, in the regular course of
business;
      (3)   A person authorized to administer injections, in the regular course
of the person’s profession or employment;
      (4)   A person, when the hypodermic in his or her possession was lawfully
obtained and is kept and used for the purpose of self-administration of insulin
or other drug prescribed for the treatment of disease by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs;
      (5)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for legal research, clinical,
educational or medicinal purposes;
      (6)   A farmer, for the lawful administration of a drug to an animal;
      (7)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for lawful professional,
mechanical, trade or craft purposes.
   (b)   No manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics or
medication packaged in hypodermics, or their authorized agents or employees,
and no terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall display any hypodermic for
sale. No person authorized to possess a hypodermic pursuant to division (a) of
this section shall negligently fail to take reasonable precautions to prevent
any hypodermic in the person’s possession from theft or acquisition by any
unauthorized person.
(R.C. § 3719.172(A), (B))
   (c)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of division (b) of this section, R.C. § 3719.05, 3719.06,
3719.13, 3719.172(B) or 3719.31, or a drug abuse offense, a violation of
division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 3719.99(E))
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 3719.172(C), (D)
§ 624.15 EVIDENCE.
   (a)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this chapter or
R.C. Chapter 2925 or Chapter 3719, a laboratory report from the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation or a laboratory operated by another
law enforcement agency, or a laboratory established by or under the authority
of an institution of higher education that has its main campus in this state
and that is accredited by the Association of American Universities or the North
Central Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, primarily for the
purpose of providing scientific service to law enforcement agencies, and signed
by the person performing the analysis, stating that the substance that is the
basis of the alleged offense has been weighed and analyzed and stating the
findings as to the content, weight and identity of the substance and that it
contains any amount of a controlled substance and the number and description of
unit dosages, is prima facie evidence of the content, identity and weight or
the existence and number of unit dosages of the substance. In any criminal
prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 or a violation of this chapter,
R.C. Chapter 2925 or R.C. Chapter 3719 that is based on the possession of
chemicals sufficient to produce a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance
included in Schedule I, Schedule II, Schedule III, Schedule IV or Schedule V, a
laboratory report from the Bureau or from any laboratory that is operated or
established as described in this division that is signed by the person
performing the analysis, stating that the substances that are the basis of the
alleged offense have been weighed and analyzed and stating the findings as to
the content, weight, and identity of each of the substances, is prima facie
evidence of the content, identity and weight of the substances.
      (2)   Attached to that report shall be a copy of a notarized statement by
the signer of the report giving the name of the signer and stating that the
signer is an employee of the laboratory issuing the report and that performing
the analysis is a part of the signer’s regular duties, and giving an outline of
the signer’s education, training and experience for performing an analysis of
materials included under this section. The signer shall attest that
scientifically accepted tests were performed with due caution, and that the
evidence was handled in accordance with established and accepted procedures
while in the custody of the laboratory.
   (b)   The prosecuting attorney shall serve a copy of the report on the
attorney of record for the accused, or on the accused if the accused has no
attorney, prior to any proceeding in which the report is to be used against the
accused other than at a preliminary hearing or grand jury proceeding where the
report may be used without having been previously served upon the accused.
   (c)   The report shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity
and weight or the existence and number of unit dosages of the substance if the
accused or the accused’s attorney demands the testimony of the person signing
the report, by serving the demand upon the prosecuting attorney, within seven
days from the accused or the accused’s attorney’s receipt of the report. The
time may be extended by a trial judge in the interests of justice.
   (d)   Any report issued for use under this section shall contain notice of
the right of the accused to demand, and the manner in which the accused shall
demand, the testimony of the person signing the report.
   (e)   Any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or R.C.
Chapter 2925 or Chapter 3719 is entitled, upon written request made to the
prosecuting attorney, to have a portion of the substance that is, or of each of
the substances that are, the basis of the alleged violation preserved for the
benefit of independent analysis performed by a laboratory analyst employed by
the accused person, or, if the accused is indigent, by a qualified laboratory
analyst appointed by the court. The portion shall be a representative sample of
the entire substance that is, or of each of the substances that are, the basis
of the alleged violation and shall be of sufficient size, in the opinion of the
court, to permit the accused’s analyst to make a thorough scientific analysis
concerning the identity of the substance or substances. The prosecuting
attorney shall provide the accused’s analyst with the sample portion at least
14 days prior to trial, unless the trial is to be held in a court not of record
or unless the accused person is charged with a minor misdemeanor, in which case
the prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused’s analyst with the sample
portion at least three days prior to trial. If the prosecuting attorney
determines that such a sample portion cannot be preserved and given to the
accused’s analyst, the prosecuting attorney shall so inform the accused person,
or the accused’s attorney. In such a circumstance, the accused person is
entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting attorney, to have the
accused’s privately employed or court appointed analyst present at an analysis
of the substance that is, or the substances that are, the basis of the alleged
violation, and, upon further written request, to receive copies of all recorded
scientific data that result from the analysis and that can be used by an
analyst in arriving at conclusions, findings or opinions concerning the
identity of the substance or substances subject to the analysis.
   (f)   In addition to the rights provided under division (e) of this section,
any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2925
or Chapter 3719 that involves a bulk amount of a controlled substance, or any
multiple thereof, or who is accused of a violation of R.C. § 2925.11 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, other than a minor misdemeanor
violation, that involves marihuana, is entitled, upon written request made to
the prosecuting attorney, to have a laboratory analyst of the accused’s choice,
or, if the accused is indigent, a qualified laboratory analyst appointed by the
court, present at a measurement or weighing of the substance that is the basis
of the alleged violation. Also, the accused person is entitled, upon further
written request, to receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result
from the measurement or weighing and that can be used by an analyst in arriving
at conclusions, findings, or opinions concerning the weight, volume or number
of unit doses of the substance subject to the measurement or weighing.
(R.C. § 2925.51)
   (g)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required under
R.C. §§ 2929.18 and 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required
under any provision of law, the court imposing sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a drug abuse offense may order the offender to
pay to the state, municipal or county law enforcement agencies that handled the
investigation and prosecution all of the costs that the state, municipal
corporation or county reasonably incurred in having tests performed under this
section or R.C. § 2925.51 or in any other manner on any substance that was the
basis of, or involved in, the offense to determine whether the substance
contained any amount of a controlled substance if the results of the tests
indicate that the substance tested contained any controlled substance. No court
shall order an offender under this section to pay the costs of tests performed
on a substance if the results of the tests do not indicate that the substance
tested contained any controlled substance. The court shall hold a hearing to
determine the amount of costs to be imposed under this section. The court may
hold the hearing as part of the sentencing hearing for the offender.
(R.C. § 2925.511)
§ 624.16 DOUBLE JEOPARDY.
   No person shall be prosecuted for a violation of this chapter if the person
has been acquitted or convicted under the federal drug abuse control laws of
the same act or omission which, it is alleged, constitutes a violation of this
chapter.
(R.C. §§ 2925.50, 3719.19)
§ 624.17 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE SCHEDULES.
   Controlled Substance Schedules I, II, III, IV and V, as established in R.C.
§ 3719.41 and amended by R.C. §§ 3719.43 and 3719.44, are hereby adopted by
reference, and shall be treated as if set forth in full herein.
§ 624.18 SALE OF PSEUDOEPHEDRINE.
   (a)   Unlawful purchases.
      (1)   As used in divisions (a), (b), (c) and (d) of this section:
         A.   CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or used by
humans and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only
pursuant to a prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         B.   EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         C.   EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         D.   PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation
that contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts, optical
isomers, or salts of optical isomers.
         E.   PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         F.   RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products for
sale to the general public.
         G.   SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture, preparation,
or substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         H.   TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 4729.01.
      (2)   A.   1.   No individual shall knowingly purchase, receive, or
otherwise acquire an amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
that is greater than either of the following unless the pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product is dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist and the licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772:
               a.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The limits specified in divisions (a)(2)A.1.a. and (a)
(2)A.1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine or
base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The limits do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         B.   It is not a violation of division (b)(1) of this section for an
individual to receive or accept more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product specified in division (a)(2)A.1.a. or (a)(2)A.1.b. of this
section if the individual is an employee of a retailer or terminal distributor
of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   A.   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly purchase,
receive, or otherwise acquire a pseudoephedrine product, or ephedrine product
unless the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product is dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist
and the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772.
         B.   Division (a)(3)A. of this section does not apply to an individual
under 18 years of age who purchases, receives, or otherwise acquires a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product from any of the following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to that individual and whose conduct is in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772;
            2.   A parent or guardian of that individual who provides the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person, as authorized by that individual’s parent or
guardian, who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            4.   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs who
provides the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to that individual if
the individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs and the individual receives or accepts from the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (4)   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly show or give
false information concerning the individual’s name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing, receiving, or otherwise acquiring
a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
      (5)   No individual shall knowingly fail to comply with the requirements
of R.C. § 3715.051(B).
      (6)   Whoever violates division (a)(2)A. of this section is guilty of
unlawful purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (a)(3)A. of this section is guilty of
underage purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (a)(4) of this section is guilty of using
false information to purchase a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the first degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (9)   Whoever violates division (a)(5) of this section is guilty of
improper purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2925.55)
   (b)   Unlawful retail sales.
      (1)   A.   1.   Except as provided in division (b)(1)B. of this section,
no retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall knowingly sell, offer
to sell, hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide to any individual an
amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
               a.   Three and six-tenths grams within a period of a single day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (b)(1)A.1.a. and
(b)(1)A.1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine
or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         B.   1.   Division (b)(1)A. of this section does not apply to any
quantity of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs if the conduct of the pharmacist and
the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772.
            2.   It is not a violation of division (b)(1)A. of this section for
a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee of either to
provide to an individual more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product specified in division (b)(1)A.1.a. or (b)(1)A.1.b. of this
section under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the
retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a sealed container in
connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging,
loading, or unloading of the product;
               b.   A stop-sale alert is generated after the submission of
information to the national precursor log exchange under the conditions
described in R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (b)(2)B. of this section, no
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall sell, offer to sell,
hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual who is under 18 years of age.
         B.   Division (b)(2)A. of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age and whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
4741, or 4772;
            2.   A parent or guardian of an individual under 18 years of age
who provides a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person who, as authorized by the individual’s parent or
guardian, dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age;
            4.   The provision by a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, or employee of either of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
in a sealed container to an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs who is under 18 years of age in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.051(A) or R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
      (4)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.052(A)(1).
      (5)   Whoever violates division (b)(1)A. of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (b)(2)A. of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to a minor, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (b)(3) of this section is guilty of
improper sale of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a misdemeanor
of the second degree.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (b)(4) of this section is guilty of
failing to submit information to the national precursor log exchange, a
misdemeanor for which the offender shall be fined not more than $1,000 per
violation.
(R.C. § 2925.56)
   (c)   Transaction scans.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division and division (d) of this section,
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
         A.   CARD HOLDER. Any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee
of a seller, to purchase or receive any pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product from the seller, agent or employee.
         B.   IDENTIFICATION CARD has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2927.021.
         C.   SELLER. A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs.
         D.   TRANSACTION SCAN. The process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks by means of a transaction scan device the validity
of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card that is
presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving any pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product.
         E.   TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2927.021.
      (2)   A.   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away or otherwise distributing
to the card holder a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
         B.   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (c)(2)A. of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away or otherwise distribute any pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to the card holder.
         C.   Division (c)(2)A. of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller as a condition for selling, giving away or
otherwise distributing a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the
person presenting the document from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or an identification card if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. §
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (c) and division (d) of this section.
      (4)   A.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except the following:
            1.   The name, address, and date of birth of the person listed on
the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by
a card holder;
            2.   The expiration date, identification number, and issuing agency
of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by a card holder.
         B.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (c)(4)A. of this section except for
purposes of division (d) of this section, R.C. § 2925.58, or R.C. § 3715.052(A)
(1).
         C.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (c)(2)A. of this section.
         D.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (d) of this section
or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (c) or division (d) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable state or federal laws or rules governing the
sale, giving away or other distribution of pseudoephedrine products or
ephedrine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (c)(2)B. or (c)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil penalty of
up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay each
collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the County
Treasury.
(R.C. § 2925.57)
   (d)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (b) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of a pseudoephedrine product is an
element of the alleged violation if the seller, agent or employee raises and
proves as an affirmative defense that all of the following occurred:
         A.   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive a pseudoephedrine
product presented a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card.
         B.   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that the
license or card was valid.
         C.   The pseudoephedrine product was sold, given away or otherwise
distributed to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification
presented and the completed transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (d)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (b) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (b) of this
section. For purposes of division (d)(1)C. of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         A.   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away or otherwise distributes a pseudoephedrine product is
18 years of age or older;
         B.   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (d)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
Deputy Registrar who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50
through 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of
that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(R.C. § 2925.58)
   (e)   Retailer’s duties.
      (1)   As used in divisions (e) and (f) of this section:
         CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or used by humans
and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only pursuant to a
prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         DRUG. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. An officer or employee of any agency or
authority of the United States, a state, a territory, a political subdivision
of a state or territory, or an Indian tribe, who is empowered by the law to
investigate or conduct an official inquiry into a potential violation of law or
prosecute or otherwise conduct a criminal, civil, or administrative proceeding
arising from an alleged violation of law.
         LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         NATIONAL PRECURSOR LOG EXCHANGE or EXCHANGE. The electronic system for
tracking sales of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products on a national
basis that is administered by the National Association of Drug Diversion
Investigators or a successor organization.
         PHARMACIST. A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 to engage in the
practice of pharmacy.
         PHARMACY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         PRESCRIBER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         PROOF OF AGE. A driver’s license, a commercial driver’s license, a
military identification card, a passport, or an identification card issued
under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows a person is 18 years of age or
older.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or
salts of optical isomers.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products for sale
to the general public.
         SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         STOP-SALE ALERT. A notification sent from the national precursor log
exchange to a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs indicating
that the completion of a sale of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
would result in a violation of R.C. § 2925.56(A)(1) or federal law.
         TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same meanings as in
R.C. § 4729.01.
         WHOLESALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
      (2)   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs that sells,
offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers, or otherwise provides a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the public shall do all of the
following:
         A.   Segregate pseudoephedrine products or ephedrine products from
other merchandise so that no member of the public may procure or purchase such
products without the direct assistance of a pharmacist or other authorized
employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
         B.   With regard to each time a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product is sold or otherwise provided without a valid prescription:
            1.   Determine, by examination of a valid proof of age, that the
purchaser or recipient is at least 18 years of age;
            2.   a.   Using any information available, including information
from the national precursor log exchange if the information is accessible, make
a reasonable attempt to ensure that no individual purchases or receives an
amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
                  i.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single
day;
                  ii.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
               b.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (e)(2)B.2.a.i.
and (e)(2)B.2.a.ii. of this section apply to the total amount of base
pseudoephedrine or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product, respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s
overall weight.
         C.   Maintain a log book of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product purchases, in accordance with R.C. § 3715.051;
         D.   If required to comply with section R.C. § 3715.052, submit the
information specified in divisions (A)(1)(a) to (A)(1)(d) of that section to
the national precursor log exchange.
      (3)   Prescriptions, orders, and records maintained pursuant to this
section and stocks of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products shall be
open for inspection to federal, state, county, and municipal officers, and
employees of the State Board of Pharmacy whose duty it is to enforce the laws
of this state or of the United States relating to controlled substances. Such
prescriptions, orders, records, and stocks shall be open for inspection by the
State Medical Board and its employees for purposes of enforcing R.C. Chapter
4731.
(R.C. § 3715.05)
   (f)   Theft or loss; reporting requirements.
      (1)   Each retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy,
prescriber or wholesaler that sells, offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers
or otherwise provides any pseudoephedrine product and that discovers the theft
or loss of any pseudoephedrine product in an amount of more than nine grams per
incident of theft or loss shall notify all of the following upon discovery of
the theft or loss:
         A.   The State Board of Pharmacy, by telephone immediately upon
discovery of the theft or loss;
         B.   Law enforcement authorities. If the incident is a theft and the
theft constitutes a felony, the retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, pharmacy, prescriber or wholesaler shall report the theft to the law
enforcement authorities in accordance with R.C. § 2921.22.
      (2)   Within 30 days after making a report by telephone to the State
Board of Pharmacy pursuant to division (f)(1)A. of this section, a retailer,
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy, prescriber or wholesaler
shall send a written report to the State Board of Pharmacy.
      (3)   The reports required under this section shall identify the product
that was stolen or lost, the amount of the product stolen or lost, and the date
and time of discovery of the theft or loss.
(R.C. § 3715.06)
§ 624.19 SALE OF PURE CAFFEINE PRODUCT.
   (a)   As used in this section, PURE CAFFEINE PRODUCT means:
      (1)   Subject to division (a)(2) of this section, a product that consists
solely or primarily of caffeine and is manufactured into a crystalline, liquid,
or powdered form.
      (2)   The phrase does not include any of the following that contains
caffeine and is formulated, manufactured, and labeled in accordance with the
laws and regulations enforced by the United States Food and Drug
Administration:
         A.   Coffee, tea, any soft drink, any energy drink, or any other
caffeine- containing beverage;
         B.   Any energy product.
   (b)   Except as provided in division (c) of this section, no person shall
knowingly sell or offer for sale a pure caffeine product.
   (c)   Division (b) of this section does not prohibit a person from selling
or offering for sale any product manufactured in a unit-dose form such as a
pill, tablet, or caplet, but only if each unit dose of the product contains not
more than 250 milligrams of caffeine.
   (d)   Nothing in this section prohibits either of the following:
      (1)   Possession of a product described in division (c) of this section;
      (2)   Possession of a pure caffeine product by any of the following:
         A.   A food processing establishment, as defined in R.C. § 3715.021;
         B.   A manufacturer of a drug that is available without a
prescription;
         C.   A laboratory that holds a current, valid category III terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs license issued by the state board of pharmacy
under R.C. § 4729.54;
         D.   A laboratory of any agency or department of this state that
performs testing, analysis, and other laboratory services on behalf of the
state;
         E.   A postal or delivery service that transports or delivers a pure
caffeine product to an entity specified in divisions (d)(2)A. to (d)(2)D. of
this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of illegal
sale of pure caffeine, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor
of the third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 2925.34)
§ 624.20 SALE OF DEXTROMETHORPHAN.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   DEXTROMETHORPHAN. Means the dextrorotatory isomer of 3-methoxy-N-
methylmorphinan, including its salts, but not including its racemic or
levorotatory forms.
      (2)   EVIDENCE OF MAJORITY AND IDENTITY. Means a document issued by the
federal government or a state, county, or municipal government, or a
subdivision or agency of any of the foregoing, including a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, an identification card issued under R.C. §§
4507.50 to 4507.52, a military identification card, or any other form of
identification that bears the name, date of birth, description, and picture of
the person identified.
      (3)   RETAILER. Means a place of business that offers consumer products
for sale to the general public, including a terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs that is licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 and operated as a pharmacy.
   (b)   No retailer or employee of a retailer shall knowingly supply, deliver,
give, or otherwise provide a drug, material, compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance containing any quantity of dextromethorphan through the sale of any
product to a person under 18 years of age, unless the person has been issued a
prescription for the product being purchased.
   (c)   For purposes of division (b) of this section, the person making the
sale of a product containing dextromethorphan shall require and obtain evidence
of majority and identity from the purchaser, unless from the purchaser’s
outward appearance the person making the sale would reasonably presume the
purchaser to be 25 years of age or older. Proof that the person making the sale
demanded, was shown, and acted in reasonable reliance on the purchaser’s
evidence of majority and identity is a defense to any charge of a violation of
division (b) of this section.
   (d)   A retailer or employee of a retailer is not liable for damages in a
civil action for injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly
arises from an act or omission associated with a failure to prevent the sale of
a product containing dextromethorphan to a person under 18 years of age, unless
the act or omission constitutes willful or wanton misconduct.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of illegally
selling dextromethorphan, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2925.62)
§ 624.21 SALE OF TOXIC GLUE.
   (a)   The terms TOXIC GLUE as used herein shall mean any compound, narcotic,
drug, solution, mixture or chemical or liquid containing any toluol, hexane,
tricholorethylene, acetone, toluene, ethyl acetate, methyl ethyl ketone,
trichoroathane, isopropanol, methyl isobutyl ketone, methyl cellosolve acetate,
cyclohexanone or any other substance containing volatile solvents releasing
vapors so as to cause a condition of excitement, intoxication, stupification,
dizziness or changing or distorting the audio, visual or mental processes;
except beverages containing alcohol or tobacco-containing substances shall not
be considered TOXIC GLUE.
   (b)   No person shall inhale, breathe, or otherwise introduce into his or
her respiratory or circulatory system any toxic glue with the intention of
becoming intoxicated, elated, paralyzed, irrational or in any manner changing,
distorting or disturbing the eyesight, thinking process, judgment, balance or
coordination. For the purpose of this section, any such condition so induced
shall be deemed an intoxicated condition.
   (c)   No person shall for the purpose of violating or aiding another violate
any provision of this section intentionally possess, buy, sell, transfer
possession or receive possession of toxic glue.
   (d)   No person shall sell or transfer possession of any toxic glue to
another person under 21 years of age except that:
      (1)   Upon written order of a parent or guardian;
      (2)   Only one tube of glue may be sold at any one time to that person
under 21 years of age, provided that the tube is included in a kit for the
assembly of a model airplane, automobile, boat or other unassembled model; or
      (3)   A kit not having glue packaged therein is sold in conjunction with
the sale of one tube of glue.
   (e)   The provisions of this section concerning toxic glue shall not apply
for its use unless taken at the direction of or under prescription of any
medical or dental treatment by a physician, surgeon, doctor, dentist or
pediatrist.
   (f)   Whoever violates the provisions of divisions (b), (c) or (d) shall be
fined not more than $100 for the first offense; a second or subsequent offense
not more than $500 or imprisonment of not more than 90 days or both.
(Ord. 1500.05, passed 10-10-1974)
CHAPTER 630
Gambling
630.01   Definitions.
630.02   Gambling in general.
630.03   Operating a gambling house.
630.04   Public gaming.
630.05   Cheating.
630.06   Responsibility of charitable organization conducting bingo game.
630.07   Maintenance of records by charitable organizations.
630.08   Qualifications of bingo game operator.
630.09   Exemption for bingo games conducted for amusement.
630.10   Prohibitions where instant bingo game is conducted.
630.11   Raffle drawings.
630.12   Instant bingo other than at bingo sessions.
630.13   Restrictions on owner or lessor of location at instant bingo.
630.14   Skill-based amusement machines; prohibited conduct.
630.15   Electronic instant bingo; prohibited conduct.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to destroy devices, see R.C. § 715.51
   Power to prohibit gambling, see R.C. § 715.49
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police Department,
see §
654.16
§ 630.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BET. The hazarding of anything of value upon the result of an event,
undertaking, or contingency, but does not include a bona fide business risk.
   BINGO. Either of the following:
      (1)   A game with all of the following characteristics:
         A.   The participants use bingo cards or sheets, including paper
formats and electronic representation or image formats, that are divided into
25 spaces arranged in five horizontal and five vertical rows of spaces, with
each space, except the central space, being designated by a combination of a
letter and a number and with the central space being designated as a free
space;
         B.   The participants cover the spaces on the bingo cards or sheets
that correspond to combinations of letters and numbers that are announced by a
bingo game operator;
         C.   A bingo game operator announces combinations of letters and
numbers that appear on objects that a bingo game operator selects by chance,
either manually or mechanically, from a receptacle that contains 75 objects at
the beginning of each game, each object marked by a different combination of a
letter and a number that corresponds to one of the 75 possible combinations of
a letter and a number that can appear on the bingo cards or sheets;
         D.   The winner of the bingo game includes any participant who
properly announces during the interval between the announcements of letters and
numbers, as described in division (1)(c) of this definition, that a
predetermined and pre-announced pattern of spaces has been covered on a bingo
card or sheet being used by the participant.
      (2)   Instant bingo, electronic instant bingo, and raffles.
   BINGO GAME OPERATOR. Any person, except security personnel, who performs
work or labor at the site of bingo including but not limited to collecting
money from participants, handing out bingo cards or sheets or objects to cover
spaces on bingo cards or sheets, selecting from a receptacle the objects that
contain the combination of letters and numbers that appear on bingo cards or
sheets, calling out the combinations of letters and numbers, distributing
prizes, selling or redeeming instant bingo tickets or cards, selling or
redeeming electronic instant bingo tickets, credits, or vouchers, accessing an
electronic instant bingo system other than as a participant, supervising the
operation of a punch board, selling raffle tickets, selecting raffle tickets
from a receptacle and announcing the winning numbers in a raffle, and
preparing, selling, and serving food or beverages. “Bingo game operator” does
not include a person who is installing, maintaining, updating, or repairing an
electronic instant bingo system.
   BINGO SESSION. A period that includes both of the following:
      (1)   Not to exceed five continuous hours for the conduct of one or more
games described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in this section,
instant bingo, and electronic instant bingo;
      (2)   A period for the conduct of instant bingo and electronic instant
bingo for not more than two hours before and not more than two hours after the
period described in division (1) of this definition.
   BINGO SUPPLIES. Bingo cards or sheets; instant bingo tickets or cards;
electronic bingo aids; raffle tickets; punch boards; seal cards; instant bingo
ticket dispensers; electronic instant bingo systems; and devices for selecting
or displaying the combination of bingo letters and numbers or raffle tickets.
Items that are “bingo supplies” are not gambling devices if sold or otherwise
provided, and used, in accordance with this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915. For
purposes of this chapter, “bingo supplies” are not to be considered equipment
used to conduct a bingo game.
   BOOKMAKING. The business of receiving or paying off bets.
   CHAMBER OF COMMERCE. Any organization of individuals, professionals, and
businesses that has the purpose to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial, and civic interests of the community and that is, and has received
from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that currently is in
effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(6).
   CHARITABLE BINGO GAME. Any bingo game described in divisions (1) or (2) of
the definition of “bingo” in this section that is conducted by a charitable
organization that has obtained a license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08 and the
proceeds of which are used for a charitable purpose.
   CHARITABLE INSTANT BINGO ORGANIZATION. An organization that is exempt from
federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3) and
is a charitable organization as defined in this section. The term does not
include a charitable organization that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3) and that is created by a
veteran’s organization, a fraternal organization, or a sporting organization in
regards to bingo conducted or assisted by a veteran’s organization, a fraternal
organization, or a sporting organization pursuant to R.C. § 2915.13, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, “charitable
organization” means either of the following:
         A.   An organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
         B.   A volunteer rescue service organization, volunteer firefighter’s
organization, veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §§ 501(c)
(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19).
      (2)   To qualify as a charitable organization, an organization shall have
been in continuous existence as such in this state for a period of two years
immediately preceding either the making of an application for a bingo license
under R.C. § 2915.08 or the conducting of any game of chance as provided in
R.C. § 2915.02(D), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   CHARITABLE PURPOSE. Means that the net profit of bingo, other than instant
bingo or electronic instant bingo, is used by, or is given, donated, or
otherwise transferred to, any of the following:
      (1)   Any organization that is described in IRC §§ 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2),
or 509(a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization that is tax
exempt under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
      (2)   A veteran’s organization that is a post, chapter, or organization
of veterans, or an auxiliary unit or society of, or a trust or foundation for,
any such post, chapter, or organization organized in the United States or any
of its possessions, at least 75% of the members of which are veterans and
substantially all of the other members of which are individuals who are
spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, or such individuals, provided that no
part of the net earnings of such post, chapter, or organization inures to the
benefit of any private shareholder or individual, and further provided that the
net profit is used by the post, chapter, or organization for the charitable
purposes set forth in R.C. § 5739.02(B)(12), is used for awarding scholarships
to or for attendance at an institution mentioned in that division of the Ohio
Revised Code, is donated to a governmental agency, or is used for nonprofit
youth activities, the purchase of United States or Ohio flags that are donated
to schools, youth groups, or other bona fide nonprofit organizations, promotion
of patriotism, or disaster relief;
      (3)   A fraternal organization that has been in continuous existence in
this state for 15 years and that uses the net profit exclusively for religious,
charitable, scientific, literary, or educational purposes, or for the
prevention of cruelty to children or animals, if contributions for such use
would qualify as a deductible charitable contribution under IRC § 170;
      (4)   A volunteer firefighter’s organization that uses the net profit for
the purposes set forth in the definition of “volunteer firefighter’s
organization” in this section.
   COMMUNITY ACTION AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 122.66.
   CONDUCT. To back, promote, organize, manage, carry on, sponsor, or prepare
for the operation of bingo or a game of chance, a scheme of chance, or a
sweepstakes.
   DEAL. A single game of instant bingo tickets, or a single game of electronic
instant bingo tickets, all with the same serial number.
   DISTRIBUTOR. Any person who purchases or obtains bingo supplies and who does
either of the following:
      (1)   Sells, offers for sale, or otherwise provides or offers to provide
the bingo supplies to another person for use in this state;
      (2)   Modifies, converts, adds to, or removes parts from the bingo
supplies to further their promotion or sale for use in this state.
   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID.
      (1)   An electronic device used by a participant to monitor bingo cards
or sheets purchased at the time and place of a bingo session and that does all
of the following:
         A.   It provides a means for a participant to input numbers and
letters announced by a bingo caller.
         B.   It compares the numbers and letters entered by the participant to
the bingo faces previously stored in the memory of the device.
         C.   It identifies a winning bingo pattern.
      (2)   The term does not include any device into which a coin, currency,
token, or an equivalent is inserted to activate play.
   ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO.
      (1)   A form of bingo that consists of an electronic or digital
representation of instant bingo in which a participant wins a prize if the
participant’s electronic instant bingo ticket contains a combination of numbers
or symbols that was designated in advance as a winning combination, and to
which all of the following apply:
         A.   Each deal has a predetermined, finite number of winning and
losing tickets and a predetermined prize amount and deal structure, provided
that there may be multiple winning combinations in each deal and multiple
winning tickets.
         B.   Each electronic instant bingo ticket within a deal has a unique
serial number that is not regenerated.
         C.   Each electronic instant bingo ticket within a deal is sold for
the same price.
         D.   After a participant purchases an electronic instant bingo ticket,
the combination of numbers or symbols on the ticket is revealed to the
participant.
         E.   The reveal of numbers or symbols on the ticket may incorporate an
entertainment or bonus theme, provided that the reveal does not include
spinning reels that resemble a slot machine.
         F.   The reveal theme, if any, does not require additional
consideration or award any prize other than any predetermined prize associated
with the electronic instant bingo ticket.
      (2)   The term shall not include any of the following:
         A.   Any game, entertainment, or bonus theme that replicates or
simulates any of the following:
            1.   The gambling games of keno, blackjack, roulette, poker, craps,
other casino-style table games;
            2.   Horse racing;
            3.   Gambling games offered in this state on slot machines or video
lottery terminals. As used in this division, VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 3770.21.
         B.   Any device operated by dropping one or more coins or tokens into
a slot and pulling a handle or pushing a button or touchpoint on a touchscreen
to activate one to three or more rotating reels marked into horizontal segments
by varying symbols, where the predetermined prize amount depends on how and how
many of the symbols line up when the rotating reels come to a rest;
         C.   Any device that includes a coin or token slot, tray, or hopper
and the ability to dispense coins, cash, tokens, or anything of value other
than a credit ticket voucher.
   ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO SYSTEM. Means both of the following:
      (1)   A mechanical, electronic, digital, or video device and associated
software to which all of the following apply:
         A.   It is used by not more than one player at a time to play
electronic instant bingo on a single screen that is physically connected to the
device;
         B.   It is located on the premises of the principal place of business
of a veteran’s or fraternal organization that holds a type II or type III bingo
license to conduct electronic instant bingo at that location issued under R.C.
§ 2915.08.
      (2)   Any associated equipment or software used to manage, monitor, or
document any aspect of electronic instant bingo.
   EXPENSES. The reasonable amount of gross profit actually expended for all of
the following:
      (1)   The purchase or lease of bingo supplies;
      (2)   The annual license fee required under R.C. § 2915.08;
      (3)   Bank fees and service charges for a bingo session or game account
described in R.C. § 2915.10;
      (4)   Audits and accounting services;
      (5)   Safes;
      (6)   Cash registers;
      (7)   Hiring security personnel;
      (8)   Advertising bingo;
      (9)   Renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session;
      (10)   Tables and chairs;
      (11)   Expenses for maintaining and operating a charitable organization’s
facilities, including but not limited to a post home, club house, lounge,
tavern, or canteen and any grounds attached to the post home, club house,
lounge, tavern, or canteen;
      (12)   Payment of real property taxes and assessments that are levied on
a premises on which bingo is conducted;
      (13)   Any other product or service directly related to the conduct of
bingo that is authorized in rules adopted by the Attorney General under R.C. §
2915.08(F)(1).
   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. Any society, order, state headquarters, or
association within this state, except a college or high school fraternity, that
is not organized for profit, that is a branch, lodge, or chapter of a national
or state organization, that exists exclusively for the common business or
sodality of its members.
   GAMBLING DEVICE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A book, totalizer, or other equipment used for recording bets;
      (2)   A ticket, token, or other device representing a chance, share, or
interest in a scheme of chance or evidencing a bet;
      (3)   A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel, slot machine,
or other apparatus designed for use in connection with a game of chance;
      (4)   Any equipment, device, apparatus, or paraphernalia specially
designed for gambling purposes;
      (5)   Bingo supplies sold or otherwise provided, or used, in violation of
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
   GAMBLING OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. Chapter 2915;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 or a violation of R.C. § 2915.06
as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or of the United States, of which gambling is an
element;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   GAME FLARE. The board or placard, or electronic representation of a board or
placard, that accompanies each deal of instant bingo or electronic instant
bingo tickets and that includes the following information for the game:
      (1)   The name of the game;
      (2)   The manufacturer’s name or distinctive logo;
      (3)   The form number;
      (4)   The ticket count;
      (5)   The prize structure, including the number of winning tickets by
denomination and the respective winning symbol or number combinations for the
winning tickets;
      (6)   The cost per play;
      (7)   The serial number of the game.
   GAME OF CHANCE. Poker, craps, roulette, or other game in which a player
gives anything of value in the hope of gain, the outcome of which is determined
largely by chance, but does not include bingo.
   GAME OF CHANCE CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. Any game of chance designed to produce
income for the person who conducts or operates the game of chance, but does not
include bingo.
   GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES. The annual gross receipts derived from the conduct of
bingo described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in this section
plus the annual net profit derived from the conduct of bingo described in
division (2) of the definition of “bingo” in this section.
   GROSS PROFIT. Gross receipts minus the amount actually expended for the
payment of prize awards.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. All money or assets, including admission fees, that a person
receives from bingo without the deduction of any amounts for prizes paid out or
for the expenses of conducting bingo. The term does not include any money
directly taken in from the sale of food or beverages by a charitable
organization conducting bingo, or by a bona fide auxiliary unit or society of a
charitable organization conducting bingo, provided all of the following apply:
      (1)   The auxiliary unit or society has been in existence as a bona fide
auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization for at least two years
prior to conducting bingo.
      (2)   The person who purchases the food or beverage receives nothing of
value except the food or beverage and items customarily received with the
purchase of that food or beverage.
      (3)   The food and beverages are sold at customary and reasonable prices.
   HISTORIC RAILROAD. All or a portion of the tracks and right-of-way of a
railroad that was owned and operated by a for profit common carrier in this
state at any time prior to January 1, 1950.
   INSTANT BINGO. A form of bingo that shall use folded or banded tickets or
paper cards with perforated break-open tabs, a face of which is covered or
otherwise hidden from view to conceal a number, letter, or symbol, or set of
numbers, letters, or symbols, some of which have been designated in advance as
prize winners, and may also include games in which some winners are determined
by the random selection of one or more bingo numbers by the use of a seal card
or bingo blower. “Instant bingo” also includes a punch board game. In all
“instant bingo” the prize amount and structure shall be predetermined. The term
does not include electronic instant bingo or any device that is activated by
the insertion of a coin, currency, token, or an equivalent, and that contains
as one of its components a video display monitor that is capable of displaying
numbers, letters, symbols, or characters in winning or losing combinations.
   INSTANT BINGO TICKET DISPENSER. A mechanical device that dispenses an
instant bingo ticket or card as the sole item of value dispensed and that has
the following characteristics:
      (1)   It is activated upon the insertion of United States currency.
      (2)   It performs no gaming functions.
      (3)   It does not contain a video display monitor or generate noise.
      (4)   It is not capable of displaying any numbers, letters, symbols, or
characters in winning or losing combinations.
      (5)   It does not simulate or display rolling or spinning reels.
      (6)   It is incapable of determining whether a dispensed bingo ticket or
card is a winning or non-winning ticket or card and requires a winning ticket
or card to be paid by a bingo game operator.
      (7)   It may provide accounting and security features to aid in
accounting for the instant bingo tickets or cards it dispenses.
      (8)   It is not part of an electronic network and is not interactive.
   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE (IRC). The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 100 Stat.
2085, 26 U.S.C. §§ 1 et seq., as now or hereafter amended.
   MANUFACTURER. Any person who assembles completed bingo supplies from raw
materials, other items, or subparts or who modifies, converts, adds to, or
removes parts from bingo supplies to further their promotion or sale.
   MERCHANDISE PRIZE. Any item of value, but shall not include any of the
following:
      (1)   Cash, gift cards, or any equivalent thereof;
      (2)   Plays on games of chance, state lottery tickets, or bingo;
      (3)   Firearms, tobacco, or alcoholic beverages; or
      (4)   A redeemable voucher that is redeemable for any of the items listed
in division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   NET PROFIT. Gross profit minus expenses.
   NET PROFIT FROM THE PROCEEDS OF THE SALE OF INSTANT BINGO OR ELECTRONIC
INSTANT BINGO. Gross profit minus the ordinary, necessary, and reasonable
expense expended for the purchase of bingo supplies for the purpose of
conducting instant bingo or electronic instant bingo, and, in the case of
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conducted by a veteran’s, fraternal,
or sporting organization, minus the payment by that organization of real
property taxes and assessments levied on a premises on which instant bingo or
electronic instant bingo is conducted.
   PARTICIPANT. Any person who plays bingo.
   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.59 and includes any firm or any
other legal entity, however organized.
   POOL NOT CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. A scheme in which a participant gives a
valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize and the total amount of
consideration wagered is distributed to a participant or participants.
   PUNCH BOARD. A form of instant bingo that uses a board containing a number
of holes or receptacles of uniform size in which are placed, mechanically and
randomly, serially numbered slips of paper that may be punched or drawn from
the hole or receptacle. A player may punch or draw the numbered slips of paper
from the holes or receptacles and obtain the prize established for the game if
the number drawn corresponds to a winning number or, if the punch board
includes the use of a seal card, a potential winning number.
   RAFFLE. A form of bingo in which the one or more prizes are won by one or
more persons who have purchased a raffle ticket. The one or more winners of the
raffle are determined by drawing a ticket stub or other detachable section from
a receptacle containing ticket stubs or detachable sections corresponding to
all tickets sold for the raffle. The term does not include the drawing of a
ticket stub or other detachable section of a ticket purchased to attend a
professional sporting event if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The ticket stub or other detachable section is used to select the
winner of a free prize given away at the professional sporting event; and
      (2)   The cost of the ticket is the same as the cost of a ticket to the
professional sporting event on days when no free prize is given away.
   REDEEMABLE VOUCHER. Any ticket, token, coupon, receipt, or other noncash
representation of value.
   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION. Any church, body of communicants, or group that is
not organized or operated for profit and that gathers in common membership for
regular worship and religious observances.
   REVOKE. To void permanently all rights and privileges of the holder of a
license issued under R.C. § 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a charitable
gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   SCHEME OF CHANCE.
      (1)   A slot machine unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3772, lottery
unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770, numbers game, pool conducted for
profit, or other scheme in which a participant gives a valuable consideration
for a chance to win a prize, but does not include bingo, a skill-based
amusement machine, or a pool not conducted for profit. “Scheme of chance”
includes the use of an electronic device to reveal the results of a game entry
if valuable consideration is paid, directly or indirectly, for a chance to win
a prize. Valuable consideration is deemed to be paid for a chance to win a
prize in the following instances:
         A.   Less than 50% of the goods or services sold by a scheme of chance
operator in exchange for game entries are used or redeemed by participants at
any one location;
         B.   Less than 50% of participants who purchase goods or services at
any one location do not accept, use, or redeem the goods or services sold or
purportedly sold;
         C.   More than 50% of prizes at any one location are revealed to
participants through an electronic device simulating a game of chance or a
“casino game” as defined in R.C. § 3772.01;
         D.   The good or service sold by a scheme of chance operator in
exchange for a game entry cannot be used or redeemed in the manner advertised;
         E.   A participant pays more than fair market value for goods or
services offered by a scheme of chance operator in order to receive one or more
game entries;
         F.   A participant may use the electronic device to purchase
additional game entries;
         G.   A participant may purchase additional game entries by using
points or credits won as prizes while using the electronic device;
         H.   A scheme of chance operator pays out in prize money more than 20%
of the gross revenue received at one location; or
         I.   A participant makes a purchase or exchange in order to obtain any
good or service that may be used to facilitate play on the electronic device.
      (2)   As used in this division, “electronic device” means a mechanical,
video, digital, or electronic machine or device that is capable of displaying
information on a screen or other mechanism and that is owned, leased, or
otherwise possessed by any person conducting a scheme of chance, or by that
person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or contractors. “Electronic
device” does not include an electronic instant bingo system.
   SEAL CARD. A form of instant bingo that uses instant bingo tickets in
conjunction with a board or placard that contains one or more seals that, when
removed or opened, reveal predesignated winning numbers, letters, or symbols.
   SECURITY PERSONNEL. Includes any person who either is a Sheriff, deputy
sheriff, Marshal, deputy marshal, township constable, or member of an organized
police department of a municipal corporation or has successfully completed a
peace officer’s training course pursuant to R.C. §§ 109.71 through 109.79 and
who is hired to provide security for the premises on which bingo is conducted.
   SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINE.
      (1)   A.   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic device that
rewards the player or players, if at all, only with merchandise prizes or with
redeemable vouchers redeemable only for merchandise prizes, provided that with
respect to rewards for playing the game all of the following apply:
            1.   The wholesale value of a merchandise prize awarded as a result
of the single play of a machine does not exceed $10;
            2.   Redeemable vouchers awarded for any single play of a machine
are not redeemable for a merchandise prize with a wholesale value of more than
$10;
            3.   Redeemable vouchers are not redeemable for a merchandise prize
that has a wholesale value of more than $10 times the fewest number of single
plays necessary to accrue the redeemable vouchers required to obtain that
prize; and
            4.   Any redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes are distributed
at the site of the skill-based amusement machine at the time of play.
         B.   A card for the purchase of gasoline is a redeemable voucher for
purposes of division (1) of this definition even if the skill-based amusement
machine for the play of which the card is awarded is located at a place where
gasoline may not be legally distributed to the public or the card is not
redeemable at the location of, or at the time of playing, the skill-based
amusement machine.
      (2)   A device shall not be considered a skill-based amusement machine
and shall be considered a slot machine if it pays cash or one or more of the
following apply:
         A.   The ability of a player to succeed at the game is impacted by the
number or ratio of prior wins to prior losses of players playing the game;
         B.   Any reward of redeemable vouchers is not based solely on the
player achieving the object of the game or the player’s score;
         C.   The outcome of the game, or the value of the redeemable voucher
or merchandise prize awarded for winning the game, can be controlled by a
source other than any player playing the game;
         D.   The success of any player is or may be determined by a chance
event that cannot be altered by player actions;
         E.   The ability of any player to succeed at the game is determined by
game features not visible or known to the player;
         F.   The ability of the player to succeed at the game is impacted by
the exercise of a skill that no reasonable player could exercise.
      (3)   All of the following apply to any machine that is operated as
described in division (1) of this definition:
         A.   As used in this definition of “skill-based amusement machine”,
GAME and PLAY mean one event from the initial activation of the machine until
the results of play are determined without payment of additional consideration.
An individual utilizing a machine that involves a single game, play, contest,
competition, or tournament may be awarded redeemable vouchers or merchandise
prizes based on the results of play.
         B.   Advance play for a single game, play, contest, competition, or
tournament participation may be purchased. The cost of the contest,
competition, or tournament participation may be greater than a single non-
contest, competition, or tournament play.
         C.   To the extent that the machine is used in a contest, competition,
or tournament, that contest, competition, or tournament has a defined starting
and ending date and is open to participants in competition for scoring and
ranking results toward the awarding of redeemable vouchers or merchandise
prizes that are stated prior to the start of the contest, competition, or
tournament.
      (4)   For purposes of division (1) of this definition, the mere presence
of a device, such as a pin-setting, ball-releasing, or scoring mechanism, that
does not contribute to or affect the outcome of the play of the game does not
make the device a skill-based amusement machine.
   SLOT MACHINE.
      (1)   Either of the following:
         A.   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player who gives the thing of value in the hope of gain;
         B.   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player to conduct bingo or a scheme or game of chance.
      (2)   The term does not include a skill-based amusement machine, an
instant bingo ticket dispenser, or an electronic instant bingo system.
   SPORTING ORGANIZATION. A hunting, fishing, or trapping organization, other
than a college or high school fraternity or sorority, that is not organized for
profit, that is affiliated with a state or national sporting organization,
including but not limited to the League of Ohio Sportsmen, and that has been in
continuous existence in this state for a period of three years.
   SUSPEND. To interrupt temporarily all rights and privileges of the holder of
a license issued under R.C. § 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a charitable
gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   SWEEPSTAKES. Any game, contest, advertising scheme or plan, or other
promotion where consideration is not required for a person to enter to win or
become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is based upon
chance. “Sweepstakes” does not include bingo as authorized under R.C. Chapter
2915, pari-mutuel wagering as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3769, lotteries
conducted by the State Lottery Commission as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3770,
and casino gaming as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3772.
   SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE.
      (1)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic machine or device that
is owned, leased, or otherwise possessed by any person conducting a
sweepstakes, or by that person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or
contractors, that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes participant, and that
is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism. A device
is a sweepstakes terminal device if any of the following apply:
         A.   The device uses a simulated game terminal as a representation of
the prizes associated with the results of the sweepstakes entries.
         B.   The device utilizes software such that the simulated game
influences or determines the winning of or value of the prize.
         C.   The device selects prizes from a predetermined finite pool of
entries.
         D.   The device utilizes a mechanism that reveals the content of a
predetermined sweepstakes entry.
         E.   The device predetermines the prize results and stores those
results for delivery at the time the sweepstakes entry results are revealed.
         F.   The device utilizes software to create a game result.
         G.   The device reveals the prize incrementally, even though the
device does not influence the awarding of the prize or the value of any prize
awarded.
         H.   The device determines and associates the prize with an entry or
entries at the time the sweepstakes is entered.
      (2)   As used in this definition and in §
630.02:
         ENTER. The act by which a person becomes eligible to receive any prize
offered in a sweepstakes.
         ENTRY. One event from the initial activation of the sweepstakes
terminal device until all the sweepstakes prize results from that activation
are revealed.
         PRIZE. Any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit, reward, or
any other thing of value that may be transferred to a person, whether
possession of the prize is actually transferred, or placed on an account or
other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize.
         SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE FACILITY. Any location in this state where
a sweepstakes terminal device is provided to a sweepstakes participant, except
as provided in § 630.02(G) and R.C. § 2915.02(G).
   VETERAN’S ORGANIZATION. Any individual post or state headquarters of a
national veteran’s association or an auxiliary unit of any individual post of a
national veteran’s association, which post, state headquarters, or auxiliary
unit is incorporated as a nonprofit corporation and either has received a
letter from the state headquarters of the national veteran’s association
indicating that the individual post or auxiliary unit is in good standing with
the national veteran’s association or has received a letter from the national
veteran’s association indicating that the state headquarters is in good
standing with the national veteran’s association. As used in this definition,
NATIONAL VETERAN’S ASSOCIATION means any veteran’s association that has been in
continuous existence as such for a period of at least five years and either is
incorporated by an act of the United States Congress or has a national dues-
paying membership of at least 5,000 persons.
   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER’S ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteer
firefighters, as defined in R.C. § 146.01, that is organized and operated
exclusively to provide financial support for a volunteer fire department or a
volunteer fire company and that is recognized or ratified by a county,
municipal corporation, or township.
   VOLUNTEER RESCUE SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteers
organized to function as an emergency medical service organization, as defined
in R.C. § 4765.01.
   YOUTH ATHLETIC ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for profit,
that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial support to, or
to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 21 years of age or younger
by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating, or contributing to the support
of an athletic team, club, league, or association.
   YOUTH ATHLETIC PARK ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for
profit, that satisfies both of the following:
      (1)   It owns, operates, and maintains playing fields that satisfy both
of the following:
         A.   The playing fields are used for athletic activities by one or
more organizations, not organized for profit, each of which is organized and
operated exclusively to provide financial support to, or to operate, athletic
activities for persons who are 18 years of age or younger by means of
sponsoring, organizing, operating, or contributing to the support of an
athletic team, club, league, or association.
         B.   The playing fields are not used for any profit-making activity at
any time during the year.
      (2)   It uses the proceeds of bingo it conducts exclusively for the
operation, maintenance, and improvement of its playing fields of the type
described in division (1) of this definition.
(R.C. § 2915.01)
§ 630.02 GAMBLING IN GENERAL.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Engage in bookmaking, or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates bookmaking.
      (2)   Establish, promote or operate or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (3)   Knowingly procure, transmit, exchange or engage in conduct that
facilitates the procurement, transmission or exchange of information for use in
establishing odds or determining winners in connection with bookmaking or with
any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (4)   Engage in betting or in playing any scheme or game of chance as a
substantial source of income or livelihood.
      (5)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
and either:
         A.   Give to another person any item described in R.C. § 2915.01(VV)
(1), (VV)(2), (VV)(3), or (VV)(4) as a prize for playing or participating in a
sweepstakes; or
         B.   Give to another person any merchandise prize, or a redeemable
voucher for a merchandise prize, the wholesale value of which is in excess of
$10 and which is awarded as a single entry for playing or participating in a
sweepstakes. Redeemable vouchers shall not be redeemable for a merchandise
prize that has a wholesale value of more than $10.
      (6)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
without first obtaining a current annual “certificate of registration” from the
Attorney General as required by R.C. § 2915.02(F).
      (7)   With purpose to violate division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4),
(a)(5), or (a)(6) of this section, acquire, possess, control or operate any
gambling device.
   (b)   For purposes of division (a)(1) of this section, a person facilitates
bookmaking if the person in any way knowingly aids an illegal bookmaking
operation, including without limitation placing a bet with a person engaged in
or facilitating illegal bookmaking. For purposes of division (a)(2) of this
section, a person facilitates a game of chance conducted for profit or a scheme
of chance if the person in any way knowingly aids in the conduct or operation
of any such game or scheme, including without limitation playing any such game
or scheme.
   (c)   This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with gambling
expressly permitted by law.
   (d)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Games of chance, if all of the following apply:
         A.   The games of chance are not craps for money or roulette for
money.
         B.   The games of chance are conducted by a charitable organization
that is and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination
letter that is currently in effect, stating that the organization is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3).
         C.   The games of chance are conducted at festivals of the charitable
organization that are conducted not more than a total of five days a calendar
year, and are conducted on premises owned by the charitable organization for a
period of no less than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the
games of chance, on premises leased from a governmental unit, or on premises
that are leased from a veteran’s or fraternal organization and that have been
owned by the lessor veteran’s or fraternal organization for a period of no less
than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the games of chance. A
charitable organization shall not lease premises from a veteran’s or fraternal
organization to conduct a festival described in this division, if the veteran’s
or fraternal organization already has leased the premises 12 times during the
preceding year to charitable organizations for that purpose. If a charitable
organization leases premises from a veteran’s or fraternal organization to
conduct a festival described in this division, the charitable organization
shall not pay a rental rate for the premises per day of the festival that
exceeds the rental rate per bingo session that a charitable organization may
pay under R.C. § 2915.09(B)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance when it leases premises from another charitable organization to
conduct bingo games.
         D.   All of the money or assets received from the games of chance
after deduction only of prizes paid out during the conduct of the games of
chance are used by, given, donated or otherwise transferred to any organization
that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt under IRC 501(a) and
described in IRC 501(c)(3).
         E.   The games of chance are not conducted during or within ten hours
of a bingo game conducted for amusement purposes only pursuant to R.C. §
2915.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. No person shall
receive any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or other
form of compensation, directly or indirectly, for operating or assisting in the
operation of any game of chance.
      (2)   Any tag fishing tournament, as defined in R.C. § 1531.01, operated
under a permit issued under R.C. § 1533.92.
      (3)   Bingo conducted by a charitable organization that holds a license
issued under R.C. § 2915.08.
   (e)   Division (d) of this section shall not be construed to authorize the
sale, lease or other temporary or permanent transfer of the right to conduct
games of chance, as granted by that division, by any charitable organization
that is granted that right.
   (f)   Any person desiring to conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a
sweepstakes with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes
terminal device facility shall first register with the Office of the Attorney
General and obtain an annual certificate of registration by providing a filing
fee of $200 and all information as required by rule adopted under R.C. §
2915.02(H). Not later than the tenth day of each month, each sweepstakes
terminal device operator shall file a sweepstakes terminal device monthly
report with the Attorney General and provide a filing fee of $50 and all
information required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H). All information
provided to the Attorney General under this division shall be available to law
enforcement upon request.
   (g)   (1)   A person may apply to the Attorney General, on a form prescribed
by the Attorney General, for a certificate of compliance that the person is not
operating a sweepstakes terminal device facility. The form shall require the
person to include the address of the business location where sweepstakes
terminal devices will be used and to make the following certifications:
         A.   That the person will not use more than two sweepstakes terminal
devices at the business location;
         B.   That the retail value of sweepstakes prizes to be awarded at the
business location using sweepstakes terminal devices during a reporting period
will be less than 3% of the gross revenue received at the business location
during the reporting period;
         C.   That no other form of gaming except lottery ticket sales as
authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770 will be conducted at the business location
or in an adjoining area of the business location;
         D.   That any sweepstakes terminal device at the business location
will not allow any deposit of any money, coin, or token, or the use of any
credit card, debit card, prepaid card, or any other method of similar payment
to be used, directly or indirectly, to participate in a sweepstakes;
         E.   That notification of any prize will not take place on the same
day as a participant’s sweepstakes entry; and
         F.   That the person consents to provide any other information to the
Attorney General as required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H).
      (2)   The filing fee for a certificate of compliance is $250. The
Attorney General may charge up to an additional $250 for reasonable expenses
resulting from any investigation related to an application for a certificate of
compliance.
      (3)   A certificate of compliance is effective for one year. The
certificate holder may reapply for a certificate of compliance. A person issued
a certificate of compliance shall file semiannual reports with the Attorney
General stating the number of sweepstakes terminal devices at the business
location and that the retail value of prizes awarded at the business location
using sweepstakes terminal devices is less than 3% of the gross revenue
received at the business location.
   (h)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of gambling, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense, gambling is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
Notwithstanding this division, failing to file a sweepstakes terminal device
monthly report as required by division (f) of this section or the semiannual
report required by division (g) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2915.02(A) - (G), (K))
§ 630.03 OPERATING A GAMBLING HOUSE.
   (a)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control or
supervision of premises, shall:
      (1)   Use or occupy the premises for gambling in violation of R.C. §
2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   Recklessly permit the premises to be used or occupied for gambling
in violation of R.C. § 2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of operating a
gambling house, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of a gambling offense, operating a gambling house is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   Premises used or occupied in violation of this section constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2915.03)
§ 630.04 PUBLIC GAMING.
   (a)   No person, while at a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall or
other place of public accommodation, business, amusement or resort shall make a
bet or play any game of chance or scheme of chance.
   (b)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control or
supervision of a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall or other place
of public accommodation, business, amusement or resort shall recklessly permit
those premises to be used or occupied in violation of division (a) of this
section.
   (c)   Divisions (a) and (b) of this section do not prohibit conduct in
connection with gambling expressly permitted by law.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, public gaming is a minor misdemeanor. If
the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense, public
gaming is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (e)   Premises used or occupied in violation of division (b) of this section
constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2915.04)
§ 630.05 CHEATING.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome
of any of the following:
      (1)   The subject of a bet.
      (2)   A contest of knowledge, skill or endurance that is not an athletic
or sporting event.
      (3)   A scheme or game of chance.
      (4)   Bingo.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Offer, give, solicit or accept anything of value to corrupt the
outcome of an athletic or sporting event.
      (2)   Engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome of an athletic or
sporting event.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
cheating. Except as otherwise provided in this division, cheating is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the potential gain from the cheating is
$1,000 or more or if the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense or of any theft offense as defined in R.C. § 2913.01, cheating is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
corrupting sports. Corrupting sports is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.05)
§ 630.06 RESPONSIBILITY OF CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION CONDUCTING BINGO GAME.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo shall fail to do any of
the following:
      (1)   Own all of the equipment used to conduct bingo or lease that
equipment from a charitable organization that is licensed to conduct bingo, or
from the landlord of a premises where bingo is conducted, for a rental rate
that is not more than is customary and reasonable for that equipment;
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(3) of this section,
use all of the gross receipts from bingo for paying prizes, for reimbursement
of expenses for or for renting premises in which to conduct bingo, for
reimbursement of expenses for or for purchasing or leasing bingo supplies used
in conducting bingo, for reimbursement of expenses for or for hiring security
personnel, for reimbursement of expenses for or for advertising bingo, or for
reimbursement of other expenses or for other expenses listed in the definition
for “expenses” in R.C. § 2915.01, provided that the amount of the receipts so
spent is not more than is customary and reasonable for a similar purchase,
lease, hiring, advertising or expense. If the building in which bingo is
conducted is owned by the charitable organization conducting bingo and the
bingo conducted includes a form of bingo described in division (1) of the
definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01, the charitable organization may deduct
from the total amount of the gross receipts from each session a sum equal to
the lesser of $600 or 45% of the gross receipts from the bingo described in
that division as consideration for the use of the premises;
      (3)   Use, or give, donate, or otherwise transfer, all of the net profit
derived from bingo described in R.C. § 2915.01(O)(1) for a charitable purpose
listed in its license application and described in R.C. § 2915.01(V), or
distribute all of the net profit from the proceeds of the sale of instant bingo
or electronic instant bingo as stated in its license application and in
accordance with R.C. § 2915.101, as applicable.
   (b)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall fail to do
any of the following:
      (1)   Conduct the bingo game on premises that are owned by the charitable
organization, on premises that are owned by another charitable organization and
leased from that charitable organization for a rental rate not in excess of the
lesser of $650 per bingo session or 45% of the gross receipts of the bingo
session, on premises that are leased from a person other than a charitable
organization for a rental rate that is not more than is customary and
reasonable for premises that are similar in location, size and quality but not
in excess of $450 per bingo session, or on premises that are owned by a person
other than a charitable organization, that are leased from that person by
another charitable organization, and that are subleased from that other
charitable organization by the charitable organization for a rental rate not in
excess of $450 per bingo session. No charitable organization is required to pay
property taxes or assessments on premises that the charitable organization
leases from another person to conduct bingo sessions. If the charitable
organization leases from a person other than a charitable organization the
premises on which it conducts bingo sessions, the lessor of the premises shall
provide only the premises to the organization and shall not provide the
organization with bingo game operators, security personnel, concessions or
concession operators, bingo supplies, or any other type of service. A
charitable organization shall not lease or sublease premises that it owns or
leases to more than three other charitable organizations per calendar week for
the purpose of conducting bingo sessions on the premises. A person that is not
a charitable organization shall not lease premises that it owns, leases or
otherwise is empowered to lease to more than three charitable organizations per
calendar week for conducting bingo sessions on the premises. In no case shall
more than nine bingo sessions be conducted on any premises in any calendar
week;
      (2)   Display its license conspicuously at the premises where the bingo
session is conducted;
      (3)   Conduct the bingo session in accordance with division (1) of the
definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01.
   (c)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for operating a bingo
session that is conducted by the charitable organization or for preparing,
selling or serving food or beverages at the site of the bingo session, permit
any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to pay
compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells or serves food or
beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable organization, or
permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to prepare,
sell or serve food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable
organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the
bingo game operators who prepare, sell or serve the food or beverages;
      (2)   Pay consulting fees to any person for any services performed in
relation to the bingo session;
      (3)   Pay concession fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in the bingo session;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(4) of this section,
conduct more than three bingo sessions in any seven-day period. A volunteer
firefighter’s organization or a volunteer rescue service organization that
conducts not more than five bingo sessions in a calendar year may conduct more
than three bingo sessions in a seven-day period after notifying the Attorney
General when it will conduct the sessions;
      (5)   Pay out more than $6,000 in prizes for bingo games described in
R.C. § 2915.01(S)(1) during any bingo session that is conducted by the
charitable organization. “Prizes” does not include awards from the conduct of
instant bingo;
      (6)   Conduct a bingo session at any time during the eight-hour period
between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., at any time during, or within ten hours of, a
bingo game conducted for amusement only pursuant to R.C. § 2915.12 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, at any premises not specified on
its license, or on any day of the week or during any time period not specified
on its license. This division does not prohibit the sale of instant bingo
tickets beginning at 9:00 a.m. for a bingo session that begins at 10:00 a.m. If
circumstances make it impractical for the charitable organization to conduct a
bingo session at the premises, or on the day of the week or at the time
specified on its license or if a charitable organization wants to conduct bingo
sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than the day or time specified
on its license, the charitable organization may apply in writing to the
Attorney General for an amended license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08(J). A
charitable organization may apply twice in each calendar year for an amended
license to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than
the day or time specified on its license. If the amended license is granted,
the organization may conduct bingo sessions at the premises, on the day of the
week, and at the time specified on its amended license;
      (7)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, is under the age of 18 to work as a bingo game operator;
      (8)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any
jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator;
      (9)   Permit the lessor of the premises on which the bingo session is
conducted, if the lessor is not a charitable organization, to provide the
charitable organization with bingo game operators, security personnel,
concessions, bingo supplies or any other type of service;
      (10)   Purchase or lease bingo supplies from any person except a
distributor issued a license under R.C. § 2915.081;
      (11)   A.   Use or permit the use of electronic bingo aids except under
the following circumstances:
            1.   For any single participant, not more than 90 bingo faces can
be played using an electronic bingo aid or aids.
            2.   The charitable organization shall provide a participant using
an electronic bingo aid with corresponding paper bingo cards or sheets.
            3.   The total price of bingo faces played with an electronic bingo
aid shall be equal to the total price of the same number of bingo faces played
with a paper bingo card or sheet sold at the same bingo session but without an
electronic bingo aid.
            4.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be part of an electronic
network other than a network that includes only bingo aids and devices that are
located on the premises at which the bingo is being conducted or be interactive
with any device not located on the premises at which the bingo is being
conducted.
            5.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to participate in bingo
that is conducted at a location other than the location at which the bingo
session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
            6.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to provide for the
input of numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller other than the bingo
caller who physically calls the numbers and letters at the location at which
the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
         B.   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 119 that govern the use of electronic bingo aids. The rules may include
a requirement that an electronic bingo aid be capable of being audited by the
Attorney General to verify the number of bingo cards or sheets played during
each bingo session.
      (12)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, to be under 18 years of age to play bingo described in division (1)
of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01.
   (d)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(3) of this section,
no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator, and no bingo
game operator shall receive or accept, any commission, wage, salary, reward,
tip, donation, gratuity or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly,
regardless of the source, for conducting bingo or providing other work or labor
at the site of bingo during a bingo session.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(3) of this section, no
charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator any commission,
wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation,
directly or indirectly regardless of the source, for conducting instant bingo,
electronic instant bingo, or both other than at a bingo session at the site of
instant bingo, electronic instant bingo, or both other than at a bingo session.
      (3)   Nothing in this division (d) of this section prohibits an employee
of a fraternal organization, veteran’s organization or sporting organization
from selling instant bingo tickets or cards to the organization’s members or
invited guests, as long as no portion of the employee’s compensation is paid
from any receipts of bingo.
   (e)   Notwithstanding division (b)(1) of this section, a charitable
organization that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written
agreements for the lease of premises it owns to another charitable organization
or other charitable organizations for the conducting of bingo sessions so that
more than two bingo sessions are conducted per calendar week on the premises,
and a person that is not a charitable organization and that, prior to December
6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease of premises it owns
to charitable organizations for the conducting of more than two bingo sessions
per calendar week on the premises, may continue to lease the premises to those
charitable organizations, provided that no more than four sessions are
conducted per calendar week, that the lessor organization or person has
notified the Attorney General in writing of the organizations that will conduct
the sessions and the days of the week and the times of the day on which the
sessions will be conducted, that the initial lease entered into with each
organization that will conduct the sessions was filed with the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977, and that each organization that will conduct the
sessions was issued a license to conduct bingo games by the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977.
   (f)   This section does not prohibit a bingo licensed charitable
organization or a game operator from giving any person an instant bingo ticket
as a prize.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of
illegally conducting a bingo game, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a)(1), (a)(3), (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), (c)(1) to (c)(11), or (d) of
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of division (a)(1), (a)(3), (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)
(3), (c)(1) to (c)(11), or (d) of this section, a violation of division (a)(1),
(a)(3), (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), (c)(1) to (c)(11), or (d) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates division (c)(12) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (c)(12) of this
section, a violation of division (c)(12) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.09)
§ 630.07 MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS BY CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo or a game of chance
pursuant to R.C. § 2915.02(D), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, shall fail to maintain the following records for at least three
years from the date on which the bingo or game of chance is conducted:
      (1)   An itemized list of the gross receipts of each bingo session, each
game of instant bingo by serial number, each electronic instant bingo game by
serial number, each raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance, and
an itemized list of the gross profits of each game of instant bingo by serial
number and each electronic instant bingo game by serial number;
      (2)   An itemized list of all expenses, other than prizes, that are
incurred in conducting bingo, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses;
      (3)   A list of all prizes awarded during each bingo session, each
raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance conducted by the
charitable organization, the total prizes awarded from each game of instant
bingo by serial number and each electronic instant bingo game by serial number,
and the name, address, and social security number of all persons who are
winners of prizes of $600 or more in value;
      (4)   An itemized list of the recipients of the net profit of bingo or
game of chance, including the name and address of each recipient to whom the
money is distributed, and if the organization uses the net profit of bingo, or
the money or assets received from a game of chance, for any charitable or other
purpose set forth in R.C. § 2915.01(V), 2915.02(D) or 2915.101, a list of each
purpose and an itemized list of each expenditure for each purpose;
      (5)   The number of persons who participate in any bingo session or game
of chance that is conducted by the charitable organization;
      (6)   A list of receipts from the sale of food and beverages by the
charitable organization or one of its auxiliary units or societies, if the
receipts were excluded from “gross receipts” under R.C. § 2915.01(T);
      (7)   An itemized list of all expenses incurred at each bingo session,
each raffle, each punch board game or each game of instant bingo or electronic
instant bingo conducted by the charitable organization in the sale of food and
beverages by the charitable organization or by an auxiliary unit or society of
the charitable organization, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses.
   (b)   A charitable organization shall keep the records that it is required
to maintain pursuant to division (a) of this section at its principal place of
business in this state or at its headquarters in this state and shall notify
the Attorney General of the location at which those records are kept.
   (c)   The gross profit from each bingo session or game described in division
(1) or (2) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall be deposited
into a checking account devoted exclusively to the bingo session or game.
Payments for allowable expenses incurred in conducting the bingo session or
game and payments to recipients of some or all of the net profit of the bingo
session or game shall be made only by checks or electronic fund transfers drawn
on the bingo session or game account.
   (d)   Each charitable organization shall conduct and record an inventory of
all of its bingo supplies as of the first day of November of each year.
   (e)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C. Chapter
119 that establish standards of accounting, record keeping and reporting to
ensure that gross receipts from bingo or games of chance are properly accounted
for.
   (f)   A distributor shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing to another person bingo supplies for use in this state.
The record shall include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name of the manufacturer from which the distributor purchased
the bingo supplies and the date of the purchase;
      (2)   The name and address of the charitable organization or other
distributor to which the bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided;
      (3)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies;
      (4)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each charitable organization.
   (g)   A manufacturer shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing bingo supplies for use in this state. The record shall
include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name and address of the distributor to whom the bingo supplies
were sold or otherwise provided;
      (2)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies, including
serial numbers;
      (3)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each distributor.
   (h)   (1)   The Attorney General or any law enforcement agency may do all of
the following:
         A.   Investigate any charitable organization, distributor, or
manufacturer or any officer, agent, trustee, member, or employee of the
organization, distributor, or manufacturer;
         B.   Examine the accounts and records of the charitable organization,
distributor, or manufacturer or of any officer, agent, trustee, member, or
employee of the organization, distributor, or manufacturer;
         C.   Conduct inspections, audits and observations of bingo or games of
chance;
         D.   Conduct inspections of the premises where bingo or games of
chance are conducted or where bingo supplies are manufactured or distributed;
         E.   Take any other necessary and reasonable action to determine if a
violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 has occurred
and to determine whether R.C. § 2915.11, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, has been complied with.
      (2)   If any law enforcement agency has reasonable grounds to believe
that a charitable organization, distributor, or manufacturer or an officer,
agent, trustee, member, or employee of the organization, distributor, or
manufacturer has violated any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915,
the law enforcement agency may proceed by action in the proper court to enforce
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, provided that the law enforcement agency
shall give written notice to the Attorney General when commencing an action as
described in this division.
   (i)   No person shall destroy, alter, conceal, withhold, or deny access to
any accounts or records of a charitable organization, distributor, or
manufacturer that have been requested for examination, or obstruct, impede, or
interfere with any inspection, audit, or observation of bingo or a game of
chance, of premises where bingo or a game of chance is conducted, or of
premises where bingo supplies are manufactured or distributed, or refuse to
comply with any reasonable request of, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with
any other reasonable action undertaken by, the Attorney General or a law
enforcement agency pursuant to division (h) of this section.
   (j)   Whoever violates division (a) or (i) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2915.10)
§ 630.08 QUALIFICATIONS OF BINGO GAME OPERATOR.
   (a)   No person shall be a bingo game operator unless the person is 18 years
of age or older.
   (b)   No person who has been convicted of a felony or a gambling offense in
any jurisdiction shall be a bingo game operator.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. Whoever violates division (b) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2915.11)
§ 630.09 EXEMPTION FOR BINGO GAMES CONDUCTED FOR AMUSEMENT.
   (a)   Sections 630.06 to 630.13 and 630.15 do not apply to bingo games that
are conducted for the purpose of amusement only. A bingo game is conducted for
the purpose of amusement only if it complies with all of the requirements
specified in either division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section.
      (1)   A.   The participants do not pay any money or any other thing of
value, including an admission fee or any fee, for bingo cards or sheets,
objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo, for the
privilege of participating in the bingo game, or to defray any costs of the
game, or pay tips or make donations during or immediately before or after the
bingo game.
         B.   All prizes awarded during the course of the game are non-
monetary, and in the form of merchandise, goods or entitlement to goods or
services only, and the total value of all prizes awarded during the game is
less than $100.00.
         C.   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or
other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         D.   The bingo game is not conducted either during or within ten hours
of any of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   A scheme or game of chance, or bingo described in R.C. §
2915.01(O)(2).
         E.   The number of players participating in the bingo game does not
exceed 50.
      (2)   A.   The participants do not pay money or any other thing of value
as an admission fee, and no participant is charged more than $0.25 to purchase
a bingo card or sheet, objects to cover the spaces or other devices used in
playing bingo.
         B.   The total amount of money paid by all of the participants for
bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover the spaces or other devices used in
playing bingo does not exceed $100.00.
         C.   All of the money paid for bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover
spaces or other devices used in playing bingo is used only to pay winners
monetary and nonmonetary prizes and to provide refreshments.
         D.   The total value of all prizes awarded during the game does not
exceed $100.00.
         E.   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or
other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         F.   The bingo game is not conducted during or within ten hours of
either of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.15 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance;
            2.   A scheme of chance or a game of chance, or bingo described in
R.C. § 2915.01(O)(2).
         G.   All of the participants reside at the premises where the bingo
game is conducted.
         H.   The bingo games are conducted on different days of the week and
not more than twice in a calendar week.
   (b)   The Attorney General or any local law enforcement agency may
investigate the conduct of a bingo game that purportedly is conducted for
purposes of amusement only if there is reason to believe that the purported
amusement bingo game does not comply with the requirements of either division
(a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section. A local law enforcement agency may proceed by
action in the proper court to enforce this section if the local law enforcement
agency gives written notice to the Attorney General when commencing the action.
(R.C. § 2915.12)
§ 630.10 PROHIBITIONS WHERE INSTANT BINGO GAME IS CONDUCTED.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts instant bingo shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 2915.09(A)(1), (A)
(2) and (A)(3), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   Conduct instant bingo unless either of the following applies:
         A.   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a), is
described in IRC 501(c)(3), is a charitable organization as defined in R.C. §
2915.01, is in good standing in the state pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08, and is in
compliance with R.C. Chapter 1716;
         B.   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a), is
described in IRC 501(c)(7), (c)(8), (c)(10) or (c)(19) or is a veteran’s
organization described in IRC 501(c)(4), and conducts instant bingo under R.C.
§ 2915.13.
      (3)   Conduct instant bingo on any day, at any time, or at any premises
not specified on the organization’s license issued pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08;
      (4)   Permit any person whom the organization knows or should have known
has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction to be a
bingo game operator in the conduct of instant bingo;
      (5)   Purchase or lease supplies used to conduct instant bingo or punch
board games from any person except a distributor licensed under R.C. §
2915.081;
      (6)   Sell or provide any instant bingo ticket or card for a price
different from the price printed on it by the manufacturer on either the
instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare;
      (7)   Sell an instant bingo ticket or card to a person under 18 years of
age;
      (8)   Fail to keep unsold instant bingo tickets or cards for less than
three years;
      (9)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting
instant bingo that is conducted by the organization or for preparing, selling
or serving food or beverages at the site of the instant bingo game, permit any
auxiliary unit or society of the organization to pay compensation to any bingo
game operator who prepares, sells or serves food or beverages at an instant
bingo game conducted by the organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or
society of the organization to prepare, sell or serve food or beverages at an
instant bingo game conducted by the organization, if the auxiliary unit or
society pays any compensation to the bingo game operators who prepare, sell or
serve the food or beverages;
      (10)   Pay fees to any person for any services performed in relation to
an instant bingo game, except as provided in R.C. § 2915.093(D);
      (11)   Pay fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in an instant bingo game;
      (12)   A.   Allow instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold to bingo game
operators at a premises at which the organization sells instant bingo tickets
or cards or to be sold to employees of a D permit holder who are working at a
premises at which instant bingo tickets or cards are sold;
         B.   Division (a)(12)A. of this section does not prohibit a licensed
charitable organization or a bingo game operator from giving any person an
instant bingo ticket as a prize in place of a cash prize won by a participant
in an instant bingo game. In no case shall an instant bingo ticket or card be
sold or provided for a price different from the price printed on it by the
manufacturer on either the instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare.
      (13)   Fail to display its bingo license, and the serial numbers of the
deal of instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold, conspicuously at each
premises at which it sells instant bingo tickets or cards;
      (14)   Possess a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards that was not
purchased from a distributor licensed under R.C. § 2915.081 as reflected on an
invoice issued by the distributor that contains all of the information required
by R.C. § 2915.10(E);
      (15)   Fail, once it opens a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards, to
continue to sell the tickets or cards in that deal until the tickets or cards
with the top two highest tiers of prizes in that deal are sold;
      (16)   Possess bingo supplies that were not obtained in accordance with
R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (b)   A charitable organization may purchase, lease, or use instant bingo
ticket dispensers to sell instant bingo tickets or cards.
   (c)   Pursuant to R.C. § 2915.091(C), the Attorney General may adopt rules
in accordance with R.C. Chapter 119 that govern the conduct of instant bingo by
charitable organizations.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section or a rule adopted under
division (c) of this section is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of division (a) of this section or of such a rule adopted under
division (c) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.091)
§ 630.11 RAFFLE DRAWINGS.
   (a)   (1)   Subject to division (a)(2) of this section, a person or entity
may conduct a raffle to raise money for the person or entity and does not need
a license to conduct bingo in order to conduct a raffle drawing that is not for
profit if the person or entity is any of the following:
         A.   Exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
         B.   A school district, community school established under R.C.
Chapter 3314, STEM school established under R.C. Chapter 3326, college-
preparatory boarding school established under R.C. Chapter 3328, or chartered
nonpublic school;
         C.   Exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(4), 501(c)(6), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or
501(c)(19).
      (2)   If a person or entity that is described in division (a)(1)C. of
this section conducts a raffle, the person or entity shall distribute at least
50% of the net profit from the raffle to a charitable purpose described in R.C.
§ 2915.01(V) or to a department or agency of the federal government, the state,
or any political subdivision.
   (b)   Except as provided in division (a) of this section, no person shall
conduct a raffle drawing that is for profit or a raffle drawing that is not for
profit.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of illegal
conduct of a raffle. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal
conduct of a raffle is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (b) of this section,
illegal conduct of a raffle is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2915.092)
§ 630.12 INSTANT BINGO OTHER THAN AT BINGO SESSIONS.
   (a)   As used in this section, RETAIL INCOME FROM ALL COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY
means the income that a person receives from the provision of goods, services
or activities that are provided at the location where instant bingo other than
at a bingo session is conducted, including the sale of instant bingo tickets. A
religious organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC
501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3), at not more than one location at which
it conducts its charitable programs, may include donations from its members and
guests as retail income.
   (b)   (1)   If a charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant
bingo other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued under R.C.
§ 2915.08, the charitable instant bingo organization shall enter into a written
contract with the owner or lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is
conducted to allow the owner or lessor to assist in the conduct of instant
bingo other than at a bingo session, identify each location where the instant
bingo other than at a bingo session is being conducted, and identify the owner
or lessor of each location.
      (2)   A charitable instant bingo organization that conducts instant bingo
other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued under R.C. §
2915.08 is not required to enter into a written contract with the owner or
lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is conducted, provided that
the owner or lessor is not assisting in the conduct of the instant bingo other
than at a bingo session and provided that the conduct of the instant bingo
other than at a bingo session at that location is not more than five days per
calendar year and not more than ten hours per day.
   (c)   Except as provided in division (f) of this section, no charitable
instant bingo organization shall conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at a location where the primary source of retail income from all
commercial activity at that location is the sale of instant bingo tickets.
   (d)   (1)   The owner or lessor of a location that enters into a contract
pursuant to division (b) of this section shall pay the full gross profit to the
charitable instant bingo organization, in return for the deal of instant bingo
tickets. The owner or lessor may retain the money that the owner or lessor
receives for selling the instant bingo tickets, provided, however, that after
the deal has been sold, the owner or lessor shall pay to the charitable instant
bingo organization the value of any unredeemed instant bingo prizes remaining
in the deal of instant bingo tickets. As used in this division, FULL GROSS
PROFIT  means the amount by which the total receipts of all instant bingo
tickets, if the deal has been sold in full, exceeds the amount that would be
paid out if all prizes were redeemed.
      (2)   The charitable instant bingo organization shall pay 6% of the total
gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets for the purpose of
reimbursing the owner or lessor for expenses described in this division.
      (3)   As used in this division, EXPENSES means those items provided for
in R.C. § 2915.01(GG)(4), (GG)(5), (GG)(6), (GG)(7), (GG)(8), (GG)(12), and
(GG)(13) and that percentage of the owner’s or lessor’s rent for the location
where instant bingo is conducted. Expenses, in the aggregate, shall not exceed
6% of the total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets.
   (e)   A charitable instant bingo organization shall provide the Attorney
General with all of the following information:
      (1)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has terminated a
contract entered into pursuant to division (b) of this section with an owner or
lessor of a location;
      (2)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has entered into a
written contract pursuant to division (b) of this section with a new owner or
lessor of a location;
      (3)   That the charitable instant bingo organization is aware of conduct
by the owner or lessor of a location at which instant bingo is conducted that
is in violation of R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (f)   Division (c) of this section does not apply to a volunteer
firefighter’s organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3), that conducts instant bingo other
than at a bingo session on the premises where the organization conducts
firefighter training, that has conducted instant bingo continuously for at
least five years prior to July 1, 2003, and that, during each of those five
years, had gross receipts of at least $1,500,000.
(R.C. § 2915.093)
   (g)   (1)   Subject to the requirements of R.C. §§ 2915.14 and 2915.15
concerning electronic instant bingo, a veteran’s organization, a fraternal
organization, or a sporting organization authorized to conduct a bingo session
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2915 may conduct instant bingo, electronic instant
bingo, or both other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued
under R.C. § 2915.08 if all of the following apply:
         A.   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to 12
hours during any day, provided that the sale does not begin earlier than 10:00
a.m. and ends not later than 2:00 a.m.
         B.   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to
its own premises and to its own members and invited guests.
         C.   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization is raising money for an organization that is described in IRC 509
(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization
that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3),
and that is in good standing in this state and executes a written contract with
that organization as required in division (g)(2) of this section.
      (2)   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization authorized to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant bingo
pursuant to division (g)(1) of this section is raising money for another
organization that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either
a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of
business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC
501(a) and described in IRC 501(c), and that is in good standing in this state,
the veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization
shall execute a written contract with the organization that is described in IRC
509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an
organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that
is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC
501(c), and that is in good standing in this state in order to conduct instant
bingo or electronic instant bingo. That contract shall include a statement of
the percentage of the net proceeds that the veteran’s, fraternal or sporting
organization will be distributing to the charitable organization that is
described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit
or an organization that maintains its principal place of business in this
state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and
described in IRC 501(c), and that is in good standing in this state.
      (3)   A.   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or
sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant
bingo pursuant to division (g)(1) of this section has been issued a liquor
permit under R.C. Chapter 4303, that permit may be subject to suspension,
revocation or cancellation if the veteran’s organization, fraternal
organization or sporting organization violates a provision of this chapter or
R.C. Chapter 2915.
         B.   No veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization that enters into a written contract pursuant to division (g)(2) of
this section shall violate any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915,
or permit, aid or abet any other person in violating any provision of this
chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
      (4)   A veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization shall give all required proceeds earned from the conduct of
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to the organization with which the
veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting organization has
entered into a written contract.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (g) of this section is guilty of illegal
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, illegal instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conduct is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (g) of this section, illegal instant bingo
or electronic instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.13)
§ 630.13 RESTRICTIONS ON OWNER OR LESSOR OF LOCATION AT INSTANT BINGO.
   (a)   No owner or lessor of a location shall assist a charitable instant
bingo organization in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at that location unless the owner or lessor has entered into a written
contract, as described in R.C. § 2915.093, with the charitable instant bingo
organization to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session.
   (b)   The location of the lessor or owner shall be designated as a location
where the charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant bingo other
than at a bingo session.
   (c)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (a) of this section shall violate any provision of
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, or permit, aid or abet any other person in
violating any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (d)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (a) of this section shall violate the terms of the
contract.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty
of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (c) or
(d) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If an owner or lessor of a location knowingly, intentionally, or
recklessly violates division (c) or (d) of this section, any license that the
owner or lessor holds for the retail sale of any goods on the owner’s or
lessor’s premises that is issued by the state or a political subdivision is
subject to suspension, revocation or payment of a monetary penalty at the
request of the Attorney General.
(R.C. § 2915.094)
§ 630.14 SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINES; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (a)   No person shall give to another person any item described in division
(ff)(1), (ff)(2), (ff)(3) or (ff)(4) of § 630.01 in exchange for a noncash
prize, toy or novelty received as a reward for playing or operating a skill-
based amusement machine or for a free or reduced-price game won on a skill-
based amusement machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of skill-based
amusement machine prohibited conduct. A violation of division (a) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree for each redemption of a prize
that is involved in the violation. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (a) of this section, a violation of that
division is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.06)
   (c)   Any regulation of skill-based amusement machines shall be governed by
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 and not by R.C. Chapter 1345.
(R.C. § 2915.061)
§ 630.15 ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (a)   No charitable organization shall conduct electronic instant bingo
unless all of the following are true:
      (1)   The organization is a veteran’s organization described in R.C. §
2915.01(J), or is a fraternal organization described in R.C. § 2915.01(L), and
the organization qualified as a veteran’s organization or fraternal
organization, as applicable, on or before June 30, 2021.
      (2)   The organization is a veteran’s organization described in IRC 501
(c)(4) or is, and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a
determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the organization
is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a), and is described in
IRC 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or 501(c)(19).
      (3)   The organization has not conducted a raffle in violation of R.C. §
2915.092(B) using an electronic raffle machine, as described in Ohio Veterans
and Fraternal Charitable Coalition v. DeWine, Case No. 13-CV-13610 (C.P.
Franklin Co. February 23, 2018), at any time on or after January 1, 2022.
   (b)   No charitable organization that conducts electronic instant bingo
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Possess an electronic instant bingo system that was not obtained in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 2915 or with any rule adopted under R.C. Chapter
2915;
      (2)   Conduct electronic instant bingo on any day, at any time, or on any
premises not specified on the organization’s type II or type III license issued
under R.C. § 2915.08;
      (3)   Hold more than one valid license to conduct electronic instant
bingo at any one time;
      (4)   Conduct electronic instant bingo on more than one premises or on
any premises other than the charitable organization’s principal place of
business;
      (5)   Operate more than ten electronic bingo systems at the premises on
which the charitable organization conducts electronic instant bingo under its
license;
      (6)   Fail to display both of the following conspicuously at the premises
on which the charitable organization conducts electronic instant bingo:
         A.   The charitable organization’s bingo license;
         B.   The serial number of each deal of electronic instant bingo
tickets being sold.
      (7)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should have
known, to be under 18 years of age to play electronic instant bingo;
      (8)   Sell or provide to any person an electronic instant bingo ticket
for a price different from the price displayed on the game flare for that deal,
except that the charitable organization may give a participant who wins an
electronic instant bingo game an electronic instant bingo ticket as a prize in
place of a cash prize;
      (9)   Fail, once an electronic instant bingo deal is begun, to continue
to sell tickets in that deal until all prizes have been awarded;
      (10)   Permit any person whom the organization knows, or should have
known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction
to be a bingo game operator in the conduct of electronic instant bingo;
      (11)   Permit a bingo game operator to play electronic instant bingo;
      (12)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(12)B. of this
section, pay compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting electronic
instant bingo.
         B.   Division (b)(12)A. of this section does not prohibit an employee
of a veteran’s organization or fraternal organization from redeeming electronic
instant bingo tickets or vouchers for the organization’s members or invited
guests, so long as no portion of the employee’s compensation is paid from any
bingo receipts.
      (13)   Pay consulting fees to any person in relation to electronic
instant bingo.
   (c)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or otherwise provide or offer to
provide an electronic instant bingo system to any person for use in this
municipality unless the electronic instant bingo system has been approved under
R.C. § 2915.15.
   (d)   Whoever knowingly violates division (a), (b), or (c) of this section
or a rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.14(D) is guilty of illegal electronic
instant bingo conduct. Illegal electronic instant bingo conduct is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or state law, or of a rule adopted
under R.C. § 2915.14(D), illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.14)
CHAPTER 636
Offenses Relating to Persons
636.01   Definitions.
636.02   Negligent homicide.
636.03   Assault.
636.04   Negligent assault.
636.05   Aggravated menacing.
636.06   Menacing by stalking.
636.07   Menacing.
636.08   Unlawful restraint.
636.09   Unlawful collection of bodily substances.
636.10   Coercion.
636.11   Nonsupport of dependents.
636.12   Endangering children.
636.13   Interference with custody.
636.14   Contributing to the unruliness or delinquency of a child.
636.15   Threatening or harassing telecommunications.
636.16   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection.
636.17   Domestic violence.
636.18   Safety of crowds attending live entertainment performances.
636.19   Hazing.
636.20   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products; transaction scans.
636.21   Ethnic intimidation.
636.22   Intimidation in connection with housing.
636.23   Failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment.
636.24   Illegal use of a trafficking device or application.
636.25   Permitting minors to play pool or billiards.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Juvenile Court, see R.C. Ch. 2151
   Parents’ liability for destructive acts of their children, see R.C. §
3109.09
   Shelters for victims of domestic violence, see R.C. §§ 3113.33 et seq.
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Disorderly conduct, see §
648.04
   Drugs, see Ch.
624
   False report of child abuse or neglect, see §
654.02
   Personal accountability for organizational conduct, see §
606.10
   “Physical harm to persons” defined, see §
606.01
   Sales of alcohol to underage persons; prohibitions and misrepresentations,
see §
612.02
   “Serious physical harm to persons” defined, see §
606.01
   Sex related offenses, see Ch.
666
   Vehicular homicide and vehicular manslaughter, see §
434.11
§ 636.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this chapter and any other provision of these
Codified Ordinances, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ANOTHER’S UNBORN or OTHER PERSON’S UNBORN. A member of the species
homo sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of another during a period that
begins with fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth
occurs.
      (2)   UNLAWFUL TERMINATION OF ANOTHER’S PREGNANCY. Causing the death of
an unborn member of the species homo sapiens who is or was carried in the womb
of another, as a result of injuries inflicted during the period that begins
with fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth occurs.
   (b)   Notwithstanding division (a) of this section, in no case shall the
definitions of the terms “another’s unborn”, “other person’s unborn” and
“unlawful termination of another’s pregnancy” that are set forth in division
(a) of this section be applied or construed in any of the following manners:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(1) of this section, in
a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as prohibiting any
pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion with the consent of
the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman implied by law in a
medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise authorized by law to
consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant woman. An abortion that
violates the conditions described in the immediately preceding sentence may be
punished as any violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04,
2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21 or
2903.22, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, as applicable. An
abortion that does not violate the conditions described in the second
immediately preceding sentence but that does violate R.C. § 2919.12, 2919.13
(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of the section, as
applicable.
      (2)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
         A.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby.
         B.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a viable,
unborn human that she is carrying.
         C.   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who dies
from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human.
         D.   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human.
         E.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in any
other manner, an injury, illness or other psychological illness or condition,
regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human that she is
carrying.
(R.C. § 2903.09)
§ 636.02 NEGLIGENT HOMICIDE.
   (a)   No person shall negligently cause the death of another or the unlawful
termination of another’s pregnancy by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent homicide, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2903.05)
Statutory reference:
   Reckless homicide, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.041]
§ 636.03 ASSAULT.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to
another or to another’s unborn.
   (b)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to another or
to another’s unborn.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of
assault. Except as provided in R.C. § 2903.13(C), assault is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
   (d)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to assault when it
is a misdemeanor also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification as
described in R.C. § 2941.1423 (victim of the offense was a woman whom the
defendant knew was pregnant at the time of the offense) that was included in
the indictment, count in the indictment or information charging the offense,
the court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory jail term as provided in
R.C. § 2929.24(F).
   (e)   A prosecution for a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section
does not preclude a prosecution of a violation of any other section of the Ohio
Revised Code. One or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that
can be prosecuted under division (a) or (b) of this section or any other
section of the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under division (a) or (b) of
this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code, the municipal
ordinance, or both sections. However, if an offender is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section and also is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2903.22, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, based on the same conduct
involving the same victim that was the basis of the violation of division (a)
or (b) of this section, the offenses are allied offenses of similar import
under R.C. § 2941.25.
(R.C. § 2903.13)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated and felonious assault, see R.C. §§ 2903.11 and 2903.12
   Felony assault offenses, see R.C. § 2903.13(C)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
   Persons who may seek relief under anti-stalking protection order; ex parte
orders, see R.C. § 2903.214
   Protection order as pretrial condition of release, see R.C. § 2903.213
   Strangulation, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.18
   Vehicular assault and aggravated vehicular assault, felony offenses, see
R.C. § 2903.08
§ 636.04 NEGLIGENT ASSAULT.
   (a)   No person shall negligently, by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, cause physical harm to another or to
another’s unborn.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent assault, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 2903.14)
§ 636.05 AGGRAVATED MENACING.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the offender
will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the other person,
such other person’s unborn, or a member of that other person’s immediate
family. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that the
offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the
other person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s
immediate family, the other person’s belief may be based on words or conduct of
the offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or
other organization that employs the other person or to which the other person
belongs.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated menacing. Except
as otherwise provided in this division (b), aggravated menacing is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or
employee of a public children services agency or a private child placing agency
and the offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or
anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, aggravated
menacing is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law or, if the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense of
violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or private child placing agency, and that prior
offense related to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
   (c)   As used in this section, “organization” includes an entity that is a
governmental employer.
(R.C. § 2903.21)
§ 636.06 MENACING BY STALKING.
   (a)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   A.   No person by engaging in a pattern of conduct shall knowingly
cause another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
the other person or a family or household member of the other person or cause
mental distress to the other person or a family or household member of the
other person. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that
the offender will cause physical harm to the other person or the other person’s
family or household member or mental distress to the other person or the other
person’s family or household member, the other person’s belief or mental
distress may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are directed at
or identify a corporation, association, or other organization that employs the
other person or to which the other person belongs.
         B.   No person, through the use of any form of written communication
or any electronic method of remotely transferring information, including but
not limited to any computer, computer network, computer program, computer
system, or telecommunication device, shall post a message or use any
intentionally written or verbal graphic gesture with purpose to do either of
the following:
            1.   Violate division (a)(1)A. of this section;
            2.   Urge or incite another to commit a violation of division (a)
(1)A. of this section.
         C.   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate division (a)
(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this section.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section is guilty of
menacing by stalking.
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(2)B. of this
section, menacing by stalking is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   Menacing by stalking is a felony, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law, if any of the following applies:
            1.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2903.211 or a violation of R.C. § 2911.211, or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to either of these offenses.
            2.   In committing the offense under division (a)(1)A., (a)(1)B. or
(a)(1)C. of this section, the offender made a threat of physical harm to or
against the victim, or as a result of an offense committed under division (a)
(1)B. or (a)(1)C. of this section, a third person induced by the offender’s
posted message made a threat of physical harm to or against the victim.
            3.   In committing the offense under division (a)(1)A., (a)(1)B. or
(a)(1)C. of this section, the offender trespassed on the land or premises where
the victim lives, is employed or attends school, or as a result of an offense
committed under division (a)(1)B. or (a)(1)C. of this section, a third person
induced by the offender’s posted message trespassed on the land or premises
where the victim lives, is employed or attends school.
            4.   The victim of the offense is a minor.
            5.   The offender has a history of violence towards the victim or
any other person or a history of other violent acts towards the victim or any
other person.
            6.   While committing the offense under division (a)(1)A. of this
section or a violation of division (a)(1)C. of this section based on conduct in
violation of division (a)(1)A. of this section, the offender had a deadly
weapon on or about the offender’s person or under the offender’s control.
Division (a)(2)B.6. of this section does not apply in determining the penalty
for a violation of division (a)(1)B. of this section or a violation of division
(a)(1)C. of this section based on conduct in violation of division (a)(1)B. of
this section.
            7.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
the subject of a protection order issued under R.C. § 2903.213 or 2903.214,
regardless of whether or not the person to be protected under the order is the
victim of the offense or another person.
            8.   In committing the offense under division (a)(1)A., (a)(1)B. or
(a)(1)C. of this section, the offender caused serious physical harm to the
premises at which the victim resides, to the real property on which that
premises is located, or to any personal property located on that premises, or
as a result of an offense committed under division (a)(1)B. of this section or
an offense committed under division (a)(1)C. of this section based on a
violation of division (a)(1)B. of this section, a third person induced by the
offender’s posted message caused serious physical harm to that premises, that
real property or any personal property on that premises.
            9.   Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been
determined to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as
manifested by evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior,
evidence of then-recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of
violent behavior and serious harm, or other evidence of then-present
dangerousness.
            10.   The victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the
offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties.
            11.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties.
      (3)   R.C. § 2919.271 applies in relation to a defendant charged with a
violation of this section.
      (4)   For the purpose of division (a) of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   COMPUTER, COMPUTER NETWORK, COMPUTER PROGRAM, COMPUTER SYSTEM,
and TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
         B.   EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. The singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
         C.   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. The singular of “emergency
medical services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
         D.   FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:
            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
person against whom the act prohibited in division (a)(1) of this section is
committed:
               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse
of the person;
               b.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the person, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the person;
               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the person, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
person.
            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the person against
whom the act prohibited in division (a)(1) of this section is committed is the
other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
         E.   MENTAL DISTRESS. Any of the following:
            1.   Any mental illness or condition that involves some temporary
substantial incapacity;
            2.   Any mental illness or condition that would normally require
psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment or other mental health services,
whether or not any person requested or received psychiatric treatment,
psychological treatment, or other mental health services.
         F.   ORGANIZATION. Includes an entity that is a governmental employer.
         G.   PATTERN OF CONDUCT. Two or more actions or incidents closely
related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any
of those actions or incidents, or two or more actions or incidents closely
related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any
of those actions or incidents, directed at one or more persons employed by or
belonging to the same corporation, association, or other organization. Actions
or incidents that prevent, obstruct or delay the performance by a public
official, firefighter, rescuer, emergency medical services person or emergency
facility person of any authorized act within the public official’s,
firefighter’s, rescuer’s, emergency medical services person’s or emergency
facility person’s official capacity, or the posting of messages, use of
intentionally written or verbal graphic gestures, or receipt of information or
data through the use of any form of written communication or an electronic
method of remotely transferring information, including but not limited to a
computer, computer network, computer program, computer system or
telecommunications device, may constitute a “pattern of conduct.”
         H.   PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has
lived with the person against whom the act prohibited in division (a)(1) of
this section is committed in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise
is cohabiting with that person, or who otherwise has cohabited with the person
within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in
question.
         I.   POST A MESSAGE. Transferring, sending, posting, publishing,
disseminating or otherwise communicating, or attempting to transfer, send,
post, publish, disseminate or otherwise communicate, any message or
information, whether truthful or untruthful, about an individual, and whether
done under one’s own name, under the name of another or while impersonating
another.
         J.   PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
         K.   SEXUAL MOTIVATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2971.01.
         L.   THIRD PERSON. In relation to conduct as described in division (a)
(1)B. of this section, an individual who is neither the offender nor the victim
of the conduct.
      (5)   The prosecution does not need to prove in a prosecution under
division (a) of this section that a person requested or received psychiatric
treatment, psychological treatment or other mental health services in order to
show that the person was caused mental distress as described in division (a)
(4)E.2. of this section.
      (6)   A.   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person solely
because the person provided access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control,
including having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access
or connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that it believes is or will
be sent in violation of division (a) of this section.
         B.   Division (a)(6)A. of this section does not create an affirmative
duty for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control to
block the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that
it believes is or will be sent in violation of division (a) of this section
except as otherwise provided by law.
         C.   Division (a)(6)A. of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of division (a) of this section or who
knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
(R.C. § 2903.211)
   (b)   Protection order. Consult R.C. § 2903.213 for current provisions
regarding protection orders, consent agreements, anti-stalking protection
orders and orders issued by a court of another state.
   (c)   Violating a protection order, consent agreement, anti-stalking
protection order or order issued by a court of another state.
      (1)   No person shall recklessly violate the terms of any of the
following:
         A.   A protection order issued or consent agreement approved pursuant
to R.C. § 2919.26 or 3113.31;
         B.   A protection order issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213 or
2903.214;
         C.   A protection order issued by a court of another state.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
violating a protection order.
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2)C. or (c)(2)D. of
this section, violating a protection order is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         C.   Violating a protection order is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the offender previously has been convicted of, pleaded
guilty to, or been adjudicated a delinquent child for any of the following:
            1.   A violation of a protection order issued or consent agreement
approved pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213, 2903.214, 2919.26, or 3113.31,
or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance;
            2.   Two or more violations of R.C. § 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22,
or 2911.211, or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
or any combination of those offenses, that involved the same person who is the
subject of the protection order or consent agreement;
            3.   One or more violations of this section, or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance.
         D.   If the offender violates a protection order or consent agreement
while committing a felony offense, violating a protection order is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         E.   If the protection order violated by the offender was an order
issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34 or 2903.214 that required electronic
monitoring of the offender pursuant to that section, the court may require in
addition to any other sentence imposed upon the offender that the offender be
electronically monitored for a period not exceeding five years by a law
enforcement agency designated by the court. If the court requires under this
division that the offender be electronically monitored, unless the court
determines that the offender is indigent, the court shall order that the
offender pay the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring device
and the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device.
      (3)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (c)(1)C. of
this section that the protection order issued by a court of another state does
not comply with the requirements specified in 18 U.S.C. § 2265(b) for a
protection order that must be accorded full faith a credit by a court of this
state or that it is not entitled to full faith and credit under 18 U.S.C. §
2265(c).
      (4)   In a prosecution for a violation of this section, it is not
necessary for the prosecution to prove that the protection order or consent
agreement was served on the defendant if the prosecution proves that the
defendant was shown the protection order or consent agreement or a copy of
either or a judge, magistrate, or law enforcement officer informed the
defendant that a protection order or consent agreement had been issued, and
proves that the defendant recklessly violated the terms of the order or
agreement.
      (5)   As used in this section, PROTECTION ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF
ANOTHER STATE means an injunction or another order issued by a criminal court
of another state for the purpose of preventing violent or threatening acts or
harassment against, contact or communication with, or physical proximity to
another person including a temporary order, and means an injunction or order of
that nature issued by a civil court of another state, including a temporary
order and a final order issued in an independent action or as a pendente lite
order in a proceeding for other relief, if the court issued it in response to a
complaint, petition or motion filed by or on behalf of a person seeking
protection. The term does not include an order for support or for custody of a
child issued pursuant to the divorce and child custody laws of another state,
except to the extent that the order for support or for custody of a child is
entitled to full faith and credit under the laws of the United States.
(R.C. § 2919.27)
§ 636.07 MENACING.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the
offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s immediate
family. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that the
offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s immediate
family, the other person’s belief may be based on words or conduct of the
offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or other
organization that employs the other person or to which the other person
belongs.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly place or attempt to place another in
reasonable fear of physical harm or death by displaying a deadly weapon,
regardless of whether the deadly weapon displayed is operable or inoperable, if
either of the following applies:
         A.   The other person is an emergency service responder, the person
knows or reasonably should know that the other person is an emergency service
responder, and it is the person’s specific purpose to engage in the specified
conduct against an emergency service responder.
         B.   The other person is a family or household member or co-worker of
an emergency service responder, the person knows or reasonably should know that
the other person is a family or household member or co-worker of an emergency
service responder, and it is the person’s specific purpose to engage in the
specified conduct against a family or household member or co-worker of an
emergency service responder.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, menacing is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public
children services agency or a private child placing agency and the offense
relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance
of official responsibilities or duties or if the victim of the offense is an
emergency service responder in the performance of the responder’s official
duties, menacing is one of the following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2) of this section, a
misdemeanor of the first degree;
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or
employee of a public children services agency or private child placing agency
or an emergency service responder, and that prior offense related to the
officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance of official
responsibilities or duties or to the responder’s performance of the responder’s
official duties, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   A prosecution for a violation of this section does not preclude a
prosecution of a violation of any other section of the Ohio Revised Code. One
or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that can be prosecuted
under this section or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code may be
prosecuted under this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code, or
both sections. However, if an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this section and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of R.C. § 2903.13, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance,
based on the same conduct involving the same victim that was the basis of the
violation of this section, the offenses are allied offenses of similar import
under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   CO-WORKER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 2903.13.
      (2)   EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. §
2903.13.
      (3)   FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. §
2903.13.
      (4)   ORGANIZATION. Includes an entity that is a governmental employer.
(R.C. § 2903.22)
§ 636.08 UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly restrain
another of the other person’s liberty.
   (b)   No person, without privilege to do so and with a sexual motivation,
shall knowingly restrain another of the other person’s liberty.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful restraint, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   As used in this section, SEXUAL MOTIVATION has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2971.01.
(R.C. § 2905.03)
§ 636.09 UNLAWFUL COLLECTION OF BODILY SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly collect any blood, urine, tissue, or other
bodily substance of another person without privilege or consent to do so.
   (b)   (1)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         A.   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a law
enforcement officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice
of a law enforcement officer, for purposes of a chemical test or tests of the
substance under R.C. § 1547.111(A)(1) or 4511.191(A)(2) to determine the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the bodily substance;
         B.   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a peace
officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice of a peace
officer, for purposes of a test or tests of the substance as provided in R.C. §
4506.17(A) to determine the person’s alcohol concentration or the presence of
any controlled substance or metabolite of a controlled substance.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section shall not be construed as implying
that the persons identified in divisions (b)(1)A. and B. of this section do not
have privilege to collect the bodily substance of another person as described
in those divisions or as limiting the definition of “privilege” set forth in
R.C. § 2901.01.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of unlawful
collection of a bodily substance. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, unlawful collection of a bodily substance is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (a) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, unlawful collection of a bodily
substance is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.15)
§ 636.10 COERCION.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to coerce another into taking or refraining
from action concerning which the other person has a legal freedom of choice,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Threaten to commit any offense.
      (2)   Utter or threaten any slander against any person.
      (3)   Expose or threaten to expose any matter tending to subject any
person to hatred, contempt or ridicule, or to damage any person’s personal or
business repute, or to impair any person’s credit.
      (4)   Institute or threaten criminal proceedings against any person.
      (5)   Take or withhold, or threaten to take or withhold official action,
or cause or threaten to cause official action to be taken or withheld.
   (b)   Divisions (a)(4) and (a)(5) of this section shall not be construed to
prohibit a prosecutor or court from doing any of the following in good faith
and in the interests of justice:
      (1)   Offering or agreeing to grant, or granting immunity from
prosecution pursuant to R.C. § 2945.44.
      (2)   In return for a plea of guilty to one or more offenses charged or
to one or more other or lesser offenses, or in return for the testimony of the
accused in a case to which the accused is not a party, offering or agreeing to
dismiss, or dismissing one or more charges pending against an accused, or
offering or agreeing to impose, or imposing a certain sentence or modification
of sentence.
      (3)   Imposing a community control sanction on certain conditions,
including without limitation requiring the offender to make restitution or
redress to the victim of the offense.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a)(3), (a)(4)
or (a)(5) of this section that the actor’s conduct was a reasonable response to
the circumstances which occasioned it, and that the actor’s purpose was limited
to any of the following:
      (1)   Compelling another to refrain from misconduct or to desist from
further misconduct.
      (2)   Preventing or redressing a wrong or injustice.
      (3)   Preventing another from taking action for which the actor
reasonably believed the other person to be disqualified.
      (4)   Compelling another to take action which the actor reasonably
believed the other person to be under a duty to take.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of coercion, a misdemeanor of
the second degree.
   (e)   As used in this section:
      (1)   COMMUNITY CONTROL SANCTION has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2929.01.
      (2)   THREAT includes a direct threat and a threat by innuendo.
(R.C. § 2905.12)
§ 636.11 NONSUPPORT OF DEPENDENTS.
   (a)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide adequate support to:
      (1)   The person’s spouse, as required by law;
      (2)   The person’s child who is under age 18, or the persons’s child with
a mental or physical disability who is under age 21;
      (3)   The person’s aged or infirm parent or adoptive parent, who from
lack of ability and means is unable to provide adequately for the parent’s own
support.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide support as
established by a court order to, another person whom, by court order or decree,
the person:
         A.   Is legally obligated to support; or
         B.   Was legally obligated to support, and an amount for support:
            1.   Was due and owing prior to the date the person’s duty to pay
current support terminated; and
            2.   Remains unpaid.
      (2)   The period of limitation under R.C. § 2901.13 applicable to
division (b)(1)B. of this section shall begin to run on the date the person’s
duty to pay current support terminates.
   (c)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage or contribute to a
child or a ward of the juvenile court becoming a dependent child, as defined in
R.C. § 2151.04, or a neglected child, as defined in R.C. § 2151.03.
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of failure to provide
adequate support under division (a) of this section or a charge of failure to
provide support established by a court order under division (b) of this section
that the accused was unable to provide adequate support or the established
support, but did provide the support that was within his or her ability and
means.
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a)(3) of this
section that the parent abandoned the accused or failed to support the accused
as required by law, while the accused was under age 18, or had a mental or
physical disability and was under age 21.
   (f)   It is not a defense to a charge under division (b) of this section
that the person whom a court has ordered the accused to support is being
adequately supported by someone other than the accused.
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of nonsupport of dependents, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (a)(2) or (b) of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or if the
offender has failed to provide support under division (a)(2) or (b) of this
section for a total accumulated period of 26 weeks out of 104 consecutive
weeks, whether or not the 26 weeks were consecutive, then a violation of
division (a)(2) or (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a felony violation of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (a)(2) or
(b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender is guilty of nonsupport of dependents by reason of
failing to provide support to his or her child as required by a child support
order issued on or after April 15, 1985, pursuant to R.C. § 2151.23, 2151.231,
2151.232, 2151.33, 3105.21, 3109.05, 3111.13, 3113.04, 3113.31, 3115.401, or
former R.C. § 3115.31, the court, in addition to any other sentence imposed,
shall assess all court costs arising out of the charge against the person and
require the person to pay any reasonable attorney’s fees of any adverse party
other than the state, as determined by the court, that arose in relation to the
charge.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
contributing to the nonsupport of dependents, a misdemeanor of the first
degree. Each day of a violation of division (c) of this section is a separate
offense.
(R.C. § 2919.21)
§ 636.12 ENDANGERING CHILDREN.
   (a)   No person, who is the parent, guardian, custodian, person having
custody or control, or person in loco parentis of a child under 18 years of age
or a child with a mental or physical disability under 21 years of age, shall
create a substantial risk to the health or safety of the child by violating a
duty of care, protection, or support. It is not a violation of a duty of care,
protection, or support under this division when the parent, guardian,
custodian, or person having custody or control of a child treats the physical
or mental illness or disability of the child by spiritual means through prayer
alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious body.
   (b)   No person shall do any of the following to a child under 18 years of
age or a child with a mental or physical disability under 21 years of age:
      (1)   Abuse the child.
      (2)   Torture or cruelly abuse the child.
      (3)   Administer corporal punishment or other physical disciplinary
measure, or physically restrain the child in a cruel manner or for a prolonged
period, which punishment, discipline or restraint is excessive under the
circumstances and creates a substantial risk of serious physical harm to the
child.
      (4)   Repeatedly administer unwarranted disciplinary measures to a child
when there is a substantial risk that this conduct, if continued, will
seriously impair or retard the child’s mental health or development.
      (5)   Entice, coerce, permit, encourage, compel, hire, employ, use or
allow the child to act, model or in any other way participate in, or be
photographed for, the production, presentation, dissemination or advertisement
of any material or performance that the offender knows or reasonably should
know is obscene, is sexually oriented matter or is nudity-oriented matter.
      (6)   Allow the child to be on the same parcel of real property and
within 100 feet of, or, in the case of more than one housing unit on the same
parcel of real property, in the same housing unit and within 100 feet of, any
act in violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or 2925.041 when the person knows that the
act is occurring, whether or not any person is prosecuted for or convicted of
the violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or 2925.041 that is the basis of the violation
of this division.
   (c)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle, as defined by R.C. § 4511.01,
within the municipality and in violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, when one or more children under
18 years of age are in the vehicle. Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
a person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation of
this division and a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of the charge of the
violation of this division. For purposes of R.C. §§ 4511.191 to 4511.197 and
all related provisions of law, a person arrested for a violation of this
division shall be considered to be under arrest for operating a vehicle while
under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, a combination of them or for
operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, or urine.
      (2)   For the purpose of division (c)(1) of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
         A.   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
         B.   VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (d)   (1)   Division (b)(5) of this section does not apply to any material
or performance that is produced, presented or disseminated for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, religious, governmental, judicial or other
proper purpose, by or to a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist,
teacher, person pursuing bona fide studies for research, librarian, member of
the clergy, prosecutor, judge or other person having a proper interest in the
material or performance.
      (2)   Mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under division (b)(5)
of this section.
      (3)   In a prosecution under division (b)(5) of this section, the trier
of fact may infer that an actor, model or participant in the material or
performance involved is a juvenile if the material or performance, through its
title, text, visual representation or otherwise, represents or depicts the
actor, model or participant as a juvenile.
      (4)   For the purpose of this division and division (b)(5) of this
section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   MATERIAL, PERFORMANCE, OBSCENE and SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2907.01.
         B.   NUDITY-ORIENTED MATTER. Any material or performance that shows a
minor in a state of nudity and that, taken as a whole by the average person
applying contemporary community standards, appeals to the prurient interest.
         C.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATTER. Any material or performance that shows
a minor participating or engaging in sexual activity, masturbation or
bestiality.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of endangering children.
      (1)   If the offender violates division (a) or (b)(1) of this section,
endangering children is one of the following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (e)(1)B., (e)(1)C. or
(e)(1)D., a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or
of any offense involving neglect, abandonment or contributing to the
delinquency of or physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided in
division (e)(1)C. or (e)(1)D. of this section, endangering children is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         C.   If the violation is a violation of division (a) of this section
and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         D.   If the violation is a violation of division (b)(1) of this
section and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender violates division (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(5) or
(b)(6) of this section, endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the offender violates division (c) of this section, the offender
shall be punished as follows:
         A.   Except as provided in (e)(3)B. or (e)(3)C., endangering children
in violation of division (c) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         B.   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child or
if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section or
a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any offense
involving neglect, abandonment or contributing to the delinquency of or
physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided in division (e)(3)C. of
this section, endangering children in violation of division (c) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         C.   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child
and if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.08, 2919.22(C) or former R.C. § 2903.07 as it
existed prior to March 23, 2000, or R.C. § 2903.04, in a case in which the
offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that
section, endangering children in violation of division (c) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         D.   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine or other sentence,
penalty or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to divisions (e)
(3)A., (e)(3)B. or (e)(3)C. of this section or pursuant to any other provision
of law and in addition to any suspension of the offender’s driver’s license or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege under
R.C. Chapter 4506, Chapter 4509, Chapter 4510 or Chapter 4511, or any other
provision of law, the court also may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(7).
         E.   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other sentence,
penalty or sanction imposed upon the offender pursuant to division (e)(3)A.,
(e)(3)B., (e)(3)C. or (e)(3)D. of this section or pursuant to any other
provision of law for the violation of division (c) of this section, if as a
part of the same trial or proceeding the offender also is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a separate charge charging the violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A),
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the
charge of the violation of division (c) of this section, the offender also
shall be sentenced in accordance with R.C. § 4511.19, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, for that violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (f)   (1)   If a person violates division (c) of this section and if, at the
time of the violation, there were two or more children under 18 years of age in
the motor vehicle involved in the violation, the offender may be convicted of a
violation of division (c) of this section for each of the children, but the
court may sentence the offender for only one of the violations.
      (2)   A.   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (c) of this section but the person is not also convicted of and does
not also plead guilty to a separate charge of violating R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge
of the violation of division (c) of this section, both the following apply:
            1.   For purposes of the provisions of R.C. § 4511.19, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that set forth the penalties and
sanctions for a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the violation of
division (c) of this section shall not constitute a violation of R.C. § 4511.19
(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   For purposes of the provisions of law that refers to a
conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and that is not described in
division (f)(2)A.1. of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the
violation of division (c) of this section shall constitute a conviction or plea
of guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
         B.   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (c) of this section and the person also is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a separate charge of violating R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge of the
violation of division (c) of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty
to the violation of division (c) of this section shall not constitute, for the
purposes of any provision of law that refers to a conviction of or a plea of
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, a conviction of or a plea of guilty to a violation of R.C.
§ 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 2919.22(A) - (E), (H))
Statutory reference:
   Community service, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(F)
   License suspension, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(G)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
§ 636.13 INTERFERENCE WITH CUSTODY.
   (a)   No person, knowing that he or she is without privilege to do so or
being reckless in that regard, shall entice, take, keep or harbor a person
identified in division (a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section from the
parent, guardian or custodian of the person identified in division (a)(1), (a)
(2) or (a)(3) of this section:
      (1)   A child under the age of 18, or a child with a mental or physical
disability under the age of 21;
      (2)   A person committed by law to an institution for delinquent, unruly,
neglected, abused or dependent children;
      (3)   A person committed by law to an institution for persons with mental
illnesses or an institution for persons with intellectual disabilities.
   (b)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause or encourage a child or a
ward of the juvenile court who has been committed to the custody of any person,
department or public or private institution to leave the custody of that
person, department or institution without legal consent.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of enticing or taking under
division (a)(1) of this section that the actor reasonably believed that his or
her conduct was necessary to preserve the child’s health or safety. It is an
affirmative defense to a charge of keeping or harboring under division (a) of
this section that the actor in good faith gave notice to law enforcement or
judicial authorities within a reasonable time after the child or committed
person came under his or her shelter, protection, or influence.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with custody.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, a violation of
division (a)(1) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the child who is
the subject of a violation of division (a)(1) is removed from the state or if
the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under this section or
a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of
division (a)(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. If the child who is the subject of a violation of division (a)(1)
suffers physical harm as a result of the violation, a violation of division (a)
(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. Each day of a violation of division (b) is a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2919.23)
§ 636.14 CONTRIBUTING TO THE UNRULINESS OR DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   DELINQUENT CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
      (2)   UNRULY CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.022.
   (b)   No person, including a parent, guardian, or other custodian of a
child, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to a child or a
ward of the juvenile court becoming an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (2)   Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the juvenile
court to become an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (3)   Act in a way that contributes to an adjudication of the child as a
delinquent child based on the child’s violation of a court order adjudicating
the child an unruly child for being an habitual truant;
      (4)   If the person is the parent, guardian, or custodian of a child who
has the duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950 to register, register a new
residence address, and periodically verify a residence address, and, if
applicable, to send a notice of intent to reside, and if the child is not
emancipated, as defined in R.C. § 2919.121, fail to ensure that the child
complies with those duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the
unruliness or delinquency of a child, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each
day of violation of this section is a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2919.24)
§ 636.15 THREATENING OR HARASSING TELECOMMUNICATIONS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a
telecommunication, or knowingly permit a telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person’s control, to another, if the caller
does any of the following:
      (1)   Makes the telecommunication with purpose to harass, intimidate, or
abuse any person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made,
whether or not actual communication takes place between the caller and a
recipient;
      (2)   Describes, suggests, requests or proposes that the caller, the
recipient of the telecommunication, or any other person engage in sexual
activity, and the recipient or another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made has requested, in a previous telecommunication or in
the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a telecommunication
to the recipient or to the premises to which the telecommunication is made;
      (3)   During the telecommunication, violates R.C. § 2903.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (4)   Knowingly states to the recipient of the telecommunication that the
caller intends to cause damage to or destroy public or private property, and
the recipient, any member of the recipient’s family or any other person who
resides at the premises to which the telecommunication is made owns, leases,
resides or works in, will at the time of the destruction or damaging be near or
in, has the responsibility of protecting, or insures the property that will be
destroyed or damaged;
      (5)   Knowingly makes the telecommunication to the recipient of the
telecommunication, to another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the recipient or another
person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a
telecommunication to those premises or to any persons at those premises;
      (6)   Knowingly makes any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal to
the recipient of the telecommunication that is threatening, intimidating,
menacing, coercive, or obscene with the intent to abuse, threaten, or harass
the recipient;
      (7)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly interrupts the
telecommunication service of any person;
      (8)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly transmits to any
person, regardless of whether the telecommunication is heard in its entirety,
any file, document, or other communication that prevents that person from using
the person’s telephone service or electronic communication device;
      (9)   Knowingly makes any false statement concerning the death, injury,
illness, disfigurement, reputation, indecent conduct, or criminal conduct of
the recipient of the telecommunication or family or household member of the
recipient with purpose to abuse, threaten, intimidate, or harass the recipient;
      (10)   Knowingly incites another person through a telecommunication or
other means to harass or participate in the harassment of a person;
      (11)   Knowingly alarms the recipient by making a telecommunication
without a lawful purpose at an hour or hours known to be inconvenient to the
recipient and in an offensive or repetitive manner.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall make or cause to be made a telecommunication or
permit a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under
the person’s control, with purpose to abuse, threaten or harass another person.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly post a text or audio statement or an
image on an internet web site or web page for the purpose of abusing,
threatening, or harassing another person.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of telecommunications
harassment.
      (2)   A violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(5), (a)(6), (a)
(7), (a)(8), (a)(9), (a)(10), or (a)(11) or (b) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony on each
subsequent offense, which shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(3), a violation
of division (a)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree on a
first offense and a felony on each subsequent offense, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If a violation of division (a)(4) of this section
results in economic harm of $1,000 or more, telecommunications harassment is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (d)   No cause of action may be asserted in any court of this municipality
against any provider of a telecommunications service, interactive computer
service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or against any
officer, employee or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, for any
injury, death or loss to person or property that allegedly arises out of the
provider’s, officer’s, employee’s or agent’s provision of information,
facilities or assistance in accordance with the terms of a court order that is
issued in relation to the investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation
of this section. A provider of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or an
officer, employee or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, is
immune from any civil or criminal liability for injury, death or loss to person
or property that allegedly arises out of the provider’s, officer’s, employee’s
or agent’s provision of information, facilities or assistance in accordance
with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the investigation
or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section.
   (e)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person solely because the
person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control, including
having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or
connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that the person believes
is, or will be sent, in violation of this section.
      (2)   Division (e)(1) of this section does not create an affirmative duty
for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method
of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control to block
the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it
believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section except as otherwise
provided by law.
      (3)   Division (e)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of this section or who knowingly
advertises the availability of material of that nature.
      (4)   A provider or user of an interactive computer service, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. § 230, shall neither be treated as the publisher or speaker of any
information provided by another information content provider, as defined in 47
U.S.C. § 230, nor held civilly or criminally liable for the creation or
development of information provided by another information content provider, as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230. Nothing in this division shall be construed to
protect a person from liability to the extent that the person developed or
created any content in violation of this section.
   (f)   Divisions (a)(5) to (a)(11) and (b)(2) of this section do not apply to
a person who, while employed or contracted by a newspaper, magazine, press
association, news agency, news wire service, cable channel or cable operator,
or radio or television station, is gathering, processing, transmitting,
compiling, editing, or disseminating information for the general public within
the scope of the person’s employment in that capacity or the person’s
contractual authority in that capacity.
   (g)   For the purpose of divisions (a) through (d) of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CABLE OPERATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
      (2)   CALLER. The person described in division (a) of this section who
makes or causes to be made a telecommunication or who permits a
telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under that
person’s control.
      (3)   ECONOMIC HARM. All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary
harm suffered by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. The term
includes but is not limited to all of the following:
         A.   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of the
criminal conduct;
         B.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
         C.   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is shut
down as a result of the criminal conduct;
         D.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
      (4)   FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:
         A.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division
(a)(9) of this section is committed:
            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse of
the recipient;
            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the recipient, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the recipient;
            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the recipient, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
recipient.
         B.   The natural parent of any child of whom the recipient of the
telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division (a)(9) of this
section is committed is the other natural parent or is the putative other
natural parent.
      (5)   PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has
lived with the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act
prohibited in division (a)(9) of this section is committed in a common law
marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with the recipient, or who
otherwise has cohabited with the recipient within five years prior to the date
of the alleged commission of the act in question.
      (6)   SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
      (7)   TELECOMMUNICATION and TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   (h)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person from making a
telecommunication to a debtor that is in compliance with the “Fair Debt
Collection Practices Act”, 15 U.S.C. § 1692, as amended, or the “Telephone
Consumer Protection Act”, 47 U.S.C. § 227, as amended.
(R.C. § 2917.21)
§ 636.16 PLACING HARMFUL SUBSTANCE OR OBJECTS IN FOOD OR CONFECTION.
   (a)   No person shall do either of the following, knowing or having
reasonable cause to believe that any person may suffer physical harm or be
seriously inconvenienced or annoyed thereby:
      (1)   Place a pin, razor blade, glass, laxative, drug of abuse or other
harmful or hazardous object or substance in any food or confection.
      (2)   Furnish to any person any food or confection which has been
adulterated in violation of division (a)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 3716.11)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 3716.99(C))
§ 636.17 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.
   (a)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm
to a family or household member.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to a family
or household member.
      (3)   No person, by threat of force, shall knowingly cause a family or
household member to believe that the offender will cause imminent physical harm
to the family or household member.
      (4)   A.   Whoever violates this section is guilty of domestic violence,
and the court shall sentence the offender as provided in divisions (a)(4)B. to
(a)(4)E. of this section.
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(4)C., (a)(4)D. or
(a)(4)E. of this section, a violation of division (a)(3) is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree and a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
         C.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(4)D. of this
section, if the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of
domestic violence, a violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or
law of this or any other state or the United States that is substantially
equivalent to domestic violence, a violation of R.C. § 2903.14, 2909.06,
2909.07, 2911.12, 2911.211 or 2919.22 if the victim of the violation was a
family or household member at the time of the violation, a violation of an
existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the
United States that is substantially equivalent to any of those sections if the
victim of the violation was a family or household member at the time of the
commission of the violation, or any offense of violence if the victim of the
offense was a family or household member at the time of the commission of the
offense, a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law, and a violation of division (a)(3) is a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
         D.   If the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been
convicted of two or more offenses of domestic violence or two or more
violations or offenses of the type described in division (a)(4)C. of this
section involving a person who was a family or household member at the time of
the violations or offenses, a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation
of division (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two or more
offenses of domestic violence or two or more violations or offenses of the type
described in division (a)(4)C. of this section involving a person who was a
family or household member at the time of the violations or offenses, and the
offender knew that the victim of the violation was pregnant at the time of the
violation, a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         E.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(4)C. or (a)(4)D. of
this section, if the offender knew that the victim of the violation was
pregnant at the time of the violation, a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2)
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a
violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
      (5)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no court or
unit of state or local government shall charge any fee, cost, deposit or money
in connection with the filing of charges against a person alleging that the
person violated this section or a municipal ordinance substantially equivalent
to this section or in connection with the prosecution of any charges so filed.
      (6)   As used in this section:
         A.   FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Any of the following:
            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
offender:
               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse as defined below, or
a former spouse of the offender;
               b.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the offender, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the offender;
               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the offender, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
offender.
            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the offender is the
other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
         B.   PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. A person who is living or has lived
with the offender in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is
cohabiting with the offender, or who otherwise has cohabited with the offender
within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in
question.
(R.C. § 2919.25)
   (b)   Temporary protection order. Consult R.C. § 2919.26 for current
provisions regarding protection orders.
   (c)   Violating a protection order, consent agreement, anti-stalking
protection order or order issued by a court of another state. See § 636.06(c)
for current provisions.
§ 636.18 SAFETY OF CROWDS ATTENDING LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCES.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CONCERT. A musical performance of which the primary component is a
presentation by persons singing or playing musical instruments, that is
intended by its sponsors mainly, but not necessarily exclusively, for the
listening enjoyment of the audience, and that is held in a facility. A
“concert” does not include any performance in which music is a part of the
presentation and the primary component of which is acting, dancing, a motion
picture, a demonstration of skills or talent other than singing or playing an
instrument, an athletic event, an exhibition or a speech.
      (2)   FACILITY. Any structure that has a roof or partial roof and that
has walls that wholly surround the area on all sides, including but not limited
to a stadium, hall, arena, armory, auditorium, ballroom, exhibition hall,
convention center or music hall.
      (3)   LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCE. Any live speech; any live musical
performance, including a concert; any live dramatic performance; any live
variety show; and any other live performance with respect to which the primary
intent of the audience can be construed to be viewing  the performers. A “live
entertainment performance” does not include any form of entertainment with
respect to which the person purchasing a ticket routinely participates in
amusements as well as views performers.
      (4)   PERSON. Includes, in addition to an individual or entity specified
in R.C. § 1.59(C), any governmental entity.
      (5)   RESTRICTED ENTERTAINMENT AREA. Any wholly or partially enclosed
area, whether indoors or outdoors, that has limited access through established
entrances or established turnstiles or similar devices.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or offer in return for a
donation, any ticket that is not numbered and that does not correspond to a
specific seat for admission to either of the following:
         A.   A live entertainment performance that is not exempted under
division (d) of this section, that is held in a restricted entertainment area,
and for which more than 8,000 tickets are offered to the public;
         B.   A concert that is not exempted under division (d) of this section
and for which more than 3,000 tickets are offered to the public.
      (2)   No person shall advertise any live entertainment performance as
described in division (b)(1)A. of this section or any concert as described in
division (b)(1)B. of this section, unless the advertisement contains the words
“Reserved Seats Only.”
   (c)   Unless exempted by division (d)(1) of this section, no person who owns
or operates any restricted entertainment area shall fail to open, maintain and
properly staff at least the number of entrances designated under division (e)
of this section for a minimum of 90 minutes prior to the scheduled start of any
live entertainment performance that is held in the restricted entertainment
area and for which more than 3,000 tickets are sold, offered for sale or
offered in return for a donation.
   (d)   (1)   A live entertainment performance, other than a concert, is
exempted from the provisions of divisions (b) and (c) of this section if both
of the following apply:
         A.   The restricted entertainment area in which the performance is
held has at least eight entrances or, if both entrances and separate admission
turnstiles or similar devices are used, has at least eight turnstiles or
similar devices.
         B.   The eight entrances or, if applicable, the eight turnstiles or
similar devices, are opened, maintained and properly staffed at least one hour
prior to the scheduled start of the performance.
      (2)   A.   1.   The officer responsible for public safety in the
municipality may, upon application of the sponsor of a concert covered by
division (b) of this section, exempt the concert from the provisions of that
division if the officer finds that the health, safety and welfare of the
participants and spectators would not be substantially affected by failure to
comply with the provisions of that division. In determining whether to grant an
exemption, the officer shall consider the following factors:
               a.   The size and design of the facility in which the concert is
scheduled;
               b.   The size, age and anticipated conduct of the crowd expected
to attend the concert;
               c.   The ability of the sponsor to manage and control the
expected crowd.
            2.   If the sponsor of any concert desires to obtain an exemption
under this division, the sponsor shall apply to the appropriate official on a
form prescribed by that official. The official shall issue an order that grants
or denies the exemption within five days after receipt of the application. The
sponsor may appeal any order that denies an exemption to the Court of Common
Pleas of the county in which the facility is located.
         B.   If an official grants an exemption under division (d)(2)A. of
this section, the official shall designate an on-duty law enforcement officer
to be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue
orders to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the participants and spectators.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (d)(2) of this section, in the case of a
concert held in a facility located on the campus of an educational institution
covered by R.C. § 3345.04, a state university law enforcement officer appointed
pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall do both of the following:
         A.   Exercise the authority to grant exemptions provided by division
(d)(2)A. of this section in lieu of an official designated in that division;
         B.   If the officer grants an exemption under division (d)(3)A. of
this section, designate an on-duty state university law enforcement officer to
be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue orders
to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the participants and spectators.
   (e)   (1)   Unless a live entertainment performance is exempted by division
(d)(1) of this section, the officer responsible for public safety within the
municipality shall designate, for purposes of division (c) of this section, the
minimum number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed at
each live entertainment performance so as to permit crowd control and reduce
congestion at the entrances. The designation shall be based on such factors as
the size and nature of the crowd expected to attend the live entertainment
performance, the length of time prior to the live entertainment performance
that crowds are expected to congregate at the entrances and the amount of
security provided at the restricted entertainment area.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (e)(1) of this section, a state university
law enforcement officer appointed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall
designate the number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed
in the case of a live entertainment performance that is held at a restricted
entertainment area located on the campus of an educational institution covered
by R.C. § 3345.04.
   (f)   No person shall enter into any contract for a live entertainment
performance that does not permit or require compliance with this section.
   (g)   (1)   This section does not apply to a live entertainment performance
held in a restricted entertainment area if one admission ticket entitles the
holder to view or participate in three or more different games, rides,
activities or live entertainment performances occurring simultaneously at
different sites within the restricted entertainment area and if the initial
admittance entrance to the restricted entertainment area, for which the ticket
is required, is separate from the entrance to any specific live entertainment
performance and an additional ticket is not required for admission to the
particular live entertainment performance.
      (2)   This section does not apply to a symphony orchestra performance, a
ballet performance, horse races, dances or fairs.
   (h)   This section does not prohibit the Council from imposing additional
requirements, not in conflict with the section, for the promotion or holding of
live entertainment performances.
   (i)   Whoever violates division (b), (c) or (f) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If any individual suffers physical harm to
his or her person as a result of a violation of this section, the sentencing
court shall consider this factor in favor of imposing a term of imprisonment
upon the offender.
(R.C. § 2917.40)
§ 636.19 HAZING.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   HAZING. Means doing any act or coercing another, including the
victim, to do any act of initiation into any student or other organization or
any act to continue or reinstate membership in or affiliation with any student
or other organization that causes or creates a substantial risk of causing
mental or physical harm to any person, including coercing another to consume
alcohol or a drug of abuse, as defined in R.C. § 3719.011.
      (2)   ORGANIZATION. Includes a national or international organization
with which a fraternity or sorority is affiliated.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another.
      (2)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other educational institution, public or private,
shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person associated with the
organization.
   (c)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another
when the hazing includes coerced consumption of alcohol or drugs of abuse
resulting in serious physical harm to the other person.
      (2)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other educational institution, public or private,
shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person associated with the
organization when the hazing includes coerced consumption of alcohol or drugs
of abuse resulting in serious physical harm to that person.
   (d)   Whoever violates divisions (b) or (c) of this section is guilty of
hazing. A violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the second degree. A violation of division (c)(1) or (c)(2) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.31)
   (e)   Reckless failure to immediately report knowledge of hazing.
      (1)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other public or private educational institution,
who is acting in an official and professional capacity shall recklessly fail to
immediately report the knowledge of hazing to a law enforcement agency in the
county in which the victim of hazing resides or in which the hazing is
occurring or has occurred.
      (2)   A violation of division (e)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree, except that the violation is a misdemeanor of the first
degree if the hazing causes serious physical harm.
(R.C. § 2903.311(B), (C))
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability for hazing, see R.C. § 2307.44
§ 636.20 ILLEGAL DISTRIBUTION OF CIGARETTES, OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS, OR
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS; TRANSACTION SCANS.
   (a)   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         AGE VERIFICATION. A service provided by an independent third party
(other than a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes) that compares information available from a
commercially available database, or aggregate of databases, that regularly are
used by government and businesses for the purpose of age and identity
verification to personal information provided during an internet sale or other
remote method of sale to establish that the purchaser is 21 years of age or
older.
         ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT.
            1.   Subject to division 2. of this definition, an electronic
smoking device, vapor product, or any other product or device that consists of
or contains nicotine that can be ingested into the body by any means,
including, but not limited to, chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, or
inhaling.
            2.   The phrase does not include any of the following:
               a.   Any cigarette or other tobacco product;
               b.   Any product that is a “drug” as that term is defined in 21
U.S.C. § 321(g)(1);
               c.   Any product that is a “device” as that term is defined in
21 U.S.C. § 321(h);
               d.   Any product that is a “combination product” as described in
21 U.S.C. § 353(g).
         CIGARETTE. Includes clove cigarettes and hand-rolled cigarettes.
         DISTRIBUTE. Means to furnish, give, or provide cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to the ultimate consumer of the cigarettes, other tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes.
         ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. Means any device that can be used to
deliver aerosolized or vaporized nicotine or any other substance to the person
inhaling from the device including an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic hookah, vaping pen, or electronic pipe. The phrase includes any
component, part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately,
and includes any substance intended to be aerosolized or vaporized during the
use of the device. The phrase does not include any product that is a drug,
device, or combination product, as those terms are defined or described in 21
U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g).
         PROOF OF AGE. Means a driver’s license, a commercial driver’s license,
a military identification card, a passport, or an identification card issued
under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows that a person is 21 years of age or
older.
         TOBACCO PRODUCT. Means any product that is made or derived from
tobacco or that contains any form of nicotine, if it is intended for human
consumption or is likely to be consumed, whether smoked, heated, chewed,
absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, or ingested by any other means, including, but
not limited to, a cigarette, an electronic smoking device, a cigar, pipe
tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, or snus. The phrase also means any component
or accessory used in the consumption of a tobacco product, such as filters,
rolling papers, pipes, blunt or hemp wraps, and liquids used in electronic
smoking devices, whether or not they contain nicotine. The phrase does not
include any product that is a drug, device, or combination product, as those
terms are defined or described in 21 U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g).
         VAPOR PRODUCT. Means a product, other than a cigarette or other
tobacco product as defined in R.C. Chapter 5743, that contains or is made or
derived from nicotine and that is intended and marketed for human consumption,
including by smoking, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing. The phrase includes any
component, part, or additive that is intended for use in an electronic smoking
device, a mechanical heating element, battery, or electronic circuit and is
used to deliver the product. The phrase does not include any product that is a
drug, device, or combination product, as those terms are defined or described
in 21 U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g). The phrase includes any product containing
nicotine, regardless of concentration.
         VENDING MACHINE. Has the same meaning as “coin machine” in R.C. §
2913.01.
      (2)   No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes, no agent, employee, or representative of a
manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes, and no other person shall do any of the following:
         A.   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes:
            1.   To any person under 21 years of age; or
            2.   Without first verifying proof of age.
         B.   Give away, sell, or distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes in
any place that does not have posted in a conspicuous place a legibly printed
sign in letters at least one-half inch high stating that giving, selling, or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to a person under 21 years of age
is prohibited by law;
         C.   Knowingly furnish any false information regarding the name, age,
or other identification of any person under 21 years of age with purpose to
obtain cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or
papers used to roll cigarettes for that person;
         D.   Manufacture, sell, or distribute in this state any pack or other
container of cigarettes containing fewer than 20 cigarettes or any package of
roll-your-own tobacco containing less than six-tenths of one ounce of tobacco;
         E.   Sell cigarettes or alternative nicotine products in a smaller
quantity than that placed in the pack or other container by the manufacturer;
         F.   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute alternative nicotine
products, papers used to roll cigarettes, or tobacco products other than
cigarettes over the internet or through another remote method without age
verification;
         G.   Allow an employee under 18 years of age to sell any tobacco
product;
         H.   Give away or otherwise distribute free samples of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or coupons redeemable
for cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alterative tobacco products.
      (3)   No person shall sell or offer to sell cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products by or from a vending machine, except
in the following locations:
         A.   An area within a factory, business, office, or other place not
open to the general public;
         B.   An area to which persons under 21 years of age are not generally
permitted access;
         C.   Any other place not identified in division (a)(3)A. or (a)(3)B.
of this section, upon all of the following conditions:
            1.   The vending machine is located within the immediate vicinity,
plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an
employee of that person, so that all cigarettes, other tobacco product, and
alternative nicotine product purchases from the vending machine will be readily
observed by the person who owns or operates the place or an employee of that
person. For the purpose of this section, a vending machine located in any
unmonitored area, including an unmonitored coatroom, restroom, hallway, or
outer waiting area, shall not be considered located within the immediate
vicinity, plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place,
or an employee of that person.
            2.   The vending machine is inaccessible to the public when the
place is closed.
            3.   A clearly visible notice is posted in the area where the
vending machine is located that states the following in letters that are
legibly printed and at least one-half inch high: “It is illegal for any person
under the age of 21 to purchase tobacco or alternative nicotine products.”
      (4)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under division
(a)(2)A. of this section:
         A.   The person under 21 years of age was accompanied by a parent,
spouse who is 21 years of age or older, or legal guardian of the person under
21 years of age.
         B.   The person who gave, sold, or distributed cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to a person under 21 years of age under division (a)(2)A. of this
section is a parent, spouse who is 21 years of age or older, or legal guardian
of the person under 21 years of age.
      (5)   A.   It is not a violation of division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this
section for a person to give or otherwise distribute to a person under 21 years
of age cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or
papers used to roll cigarettes while the person under 21 years of age is
participating in a research protocol if all of the following apply:
            1.   The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of the person under
21 years of age has consented in writing to the person under 21 years of age
participating in the research protocol.
            2.   An institutional human subjects protection review board, or an
equivalent entity, has approved the research protocol.
            3.   The person under 21 years of age is participating in the
research protocol at the facility or location specified in the research
protocol.
         B.   It is not a violation of division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this
section for an employer to permit an employee 18, 19, or 20 years of age to
sell a tobacco product.
      (6)   A.   No delivery service shall accept from, transport or deliver
to, or allow pick-up by, a person under 21 years of age with respect to any of
the following:
            1.   Alternative nicotine products;
            2.   Papers used to roll cigarettes;
            3.   Tobacco products other than cigarettes.
         B.   A delivery service shall require proof of age as a condition of
accepting, transporting, delivering, or allowing pickup of the items described
in divisions (a)(6)A.1. to 3. of this section.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (a)(2)A., (a)(2)B., (a)(2)D., (a)(2)E.,
(a)(2)F., (a)(2)G., (a)(2)H., (a)(3) or (a)(6) of this section is guilty of
illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal
distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to illegal distribution of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of
the third degree.
      (8)   A.   Notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2), if an offender is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (a)(2)A. of this
section, the court shall impose a fine in the following amount:
            1.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (a)(8)A.2., (a)
(8)A.3., (a)(8)A.4., and (a)(8)A.5. of this section, not more than $250;
            2.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (a)(8)A.3., (a)
(8)A.4., and (a)(8)A.5. of this section, if an offender has previously been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (a)(2)A. of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, not
more than $500;
            3.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (a)(8)A.4. and (a)
(8)A.5. of this section, if an offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (a)(2)A. of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, $500;
            4.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(8)A.5. of this
section, if an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
three or more violations of division (a)(2)A. of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, $1,000;
            5.   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to four or more violations of division (a)(2)A. of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, $1,500.
         B.   The financial sanctions required by division (a)(8)A. of this
section are in lieu of the financial sanctions described in R.C. § 2929.28(A)
(2), but are in addition to any other sanctions or penalties that may apply to
the offender, including other financial sanctions under that section or a jail
term under R.C. § 2929.24.
      (9)   Whoever violates division (a)(2)C. of this section is guilty of
permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of division (a)(2)C. of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (10)   Any cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes that are given, sold, or otherwise
distributed to a person under 21 years of age in violation of this section and
that are used, possessed, purchased, or received by a person under 21 years of
age in violation of R.C. § 2151.87 are subject to seizure and forfeiture as
contraband under R.C. Chapter 2981.
(R.C. § 2927.02)
   (b)   Transaction scan.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division and division (c) of this section,
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
         A.   CARD HOLDER. Any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee
of a seller, to purchase or receive cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products from a seller, agent or employee.
         B.   IDENTIFICATION CARD. An identification card issued under R.C. §§
4507.50 to 4507.52.
         C.   SELLER. A seller of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products and includes any person whose gift of or other
distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products is subject to the prohibitions of division (a) of this section.
         D.   TRANSACTION SCAN. The process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks, by means of a transaction scan device, the
validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card
that is presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.
         E.   TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Any commercial device or combination of
devices used at a point of sale that is capable of deciphering in an
electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic strip or
bar code of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification
card.
      (2)   A.   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away or otherwise distributing
to the card holder cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products.
         B.   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (b)(2)A. of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away or otherwise distribute any cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products to the card holder.
         C.   Division (b)(2)A. of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card, if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device, as a condition for selling, giving away or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products to the person presenting the document.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. §
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (b) and division (c) of this section.
      (4)   A.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except for the following:
            1.   The name and date of birth of the person listed on the
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the
card holder;
            2.   The expiration date and identification number of the driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the card
holder.
         B.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (b)(4)A. of this section, except for
purposes of division (c) of this section.
         C.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (c)(2)A. of this section.
         D.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (c) of this section
or another section of these Codified Ordinances or the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (b) or division (c) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable local, state or federal laws or rules
governing the sale, giving away or other distribution of cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (b)(2)B. or (b)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal tobacco product or alternative nicotine
product transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil
penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay
each collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the
County Treasury.
(R.C. § 2927.021)
   (c)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (a) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of cigarettes, other tobacco products,
or alternative nicotine products is an element of the alleged violation, if the
seller, agent or employee raises and proves as an affirmative defense that all
of the following occurred:
         A.   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products presented a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or an identification card.
         B.   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that the
license or card was valid.
         C.   The cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products were sold, given away or otherwise distributed to the card holder in
reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and the completed
transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (c)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (a) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (a) of this
section. For purposes of division (c)(1)C. of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         A.   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away or otherwise distributes cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products is 21 years of age or older;
         B.   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (c)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
Deputy Registrar who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to
4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of that
issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with the
Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(R.C. § 2927.022)
   (d)   Shipment of tobacco products.
      (1)   As used in this division (d):
         A.   AUTHORIZED RECIPIENT OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Means:
            1.   In the case of cigarettes, a person who is:
               a.   Licensed as a cigarette wholesale dealer under R.C. §
5743.15;
               b.   Licensed as a retail dealer as long as the person purchases
cigarettes with the appropriate tax stamp affixed;
               c.   An export warehouse proprietor as defined in Internal
Revenue Code § 5702;
               d.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse under 19 U.S.C. §
1311 or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;
               e.   An officer, employee, or agent of the federal government or
of this state acting in the person's official capacity;
               f.   A department, agency, instrumentality, or political
subdivision of the federal government or of this state;
               g.   A person having a consent for consumer shipment issued by
the Ohio Tax Commissioner under R.C. § 5743.71.
            2.   In the case of electronic smoking devices or vapor products, a
person who is:
               a.   Licensed as a distributor of tobacco or vapor products
under R.C. § 5743.61;
               b.   A retail dealer of vapor products, as defined in R.C. §
5741.01(C)(3), that is not licensed as a vapor distributor, as long as the tax
levied by R.C. § 5743.51, 5743.62, or 5743.63, as applicable, has been paid;
               c.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse under 19 U.S.C. §
1311 or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;
               d.   An officer, employee, or agent of the federal government or
of this state acting in the person's official capacity;
               e.   A department, agency, instrumentality, or political
subdivision of the federal government or of this state.
         B.   MOTOR CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4923.01.
      (2)   The purpose of this section is to prevent the sale of cigarettes,
electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to minors and to ensure
compliance with the Master Settlement Agreement, as defined in R.C. § 1346.01.
      (3)   A.   No person shall cause to be shipped any cigarettes, electronic
smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in this municipality other
than an authorized recipient of tobacco products.
         B.   No motor carrier, or other person shall knowingly transport
cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in
this municipality that the carrier or other person reasonably believes is not
an authorized recipient of tobacco products. If cigarettes, electronic smoking
devices, and vapor products are transported to a home or residence, it shall be
presumed that the motor carrier, or other person knew that the person to whom
the cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products were delivered
was not an authorized recipient of tobacco products.
      (4)   No person engaged in the business of selling cigarettes, electronic
smoking devices, and vapor products who ships or causes to be shipped
cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in
this municipality in any container or wrapping other than the original
container or wrapping shall fail to plainly and visibly mark the exterior of
the container or wrapping in which the cigarettes, electronic smoking devices,
and vapor products are shipped with the words “cigarettes”, “electronic smoking
devices”, or “vapor products”, as applicable.
      (5)   A court shall impose a fine of up to $1,000 for each violation of
division (d)(3)A., (d)(3)B. or (d)(4) of this section.
(R.C. § 2927.023)
   (e)   Furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products.
      (1)   No person who is 18 years of age or older but younger than 21 years
of age shall knowingly furnish false information concerning that person’s name,
age, or other identification for the purpose of obtaining tobacco products.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (e)(1) of this section is guilty of
furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, furnishing false information to obtain tobacco
products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (e)(1) of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(R.C. § 2927.024)
§ 636.21 ETHNIC INTIMIDATION.
   (a)   No person shall violate R.C. § 2903.21, 2903.22, 2909.06 or 2909.07,
or 2917.21(A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance to any of these sections, by reason of the race, color, religion or
national origin of another person or group of persons.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of ethnic intimidation. Ethnic
intimidation is an offense of the next higher degree than the offense the
commission of which is a necessary element of ethnic intimidation. In the case
of an offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree, ethnic intimidation is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.12)
§ 636.22 INTIMIDATION IN CONNECTION WITH HOUSING.
   (a)   No person, whether or not acting under color of law, shall by force or
threat of force willfully injure, intimidate or interfere with, or attempt to
injure, intimidate or interfere with any of the following:
      (1)   Any person because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status,
as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin, military status as defined in
that section, disability as defined in that section, or ancestry and because
that person is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying,
contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or
occupation of any housing accommodations, or applying for or participating in
any service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or
renting housing accommodations.
      (2)   Any person because that person is or has been doing, or in order to
intimidate that person or any other person or any class of persons from doing
either of the following:
         A.   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin,
military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in that
section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations, or
facilities described in division (a)(1) of this section;
         B.   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
      (3)   Any person because that person is or has been, or in order to
discourage that person or any other person from, lawfully aiding or encouraging
other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin,
military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in that
section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations or
facilities described in division (a)(1) of this section, or participating
lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity
to so participate.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2927.03)
§ 636.23 FAILING TO PROVIDE FOR A PERSON WITH A FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENT.
   (a)   No caretaker shall knowingly fail to provide a person with a
functional impairment under the caretaker’s care with any treatment, care,
goods, or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the
person with a functional impairment when this failure results in physical harm
or serious physical harm to the person with a functional impairment.
   (b)   No caretaker shall recklessly fail to provide a person with a
functional impairment under the caretaker’s care with any treatment, care,
goods, or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the
person with a functional impairment when this failure results in serious
physical harm to the person with a functional impairment.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
knowingly failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the person with a functional impairment
under the offender’s care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (a) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
recklessly failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment, a
misdemeanor of the second degree. If the person with a functional impairment
under the offender’s care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (b) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.16)
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CARETAKER. A person who assumes the duty to provide for the care
and protection of a person with a functional impairment on a voluntary basis,
by contract, through receipt of payment for care and protection, as a result of
a family relationship, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. The
term does not include a person who owns, operates, or administers, or who is an
agent or employee of, a care facility, as defined in R.C. § 2903.33.
      (2)   PERSON WITH A FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENT. Any person who has a physical
or mental impairment that prevents the person from providing for the person’s
own care or protection or whose infirmities caused by aging prevent the person
from providing for the person’s own care or protection.
(R.C. § 2903.10)
§ 636.24 ILLEGAL USE OF A TRACKING DEVICE OR APPLICATION.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   BUSINESS ENTITY. Means any form of corporation, partnership,
association, cooperative, joint venture, business trust, or sole proprietorship
that conducts business in this state.
      (2)   BUSINESS OF PRIVATE INVESTIGATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 4749.01.
      (3)   DISABLED ADULT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (4)   ELDERLY PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (5)   ELECTRONIC MONITORING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      (6)   ELECTRONIC MONITORING DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2929.01.
      (7)   LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Means any organization or unit comprised of
law enforcement officers, and also includes any federal or military law
enforcement agency.
      (8)   OHIO PROTECTION ORDER. Means a protection order filed or issued or
a consent agreement approved pursuant to R.C. § 2919.26 or 3113.31, a
protection order filed or issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213, or
2903.214, or a no contact order issued as any of the following:
         A.   As part of a person’s sentence under a community control sanction
imposed under R.C. § 2929.16, 2929.17, 2929.26, or 2929.27;
         B.   As a term or condition of a person’s release under R.C. §
2929.20;
         C.   As a post-release control sanction imposed as a condition of a
person’s post-release control under R.C. § 2967.28;
         D.   As a term of supervision for a person transferred to transitional
control under R.C. § 2967.26;
         E.   As a term or condition of the intervention plan of a person
granted intervention in lieu of conviction under R.C. § 2951.041.
      (9)   PERSON. Means an individual, but does not include a business
entity.
      (10)   PRIVATE INVESTIGATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4749.01.
      (11)   PROTECTION ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF ANOTHER STATE. Has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2919.27.
      (12)   TRACKING APPLICATION. Means any software program that permits a
person to remotely determine or track the position or movement of another
person or another person’s property.
      (13)   TRACKING DEVICE. Means an electronic or mechanical device that
permits a person to remotely determine or track the position or movement of
another person or another person’s property, including an electronic monitoring
device.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d) of this section, no
person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Install a tracking device or tracking application on another
person’s property without the other person’s consent or cause a tracking device
or tracking application to track the position or movement of another person or
another person’s property without the other person’s consent;
      (2)   If the person installed a tracking device or tracking application
on another’s property with the other person’s consent and the other person
subsequently revokes that consent, fail to remove or ensure the removal of the
device or application after the other person revokes the consent.
   (c)   (1)   For purposes of this section, if a person has given consent for
another to install a tracking device or tracking application on the consenting
person’s property, it is presumed that the consenting person has revoked that
consent if any of the following applies:
         A.   The consenting person and the person to whom consent was given
are lawfully married and one of them files a complaint for divorce or a
petition for dissolution of marriage from the other. Not later than 72 hours
after being served with a complaint for divorce or a petition for dissolution
of marriage, the person to whom consent was given shall lawfully uninstall or
discontinue use of the tracking device or tracking application. If the person
to whom consent was given cannot lawfully uninstall or discontinue use of the
tracking device or tracking application, the person to whom consent was given
shall notify the court in which the complaint for divorce or the petition for
dissolution of marriage was filed in writing.
         B.   The consenting person or the person to whom consent was given
files an Ohio protection order against the other person or an Ohio protection
order is issued against the other person, and the person to be protected under
the order is the consenting person. Not later than 72 hours after being served
with the Ohio protection order, the person to whom consent was given shall
lawfully uninstall or discontinue use of the tracking device or tracking
application. If the person to whom consent was given cannot lawfully uninstall
or discontinue use of the tracking device or tracking application, the person
to whom consent was given shall notify the court that issued the Ohio
protection order in writing that the person to whom consent was given has
installed or is using a tracking device or tracking application on the
previously consenting person’s person or the person’s property and cannot
uninstall or discontinue its use without violating the Ohio protection order.
      (2)   Revocation of consent under this division is effective upon the
service of the petition or motion or an Ohio protection order.
   (d)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A law enforcement officer, or any law enforcement agency, that
installs a tracking device or tracking application on another person’s property
or causes a tracking device or tracking application to track the position or
movement of another person or another person’s property as part of a criminal
investigation, or a probation officer, parole officer, or employee of the
department of rehabilitation and correction, a halfway house, or a community-
based correctional facility when engaged in the lawful performance of the
officer’s or employee’s official duties;
      (2)   A parent or legal guardian of a minor child who installs or uses a
tracking device or tracking application to track the minor child if any of the
following applies:
         A.   The parents or legal guardians of the child are lawfully married
to each other and are not separated or otherwise living apart, and either of
those parents or legal guardians consents to the installation of the tracking
device or tracking application;
         B.   The parent or legal guardian of the child is the sole surviving
parent or legal guardian of the child;
         C.   The parent or legal guardian of the child has sole custody of the
child;
         D.   The parents or legal guardians of the child are divorced,
separated, or otherwise living apart and neither parent has sole custody of the
child, and both consent to the installation of the tracking device or tracking
application;
         E.   The parents or legal guardians of the child are divorced,
separated, or otherwise living apart, neither parent has sole custody of the
child, and either only one parent consents to the installation of the tracking
device or tracking application or one parent revokes consent, if the consenting
parent only uses the tracking device or tracking application during that
parent’s parenting or custodial time and disables or removes the tracking
device or application during the nonconsenting parent’s parenting or custodial
time.
      (3)   A caregiver of an elderly person or disabled adult, if the elderly
person’s or disabled adult’s treating physician certifies that the installation
of a tracking device or tracking application onto the elderly person’s or
disabled adult’s property is necessary to ensure the safety of the elderly
person or disabled adult;
      (4)   A person acting in good faith on behalf of a business entity for a
legitimate business purpose, provided that this division does not apply to a
private investigator engaged in the business of private investigation on behalf
of another person;
      (5)   A.   A private investigator or other person licensed under R.C. §
4749.03, who is acting in the normal course of the investigator’s business of
private investigation on behalf of another person and who has the consent of
the owner of the property upon which the tracking device or tracking
application is installed, for the purpose of obtaining information with
reference to any of the following:
            1.   Criminal offenses committed, threatened, or suspected against
the United States, a territory of the United States, a state, or any person or
legal entity;
            2.   Locating an individual known to be a fugitive from justice;
            3.   Locating lost or stolen property or other assets that have
been awarded by the court;
            4.   Investigating claims related to workers’ compensation.
         B.   This division does not apply if the person on whose behalf the
private investigator is working is the subject of an Ohio protection order or a
protection order issued by a court of another state or if the private
investigator knows or reasonably should know that the person on whose behalf
the private investigator is working seeks the investigator’s services to aid in
the commission of a crime.
      (6)   An owner or lessee of a motor vehicle who installs, or directs the
installation of, a tracking device or tracking application on the vehicle
during the period of ownership or lease, if any of the following applies:
         A.   The tracking device or tracking application is removed before the
vehicle’s title is transferred or the vehicle’s lease expires;
         B.   The new owner of the vehicle, in the case of a sale, or the
lessor of the vehicle, in the case of an expired lease, consents in writing to
the non-removal of the tracking device or tracking application;
         C.   The owner of the vehicle at the time of the installation of the
tracking device or tracking application was the original manufacturer of the
vehicle.
      (7)   A person who installs a tracking device or application on property
in which the person has an ownership or contractual interest, unless the person
is the subject of a protective order and the property is likely to be used by
the person who obtained the protective order;
      (8)   A person or business entity that installs a tracking device or
tracking application on any fixed wing aircraft or rotorcraft operated or
managed by the person or business entity pursuant to 14 C.F.R. part 91 or part
135 to track the position or movement of the fixed wing aircraft or rotorcraft;
      (9)   A surety bail bond agent, or any employee or contractor of a surety
bail bond agent, that installs a tracking device or tracking application on
another person’s property or causes a tracking device or tracking application
to track the position or movement of another person or another person’s
property as part of the surety bail bond agent’s, employee’s, or contractor’s
official responsibilities or duties.
   (e)   For purposes of division (d)(1) of this section, a probation officer,
parole officer, or employee of the department of rehabilitation and correction,
a halfway house, or a community-based correctional facility is engaged in the
lawful performance of the officer’s or employee’s duties if both of the
following apply:
      (1)   The court or the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction
imposes electronic monitoring on a person.
      (2)   The officer or employee installs or uses an electronic monitoring
device on that person in accordance with the court’s or department’s imposition
of electronic monitoring of that person.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal use of a tracking
device or application.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (f)(2) of this section,
illegal use of a tracking device or application is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   Illegal use of a tracking device or application is a felony to be
prosecuted under state law if any of the following applies:
         A.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of this section, R.C. § 2903.216, or R.C. § 2903.211 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         B.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
the subject of a protection order issued under R.C. § 2903.213 or 2903.214,
regardless of whether the person to be protected under the order is the victim
of the offense or another person.
         C.   Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been determined
to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as manifested by
evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior, evidence of then-
recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of violent behavior and
serious physical harm, or other evidence of then-present dangerousness.
         D.   The offender has a history of violence toward the victim or a
history of other violent acts towards the victim.
(R.C. § 2903.216)
§ 636.25 PERMITTING MINORS TO PLAY POOL OR BILLIARDS.
   (a)   No owner or keeper of a billiard parlor or an owner or keeper of a
billiard table at any other public place, shall permit a minor under the age of
18 years, to play billiards, or pool, or loiter in such parlor or public place.
Provided a minor under 18 years of age, when accompanied by either parent or
his or her legal guardian may be permitted to play both billiards and pool, or
be in and remain in such public place.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section shall be fined $25 for
the first offense, and $50 for each subsequent offense
(Ord. 1600.04, passed 10-4-1976)
Statutory reference:
   City authorized to regulate billiards and pool, see R.C. § 715.51
CHAPTER 642
Offenses Relating to Property
642.01   Definitions.
642.02   Possession of municipal property.
642.03   Unauthorized use of property.
642.04   Injuring vines, bushes, trees or crops.
642.05   Desecration.
642.06   Arson.
642.07   Determining property value in arson.
642.08   Criminal damaging or endangering; vehicular vandalism.
642.09   Criminal mischief.
642.10   Criminal trespass.
642.11   Aggravated trespass.
642.12   Assaulting police dog or horse, or assistance dog.
642.13   Railroad vandalism; criminal trespass; interference with operation of
train; grade crossing device vandalism.
642.14   Swimming, wading and bathing in gravel pits.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Parents’ liability for destructive acts of their children, see R.C. §
3109.09
   Value of written instrument or evidence of debt, see R.C. § 1.07
   Alteration, injury, removal of traffic-control devices, see §
414.07
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property, see §
654.17
   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police Department,
see §
654.16
   Endangering aircraft and airport operations, see §
678.13
   “Physical harm to property” defined, see §
606.01
   Possessing criminal tools, see §
678.14
   “Property” defined, see §
606.01
   “Serious physical harm to property” defined, see §
606.01
   Theft and fraud, see Ch.
672
§ 642.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter and Chapter 672, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   ACTIVE DUTY SERVICE MEMBER. Any member of the armed forces of the United
States performing active duty under Title 10 of the United States Code.
   ANHYDROUS AMMONIA. A compound formed by the combination of two gaseous
elements, nitrogen and hydrogen, in the manner described below. Anhydrous
ammonia is one part nitrogen to three parts hydrogen (NH3). Anhydrous ammonia
by weight is fourteen parts nitrogen to three parts hydrogen, which is
approximately 82% nitrogen to 18% hydrogen.
   ASSISTANCE DOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
   CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE. Any services provided by or through the facilities
of any cable television system or other similar closed circuit coaxial cable
communications system, or any microwave or similar transmission service used in
connection with any cable television system or other similar closed circuit
coaxial cable communications system.
   COIN MACHINE. Any mechanical or electronic device designed to do both of the
following:
      (1)   Receive a coin or bill, or token made for that purpose;
      (2)   In return for the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill, or token,
automatically dispense property, provide a service, or grant a license.
   COMPUTER. An electronic device that performs logical, arithmetic, and memory
functions by the manipulation of electronic or magnetic impulses. The term
includes but is not limited to all input, output, processing, storage, computer
program, or communication facilities that are connected, or related, in a
computer system or network to an electronic device of that nature.
   COMPUTER CONTAMINANT. Means a computer program that is designed to modify,
damage, destroy, disable, deny or degrade access to, allow unauthorized access
to, functionally impair, record, or transmit information within a computer,
computer system, or computer network without the express or implied consent of
the owner or other person authorized to give consent and that is of a type or
kind described in divisions (1) through (4) of this definition or of a type or
kind similar to a type or kind described in divisions (1) through (4) of this
definition:
      (1)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “viruses” and
“worms” that are self-replicating or self-propagating and that are designed to
contaminate other computer programs, compromise computer security, consume
computer resources, modify, destroy, record, or transmit data, or disrupt the
normal operation of the computer, computer system, or computer network;
      (2)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “Trojans” or “Trojan
horses” that are not self-replicating or self-propagating and that are designed
to compromise computer security, consume computer resources, modify, destroy,
record, or transmit data, or disrupt the normal operation of the computer,
computer system, or computer network;
      (3)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “zombies” that are
designed to use a computer without the knowledge and consent of the owner, or
other person authorized to give consent, and that are designed to send large
quantities of data to a targeted computer network for the purpose of degrading
the targeted computer’s or network’s performance, or denying access through the
network to the targeted computer or network, resulting in what is commonly
known as “denial of service” or “distributed denial of service” attacks;
      (4)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “trap doors”, “back
doors”, or “root kits” that are designed to bypass standard authentication
software and that are designed to allow access or use of a computer without the
knowledge or consent of the owner, or other person authorized to give consent.
   COMPUTER HACKING.
      (1)   The term means any of the following:
         A.   Gaining access or attempting to gain access to all or part of a
computer, computer system, or a computer network without express or implied
authorization with the intent to defraud or with intent to commit a crime;
         B.   Misusing computer or network services including but not limited
to mail transfer programs, file transfer programs, proxy servers, and web
servers by performing functions not authorized by the owner of the computer,
computer system, or computer network or other person authorized to give
consent. As used in this division, “misuse of computer and network services”
includes but is not limited to the unauthorized use of any of the following:
            1.   Mail transfer programs to send mail to persons other than the
authorized users of that computer or computer network;
            2.   File transfer program services or proxy servers to access
other computers, computer systems, or computer networks;
            3.   Web servers to redirect users to other web pages or web
servers.
         C.   1.   Subject to division (1)C.2. of this definition, using a
group of computer programs commonly known as “port scanners”
   CREATE A SUBSTANTIAL RISK OF SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO ANY PERSON. Includes
the creation of a substantial risk of serious physical harm to any emergency
personnel.
   CREDIT CARD. Includes but is not limited to a card, code, device, or other
means of access to a customer’s account for the purpose of obtaining money,
property, labor, or services on credit, or for initiating an electronic fund
transfer at a point-of-sale terminal, an automated teller machine, or a cash
dispensing machine. It also includes a county procurement card issued under
R.C. § 301.29.
   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
   DATA. A representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts, or
instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner and
that are intended for use in a computer, computer system, or computer network.
   DECEPTION. To knowingly deceive another or cause another to be deceived by
any false or misleading representation, by withholding information, by
preventing another from acquiring information, or by any other conduct, act, or
omission that creates, confirms, or perpetuates a false impression in another,
including a false impression as to law, value, state of mind, or other
objective or subjective fact.
   DEFRAUD. To knowingly obtain, by deception, some benefit for oneself or
another, or to knowingly cause, by deception, some detriment to another.
   DEPRIVE. To do any of the following:
      (1)   To withhold property of another permanently, or for a period that
appropriates a substantial portion of its value or use, or with purpose to
restore it only upon payment of a reward or other consideration;
      (2)   To dispose of property so as to make it unlikely that the owner
will recover it;
      (3)   To accept, use, or appropriate money, property, or services, with
purpose not to give proper consideration in return for the money, property, or
services, and without reasonable justification or excuse for not giving proper
consideration.
   DISABLED ADULT. A person who is 18 years of age or older and has some
impairment of body or mind that makes the person unable to work at any
substantially remunerative employment that the  person otherwise would be able
to perform and that will, with reasonable probability, continue for a period of
at least 12 months without any present indication of recovery from the
impairment, or who is 18 years of age or older and has been certified as
permanently and totally disabled by an agency of this state or the United
States that has the function of so classifying persons.
   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   ELDERLY PERSON. A person who is 65 years of age or older.
   ELECTRONIC FUND TRANSFER. Has the same meaning as in 92 Stat. 3728, 15
U.S.C. § 1693a, as amended.
   EMERGENCY PERSONNEL. Means any of the following persons:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01;
      (2)   A member of a fire department or other firefighting agency of a
municipal corporation, township, township fire district, joint fire district,
other political subdivision, or combination of political subdivisions;
      (3)   A member of a private fire company, as defined in R.C. § 9.60, or a
volunteer firefighter;
      (4)    A member of a joint ambulance district or joint emergency medical
services district;
      (5)   An emergency medical technician-basic, emergency medical
technician- intermediate, emergency medical technician-paramedic, ambulance
operator, or other member of an emergency medical service that is owned or
operated by a political subdivision or a private entity;
      (6)   The State Fire Marshal, the Chief Deputy State Fire Marshal, or an
assistant state fire marshal;
      (7)   A fire prevention officer of a political subdivision or an arson,
fire, or similar investigator of a political subdivision.
   FEDERALLY-LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5502.63.
   FIREARM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
   FORGE. To fabricate or create, in whole or in part and by any means, any
spurious writing, or to make, execute, alter, complete, reproduce, or otherwise
purport to authenticate any writing, when the writing in fact is not
authenticated by that conduct.
   GAIN ACCESS. To approach, instruct, communicate with, store data in,
retrieve data from, or otherwise make use of any resources of a computer,
computer system, or computer network, or any cable service or cable system both
as defined in R.C. § 2913.04.
   INFORMATION SERVICE.
      (1)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, the offering of a
capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing,
retrieving, utilizing, or making available information via telecommunications,
including but not limited to electronic publishing.
      (2)   The term does not include any use of a capability of a type
described in division (1) of this definition for the management, control, or
operation of a telecommunications system or the management of a
telecommunications service.
   INTERNET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 341.42.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Means any house, building, outbuilding, watercraft,
aircraft, railroad car, truck, trailer, tent, or other structure, vehicle, or
shelter, or any portion thereof, to which any of the following applies:
      (1)   It is maintained as a permanent or temporary dwelling, even though
it is temporarily unoccupied and whether nor not any person is actually
present;
      (2)   At the time, it is occupied as the permanent or temporary
habitation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (3)   At the time, it is specially adapted for the overnight
accommodation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (4)   At the time, any person is present or likely to be present in it.
   OWNER. Unless the context requires a different meaning, any person, other
than the actor, who is the owner of, who has possession or control of, or who
has any license or interest in property or services, even though the ownership,
possession, control, license, or interest is unlawful.
   POLICE DOG OR HORSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.321.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.
   RENTED PROPERTY. Personal property in which the right of possession and use
of the property is for a short and possibly indeterminate term in return for
consideration; the rentee generally controls  the duration of possession of the
property within any applicable minimum or maximum term; and the amount of
consideration is generally determined by the duration of possession of the
property.
   SERVICES. Includes labor, personal services, professional services, rental
services, public utility services including wireless service as defined in R.C.
§ 128.01(F)(1), common carrier services, and food, drink, transportation,
entertainment, and cable television services and, for purposes of R.C. §
2913.04 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, includes cable
services as defined in that section.
   SLUG. An object that, by virtue of its size, shape, composition, or other
quality, is capable of being inserted or deposited in a coin machine as an
improper substitute for a genuine coin, bill, or token made for that purpose.
   STATE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.
   TELECOMMUNICATION. The origination, emission, dissemination, transmission,
or reception of data, images, signals, sounds, or other intelligence or
equivalence or intelligence of any nature over any communications system by any
method, including but not limited to a fiber optic, electronic, magnetic,
optical, digital or analog method.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Any instrument, equipment, machine, or other
device that facilitates telecommunication, including but not limited to a
computer, computer network, computer chip, computer circuit, scanner,
telephone, cellular telephone, pager, personal communications device,
transponder, receiver, radio, modem, or device that enables the use of a modem.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The providing, allowing, facilitating, or
generating of any form of telecommunication through the use of a
telecommunications device over a telecommunications system.
   THEFT OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12, 2911.13,
2911.31, 2911.32, 2913.02, 2913.03, 2913.04, 2913.041, 2913.08, 2913.11,
2913.21, 2913.31, 2913.32, 2913.33, 2913.34, 2913.40, 2913.42, 2913.43,
2913.44, 2913.45, 2913.47, 2913.48, former R.C. § 2913.47 or 2913.48, or R.C. §
2913.51, 2915.05, or 2921.41;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
section listed in division (1) of this definition, or a violation of R.C. §
2913.41, 2913.81 or 2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or the United States involving robbery, burglary,
breaking and entering, theft, embezzlement, wrongful conversion, forgery,
counterfeiting, deceit, or fraud;
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing any offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   UTTER. To issue, publish, transfer, use, put or send into circulation,
deliver, or display.
   WRITING. Any computer software, document, letter, memorandum, note, paper,
plate, data, film, or other thing having in or upon it any written, type-
written, or printed matter, and any token, stamp, seal, credit card, badge,
trademark, label, or other symbol of value, right, privilege, license, or
identification.
(R.C. §§ 2909.01, 2913.01)
§ 642.02 POSSESSION OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall, without being authorized, have in his or her control
or possession any equipment, tools, implements or other property belonging to
the municipality.
(R.C. § 5589.12)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
§ 642.03 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly use or operate the property of another
without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (b)   No person, in any manner and by any means, including but not limited
to computer hacking, shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
or cause access to be gained to any computer, computer system, computer
network, cable service, cable system, telecommunications device,
telecommunications service or information service without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the owner of the
computer, computer system, computer network, cable service, cable system,
telecommunications device, telecommunications service or information service or
other person authorized to give consent.
   (c)   Except as permitted under R.C. § 5503.101, no person shall knowingly
gain access to, attempt to gain access to, cause access to be granted to, or
disseminate information gained from access to the law enforcement automated
database system created pursuant to R.C. § 5503.10 without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the chair of the Law
Enforcement Automated Data System Steering Committee.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
cause access to be granted to, or disseminate information gained from access to
the Ohio law enforcement gateway established and operated pursuant to R.C. §
109.57(C)(1) without the consent of, or beyond the scope of the express or
implied consent of, the Superintendent of the Bureau of Criminal Identification
and Investigation.
   (e)   The affirmative defenses contained in R.C. § 2913.03(C) are
affirmative defenses to a charge under this section.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of property. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (1)   If unauthorized use of property is committed for the purpose of
devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to obtain property or services,
unauthorized use of property is whichever of the following is applicable:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided below, unauthorized use of property
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   If the value of the property or services or the loss to the
victim is $1,000 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, unauthorized use of property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of computer, cable or telecommunication property, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (h)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the law enforcement automated database system, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (i)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the Ohio law enforcement gateway, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
   (j)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CABLE OPERATOR. Any person or group of persons that does either of
the following:
         A.   Provides cable service over a cable system and directly through
one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system;
         B.   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of a cable system.
      (2)   CABLE SERVICE. Any of the following:
         A.   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
of information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers
generally;
         B.   Subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the
selection or use of video programming or of information that a cable operator
makes available to all subscribers generally, both as described in division (f)
(2)A. above;
         C.   Any cable television service.
      (3)   CABLE SYSTEM. Any facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video
programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community.
“Cable system” does not include any of the following:
         A.   Any facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations;
         B.   Any facility that serves subscribers without using any public
right-of- way;
         C.   Any facility of a common carrier that, under 47 U.S.C. § 522(7)
(c), is excluded from the term “cable system” as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7);
         D.   Any open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. § 573;
         E.   Any facility of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility system.
(R.C. § 2913.04)
Statutory reference:
   Telecommunications: fraud and unlawful use of a device, felony offenses, see
R.C. §§ 2913.05 and 2913.06
§ 642.04 INJURING VINES, BUSHES, TREES OR CROPS.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly cut down,
destroy, girdle or otherwise injure a vine, bush, shrub, sapling, tree or crop
standing or growing on the land of another or upon public land.
   (b)   In addition to the penalty provided in division (c) of this section,
whoever violates this section is liable in treble damages for the injury
caused.
(R.C. § 901.51)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 901.99(A))
§ 642.05 DESECRATION.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall purposely deface, damage,
pollute or otherwise physically mistreat any of the following:
      (1)   Any public monument;
      (2)   Any historical or commemorative marker, or any structure, Indian
mound or earthwork, cemetery, thing or site of great historical or
archeological interest;
      (3)   A place of worship, its furnishings or religious artifacts or
sacred texts within the place of worship or within the grounds upon which the
place of worship is located;
      (4)   A work of art or museum piece;
      (5)   Any other object of reverence or sacred devotion.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of desecration. A violation of
division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the second degree. A violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   As used in this section, CEMETERY means any place of burial and
includes burial sites that contain American Indian burial objects placed with
or containing American Indian human remains.
(R.C. § 2927.11)
§ 642.06 ARSON.
   (a)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of another without the other person’s consent;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of the offender or another, with purpose to defraud;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to the
statehouse or a courthouse, school building, or other building or structure
that is owned or controlled by the state, any political subdivision, or any
department, agency, or instrumentality of the state or a political subdivision,
and that is used for public purposes;
      (4)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
property of another without the other person’s consent or to any property of
the offender or another with purpose to defraud;
      (5)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision without the consent of
the other person, the state, or the political subdivision;
      (6)   With purpose to defraud, cause, or create a substantial risk of,
physical harm to any park, preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over
land, forest, timberland, greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is
owned or controlled by the offender, another person, the state, or a political
subdivision.
   (b)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure that is not an occupied structure and that is in or on any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision.
   (c)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b)(1)
or (b)(2) of this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the
other person.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b)(3) of
this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the other person, the
state, or the political subdivision.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of arson.
      (2)   A violation of division (a)(1) or (b)(1) of this section is one of
the following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(2)B. of this
section, a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         B.   If the value of the property or the amount of the physical harm
involved is $1,000 or more, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (3)   A violation of division (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), (a)(5), (a)(6), (b)
(2) or (b)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2909.03)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated arson, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2909.02
   Convicted arsonist to make restitution to public agency, see R.C. § 2929.28
§ 642.07 DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE IN ARSON.
   (a)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or amount of physical harm involved in a violation of § 642.06(a)(1)
or (b)(1):
      (1)   If the property is an heirloom, memento, collector’s item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record or other thing that is either
irreplaceable or is replaceable only on the expenditure of substantial time,
effort, or money, the value of the property or the amount of physical harm
involved is the amount that would compensate the owner for its loss.
      (2)   If the property is not covered under division (a)(1) of this
section, and the physical harm is such that the property can be restored
substantially to its former condition, the amount of physical harm involved is
the reasonable cost of restoring the property.
      (3)   If the property is not covered under division (a)(1) of this
section, and the physical harm is such that the property cannot be restored
substantially to its former condition, the value of the property, in the case
of personal property, is the cost of replacing the property with new property
of like kind and quality, and in the case of real property or real property
fixtures, is the difference in the fair market value of the property
immediately before and immediately after the offense.
   (b)   As used in this section, FAIR MARKET VALUE has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2913.61.
   (c)   Prima facie evidence of the value of property, as provided in R.C. §
2913.61(D), may be used to establish the value of property pursuant to this
section.
(R.C. § 2909.11(B) - (D))
§ 642.08 CRIMINAL DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING; VEHICULAR VANDALISM.
   (a)   Criminal damaging or endangering.
      (1)   No person shall cause or create a substantial risk of physical harm
to any property of another without the other person’s consent:
         A.   Knowingly, by any means; or
         B.   Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood, poison gas,
poison, radioactive material, caustic or corrosive material, or other
inherently dangerous agency or substance.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (a) is guilty of criminal damaging
or endangering, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If violation of this
division (a) creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging
or endangering is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the property involved
in a violation of this division (a) is an aircraft, an aircraft engine,
propeller, appliance, spare part or any other equipment or implement used or
intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or endangering
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the property
involved in a violation of this division (a) is an aircraft, an aircraft
engine, propeller, appliance, spare part or any other equipment or implement
used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the
violation creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or if the
property involved in a violation of this division (a) is an occupied aircraft,
criminal damaging or endangering is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2909.06)
   (b)   Vehicular vandalism.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (b), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         A.   ALLEY, STREET, and VEHICLE. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
4511.01.
         B.   HIGHWAY. Any highway as defined in R.C. § 4511.01 or any lane,
road, street, alley, bridge or overpass.
         C.   VESSEL and WATERS IN THIS STATE. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 1546.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any
object at, onto or in the path of any of the following:
         A.   Any vehicle on a highway;
         B.   Any boat or vessel on any of the waters in this state.
      (3)   Whoever violates this division (b) is guilty of vehicular
vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division (b)(3), vehicular
vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of this
division (b) creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or the
violation of this division (b) causes serious physical harm to property,
vehicular vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
If the violation of this division (b) causes physical harm to any person or
serious physical harm to any person, vehicular vandalism is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.09)
Statutory reference:
   Disrupting public services, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.04
   Vandalism, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.05
§ 642.09 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with the either of the following:
         A.   The property of another;
         B.   One’s own residential real property with the purpose to decrease
the value of or enjoyment of the residential real property, if both of the
following apply:
            1.   The residential real property is subject to a mortgage.
            2.   The person has been served with a summons and complaint in a
pending residential mortgage loan foreclosure action relating to that real
property. As used in this division, “pending” includes the time between
judgment entry and confirmation of sale.
      (2)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of property of
another, employ a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator or other device
releasing a substance that is harmful or offensive to persons exposed, or that
tends to cause public alarm;
      (3)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy
or otherwise improperly tamper with a bench mark, triangulation station,
boundary marker or other survey station, monument or marker;
      (4)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy
or otherwise improperly tamper with any safety device, the property of another,
or the property of the offender when required or placed for the safety of
others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or availability for its
intended purpose;
      (5)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of the property
of another, set a fire on the land of another or place personal property that
has been set on fire on the land of another, which fire or personal property is
outside and apart from any building, other structure, or personal property that
is on that land;
      (6)   Without privilege to do so, and with intent to impair the
functioning of any computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software or computer program, knowingly do any of the following:
         A.   In any manner or by any means, including but not limited to
computer hacking, alter, damage, destroy or modify a computer, computer system,
computer network, computer software, or computer program or data contained in a
computer, computer system, computer network, computer software or computer
program;
         B.   Introduce a computer contaminant into a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software or computer program.
      (7)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly destroy or improperly tamper
with a critical infrastructure facility.
   (b)   As used in this section:
      (1)   CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2911.21.
      (2)   IMPROPERLY TAMPER. Means to change the physical location or the
physical condition of the property.
      (3)   SAFETY DEVICE. Means any fire extinguisher, fire hose, or fire axe,
or any fire escape, emergency exit, or emergency escape equipment, or any life
line, life-saving ring, life preserver, or life boat or raft, or any alarm,
light, flare, signal, sign, or notice intended to warn of danger or emergency,
or intended for other safety purposes, or any guard railing or safety
barricade, or any traffic sign or signal, or any railroad grade crossing sign,
signal, or gate, or any first aid or survival equipment, or any other device,
apparatus, or equipment intended for protecting or preserving the safety of
persons or property.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal mischief,
and shall be punished as provided in division (c)(2), (c)(3), or (c)(4) of this
section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), or (a)(5) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, if the violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4),
or (a)(5) of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person,
criminal mischief committed in violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3),
(a)(4), or (a)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
property involved in the violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4),
or (a)(5) of this section is an aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller,
appliance, spare part, fuel, lubricant, hydraulic fluid, any other equipment,
implement, or material used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft, or any cargo carried or intended to be carried in an aircraft and if
the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or if the
aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief committed in
violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), or (a)(5) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (a)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (a)(6) of this section or the loss to the victim resulting from the
violation is $1,000 or more, or if the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (a)(6) is used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft and the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or
if the aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (a)(6) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Criminal mischief committed in violation of division (a)(7) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.07)
§ 642.10 CRIMINAL TRESPASS.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another;
      (2)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, the
use of which is lawfully restricted to certain persons, purposes, modes or
hours, when the offender knows the offender is in violation of any such
restriction or is reckless in that regard;
      (3)   Recklessly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, as
to which notice against unauthorized access or presence is given by actual
communication to the offender, or in a manner prescribed by law, or by posting
in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential
intruders, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to restrict
access;
      (4)   Being on the land or premises of another, negligently fail or
refuse to leave upon being notified by signage posted in a conspicuous place or
otherwise being notified to do so by the owner or occupant, or the agent or
servant of either;
      (5)   Knowingly enter or remain on a critical infrastructure facility.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the land or
premises involved was owned, controlled, or in custody of a public agency.
   (c)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the offender was
authorized to enter or remain on the land or premises involved, when the
authorization was secured by deception.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal trespass.
Criminal trespass in violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), or (a)(4) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Criminal trespass in
violation of division (a)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, if the person, in committing the
violation of this section, used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle, the court shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount
imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 2911.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and the offender, in committing each violation,
used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, the court, in
addition to or independent of all other penalties imposed for the violation,
may impound the certificate of registration of that snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle or the certificate of registration and license plate of that all-
purpose vehicle for not less than 60 days. In such a case, R.C. § 4519.47
applies.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, if the
offender, in committing the violation of this section, used an all-purpose
vehicle, the Clerk of the Court shall pay the fine imposed pursuant to this
section to the State Recreational Vehicle Fund created by R.C. § 4519.11.
   (f)   As used in divisions (a) through (e) of this section:
      (1)   ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE, and SNOWMOBILE. Have
the same meanings as in R.C. § 4519.01.
      (2)   CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Means:
         A.   One of the following, if completely enclosed by a fence or other
physical barrier that is obviously designed to exclude intruders, or if clearly
marked with signs that are reasonably likely to come to the attention of
potential intruders and that indicate entry is forbidden without site
authorization:
            1.   A petroleum or alumina refinery;
            2.   An electric generating facility, substation, switching
station, electrical control center, or electric transmission and distribution
lines and associated equipment;
            3.   A chemical, polymer, or rubber manufacturing facility;
            4.   A water intake structure, water treatment facility, waste
water facility, drainage facility, water management facility, or any similar
water or sewage treatment system and its water and sewage piping;
            5.   A natural gas company facility or interstate natural gas
pipeline, including a pipeline interconnection, a natural gas compressor
station and associated facilities, city gate or town border station, metering
station, above-ground piping, regulator station, valve site, delivery station,
fabricated assembly, or any other part of a natural gas storage facility
involved in the gathering, storage, transmission, or distribution of gas;
            6.   A telecommunications central switching office or remote
switching facility or an equivalent network facility that serves a similar
purpose;
            7.   Wireline or wireless telecommunications infrastructure,
including telecommunications towers and telephone poles and lines, including
fiber optic lines;
            8.   A port, trucking terminal, or other freight transportation
facility;
            9.   A gas processing plant, including a plant used in the
processing, treatment, or fractionation of natural gas or natural gas liquids;
            10.   A transmission facility used by a federally licensed radio or
television station;
            11.   A steel-making facility that uses an electric arc furnace to
make steel;
            12.   A facility identified and regulated by the United States
Department of Homeland Security’s Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards
Program under 6 C.F.R. part 27;
            13.   A dam that is regulated by the state or federal government;
            14.   A crude oil or refined products storage and distribution
facility, including valve sites, pipeline interconnections, pump station,
metering station, below- or above- ground pipeline, or piping and truck loading
or off-loading facility;
            15.   A video service network and broadband infrastructure,
including associated buildings and facilities, video service headends, towers,
utility poles, and utility lines such as fiber optic lines. As used in this
division, VIDEO SERVICE NETWORK has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
            16.   Any above-ground portion of an oil, gas, hazardous liquid or
chemical pipeline, tank, or other storage facility;
            17.   Any above-ground portion of a well, well pad, or production
operation;
            18.   A laydown area or construction site for pipe and other
equipment intended for use on an interstate or intrastate natural gas or crude
oil pipeline;
            19.   Any mining operation, including any processing equipment,
batching operation, or support facility for that mining operation.
         B.   With respect to a video service network or broadband or wireless
telecommunications infrastructure, the above-ground portion of a facility
installed in a public right-of- way on a utility pole or in a conduit;
         C.   Any railroad property;
         D.   An electronic asset of any of the following:
            1.   An electric light company that is a public utility under R.C.
§ 4905.02;
            2.   An electric cooperative, as defined in R.C. § 4928.01;
            3.   A municipal electric utility, as defined in R.C. § 4928.01;
            4.   A natural gas company that is a public utility under R.C. §
4905.02;
            5.   A telephone company that is a public utility under R.C. §
4905.02;
            6.   A video service provider, including a cable operator, as those
terms are defined in R.C. § 1332.21.
      (3)   ELECTRONIC ASSET. Includes, but is not limited to, the hardware,
software, and data of a programmable electronic device; all communications,
operations, and customer data networks; and the contents of those data
networks.
      (4)   LAND or PREMISES. Includes any land, building, structure, or place
belonging to, controlled by, or in custody of another, and any separate
enclosure or room, or portion thereof.
      (5)   PRODUCTION OPERATION, WELL, and WELL PAD. Have the same meanings as
in R.C. § 1509.01.
(R.C. § 2911.21)
   (g)   Criminal trespass on a place of public amusement.
      (1)   As used in this division (g), “place of public amusement” means a
stadium, theater or other facility, whether licensed or not, at which a live
performance, sporting event or other activity takes place for entertainment of
the public and to which access is made available to the public, regardless of
whether admission is charged.
      (2)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter or
remain on any restricted portion of a place of public amusement and, as a
result of that conduct, interrupt or cause the delay of the live performance,
sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement
after a printed written notice has been given as provided in division (g)(4)A.
of this section that the general public is restricted from access to that
restricted portion of the place of public amusement. A restricted portion of a
place of public amusement may include but is not limited to a playing field, an
athletic surface or a stage located at the place of public amusement.
      (3)   An owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent of the
owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of public amusement
may use reasonable force to restrain and remove a person from a restricted
portion of the place of public amusement if the person enters or remains on the
restricted portion of the place of public amusement and, as a result of that
conduct, interrupts or causes the delay of the live performance, sporting event
or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement. This division
does not provide immunity from criminal liability for any use of force beyond
reasonable force by an owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent
of either the owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of
public amusement.
      (4)   A.   Notice has been given that the general public is restricted
from access to a portion of a place of public amusement if a printed written
notice of the restricted access has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at
the entrance to that portion of the place of public amusement. If a printed
written notice is posted or exhibited as described in this division regarding a
portion of a place of public amusement, in addition to that posting or
exhibition, notice that the general public is restricted from access to that
portion of the place of public amusement also may be given, but is not required
to be given, by either of the following means:
            1.   By notifying the person personally, either orally or in
writing, that access to that portion of the place of public amusement is
restricted;
            2.   By broadcasting over the public address system of the place of
public amusement an oral warning that access to that portion of the place of
public amusement is restricted.
         B.   If notice that the general public is restricted from access to a
portion of a place of public amusement is provided by the posting or exhibition
of a printed written notice as described in division (g)(4)A. of this section,
the municipality, in a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (g)(2)
of this section, is not required to prove that the defendant received actual
notice that the general public is restricted from access to a portion of a
place of public amusement.
      (5)   A.   Whoever violates division (g)(2) of this section is guilty of
criminal trespass on a place of public amusement, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         B.   In addition to any jail term, fine or other sentence, penalty or
sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to division (g)(5)A. of this
section, a court may require an offender who violates this section to perform
not less than 30 and not more than 120 hours of supervised community service
work.
(R.C. § 2911.23)
§ 642.11 AGGRAVATED TRESPASS.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall enter or remain on the land or premises of
another with purpose to commit on that land or those premises a misdemeanor,
the elements of which involve causing physical harm to another person or
causing another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
that person.
      (2)   No person shall enter or remain on a critical infrastructure
facility with purpose to destroy or tamper with the facility.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated trespass.
Aggravated trespass in violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Aggravated trespass in violation of division
(a)(2) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
   (c)   As used in this section, CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2911.21.
(R.C. § 2911.211)
§ 642.12 ASSAULTING POLICE DOG OR HORSE, OR ASSISTANCE DOG.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
a police dog or horse in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in
the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical harm
is caused or attempted.
      (2)   The police dog or horse is not assisting a law enforcement officer
in the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical
harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog
or horse is a police dog or horse.
   (b)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment or strike a police dog or horse;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at a police dog or horse;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct a police dog or horse, or interfere with
or obstruct a law enforcement officer who is being assisted by a police dog or
horse, in a manner that does any of the following:
         A.   Inhibits or restricts the law enforcement officer’s control of
the police dog or horse;
         B.   Deprives the law enforcement officer of control of the police dog
or horse;
         C.   Releases the police dog or horse from its area of control;
         D.   Enters the area of control of the police dog or horse without the
consent of the law enforcement officer, including placing food or any other
object or substance into that area;
         E.   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the police dog or horse to
assist a law enforcement officer.
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to a police dog or horse;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger a police dog or horse that at the time of the conduct, the
police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance
of the officer’s duties or that the person knows is a police dog or horse.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
an assistance dog in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The dog, at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, is
assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment.
      (2)   The dog, at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, is
not assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment, but the offender has actual knowledge that
the dog is an assistance dog.
   (d)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment or strike an assistance dog;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at an assistance dog;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct an assistance dog, or interfere with or
obstruct a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a person with a
mobility impairment who is being assisted or served by an assistance dog, in a
manner that does any of the following:
         A.   Inhibits or restricts the assisted or served person’s control of
the dog;
         B.   Deprives the assisted or served person of control of the dog;
         C.   Releases the dog from its area of control;
         D.   Enters the area of control of the dog without the consent of the
assisted or served person, including placing food or any other object or
substance into that area;
         E.   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the dog to assist the
assisted or served person;
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to an assistance dog;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger an assistance dog that at the time of the conduct is
assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment or that the person knows is an assistance
dog.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
assaulting a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. If the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse
other than death or serious physical harm, assaulting a police dog or horse is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death, assaulting a police
dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
harassing a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided this division,
harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse but does not
result in its death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing a police dog
or horse is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in
serous physical harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death,
harassing a police dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
assaulting an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog other than death or
serious physical harm, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the
assistance dog or results in its death, assaulting an assistance dog is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of
harassing an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog but does not result in
the death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing an assistance dog is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the assistance dog or results in its death, harassing an assistance dog
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   In addition to any other sanctions or penalty imposed for the
offense under this section, R.C. Chapter 2929 or any other provision of the
Revised Code or this code, whoever violates division (a), (b), (c) or (d) of
this section is responsible for the payment of all of the following:
         A.   Any veterinary bill or bill for medication incurred as a result
of the violation by the police department regarding a violation of division (a)
or (b) of this section or by the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired
or the person with a mobility impairment assisted or served by the assistance
dog regarding a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section;
         B.   The cost of any damaged equipment that results from the
violation;
         C.   If the violation did not result in the death of the police dog or
horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation and if, as a
result of that dog or horse being the subject of the violation, the dog or
horse needs further training or retraining to be able to continue in the
capacity of a police dog or horse or an assistance dog, the cost of any further
training or retraining of that dog or horse by a law enforcement officer or by
the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or the person with a
mobility impairment assisted or served by the assistance dog;
         D.   If the violation resulted in the death of the assistance dog that
was the subject of the violation or resulted in serious physical harm to the
police dog or horse or the assistance dog or horse that was the subject of the
violation to the extent that the dog or horse needs to be replaced on either a
temporary or a permanent basis, the cost of replacing that dog or horse and of
any further training of a new police dog or horse or a new assistance dog by a
law enforcement officer or by the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing
impaired or the person with a mobility impairment assisted or served by the
assistance dog, which replacement or training is required because of the death
of or the serious physical harm to the dog or horse that was the subject of the
violation.
   (f)   This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian whose conduct
is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4741.
   (g)   This section only applies to an offender who knows or should know at
the time of the violation that the police dog or horse or assistance dog that
is the subject of a violation under this section is a police dog or horse or an
assistance dog.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ASSISTANCE DOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
      (2)   BLIND. Had the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
      (3)   PERSON WITH A MOBILITY IMPAIRMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 955.011.
      (4)   PHYSICAL HARM. Any injury, illness or other psychological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
      (5)   POLICE DOG OR HORSE. A dog or horse that has been trained and may
be used to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their official
duties.
      (6)   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Any of the following:
         A.   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death.
         B.   Any physical harm that causes permanent maiming or that involves
some temporary, substantial maiming.
         C.   Any physical harm that causes acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering.
(R.C. § 2921.321)
§ 642.13 RAILROAD VANDALISM; CRIMINAL TRESPASS; INTERFERENCE WITH OPERATION OF
TRAIN; GRADE CROSSING DEVICE VANDALISM.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any object
at, onto, or in the path of, any railroad rail, railroad track, locomotive,
engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company while such vehicle
is on a railroad track.
   (b)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall climb upon or into any
locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company when
it is on a railroad track.
   (c)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall disrupt, delay, or
prevent the operation of any train or other vehicle of a railroad company while
such vehicle is on a railroad track.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of railroad
vandalism. Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of criminal
trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other railroad vehicle.
Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of interference with
the operation of a train. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
railroad vandalism; criminal trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or
other railroad vehicle; and interference with the operation of a train each is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of division (a), (b), or
(c) of this section causes serious physical harm to property or creates a
substantial risk of physical harm to any person, causes physical harm to any
person, or causes serious physical harm to any person, the violation is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.10)
   (e)   No person shall knowingly deface, damage, obstruct, remove, or
otherwise impair the operation of any railroad grade crossing warning signal or
other protective device, including any gate, bell, light, crossbuck, stop sign,
yield sign, advance warning sign, or advance pavement marking.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section is guilty of railroad
grade crossing device vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the violation of division (e) of this section causes serious physical harm
to property or creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person,
causes physical harm to any person, or causes serious physical harm to any
person, railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.101)
§ 642.14 SWIMMING, WADING AND BATHING IN GRAVEL PITS.
   (a)   No person shall wade, swim or bath in any gravel quarries within the
village.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section shall be fined not more
than $100 for each offense.
(Ord. 1500.02, passed 10-10-1974)
CHAPTER 648
Peace Disturbances
648.01   Riot.
648.02   Failure to disperse.
648.03   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot.
648.04   Disorderly conduct.
648.05   Disturbing a lawful meeting.
648.06   Misconduct at an emergency.
648.07   Inducing panic.
648.08   Making false alarms.
648.09   Inciting to violence.
648.10   Impeding public passage of an emergency service responder.
648.11   Noise.
648.12   Nuisances.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Cordoning off riot areas; prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives, see
R.C. § 3761.16
   Power to regulate peace disturbances, see R.C. § 715.49
   Riot and civil disorder assistance by State Highway Patrol, see R.C. §
5503.02
   Suspension of beer and liquor sales during emergency, see R.C. § 4301.251
   Arson, see §
642.06
   Assault, see §§
636.03,
636.04
   Barking or howling dogs, see §
618.07
   “Deadly force” defined, see §
606.01
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Desecration, see §
642.05
   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property, see §
654.17
   Fireworks, see §
678.12
   “Force” defined, see §
606.01
   Interfering with civil rights, see §
654.13
   Liquor sale to intoxicated person, see §
612.03
   Menacing, see §§
636.05 et seq.
   Noisy mufflers, see §
438.22
   “Peeling”; cracking exhaust noises, see §
432.38
   Pointing and discharging firearms and other weapons, see §
678.10
   Resisting arrest, see §
654.08
   Sirens, whistles and bells on motor vehicles, see §
438.21
   Trespass, see §§
642.10,
642.11
§ 648.01 RIOT.
   (a)   No person shall participate with four or more others in a course of
disorderly conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance:
      (1)   With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a
misdemeanor, other than disorderly conduct;
      (2)   With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee into
taking or refraining from official action, or with purpose to hinder, impede or
obstruct a function of government;
      (3)   With purpose to hinder, impede or obstruct the orderly process of
administration or instruction at an educational institution, or to interfere
with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at the institution.
   (b)   No person shall participate with four or more others with purpose to
do an act with unlawful force or violence, even though the act might otherwise
be lawful.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 2917.03)
   (d)   For the purposes of prosecuting violations of this section, the
prosecution is not required to allege or prove that the offender expressly
agreed with four or more others to commit any act that constitutes a violation
this section prior to or while committing those acts.
(R.C. § 2917.031)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated riot, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2917.02
§ 648.02 FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
   (a)   Where five or more persons are participating in a course of disorderly
conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, and there are other persons in the vicinity whose presence creates
the likelihood of physical harm to persons or property or of serious public
inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, a law enforcement officer or other public
official may order the participants and the other persons to disperse. No
person shall knowingly fail to obey the order.
   (b)   Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are peaceably
assembled for a lawful purpose.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disperse.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3) of this section,
failure to disperse is a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   Failure to disperse is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the
failure to obey the order described in division (a) of this section creates the
likelihood of physical harm to persons or is committed at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind.
(R.C. § 2917.04)
§ 648.03 JUSTIFIABLE USE OF FORCE TO SUPPRESS RIOT.
   A law enforcement officer or firefighter engaged in suppressing a riot or in
protecting persons or property during a riot:
   (a)   Is justified in using force, other than deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters;
   (b)   Is justified in using force, including deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters whose conduct is creating a substantial risk of
serious physical harm to persons.
(R.C. § 2917.05)
§ 648.04 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (a)   No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance or alarm to
another, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or property,
or in violent or turbulent behavior;
      (2)   Making unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse utterance,
gesture or display, or communicating unwarranted and grossly abusive language
to any person;
      (3)   Insulting, taunting or challenging another, under circumstances in
which that conduct is likely to provoke a violent response;
      (4)   Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a public street,
road, highway or right-of-way, or to, from, within or upon public or private
property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, and by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender;
      (5)   Creating a condition that is physically offensive to persons or
that presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender.
   (b)   No person while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   In a public place or in the presence of two or more persons, engage
in conduct likely to be offensive or to cause inconvenience, annoyance or alarm
to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which conduct the offender, if he or she
were not intoxicated, should know is likely to have that effect on others;
      (2)   Engage in conduct or create a condition that presents a risk of
physical harm to himself, herself or another, or to the property of another.
   (c)   Violation of any statute or ordinance of which an element is operating
a motor vehicle, locomotive, watercraft, aircraft or other vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse is not a violation of division
(b) of this section.
   (d)   If a person appears to an ordinary observer to be intoxicated, it is
probable cause to believe that the person is voluntarily intoxicated for
purposes of division (b) of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disorderly conduct.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (e)(2) and (e)(3) of this
section, disorderly conduct is a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if any of
the following applies:
         A.   The offender persists in disorderly conduct after reasonable
warning or request to desist.
         B.   The offense is committed in the vicinity of a school or in a
school safety zone.
         C.   The offense is committed in the presence of any law enforcement
officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services
person or other authorized person who is engaged in the person’s duties at the
scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind.
         D.   The offense is committed in the presence of any emergency
facility person who is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility.
      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to three or more violations of division (b) of this section, Ohio R.C. 2917.11
(B), or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
   (f)   For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2925.01.
      (2)   EMERGENCY FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.
      (3)   EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. The singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
      (4)   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. The singular of “emergency
medical services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
(R.C. § 2917.11)
§ 648.05 DISTURBING A LAWFUL MEETING.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting,
procession or gathering, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Do any act which obstructs or interferes with the due conduct of
the meeting, procession or gathering.
      (2)   Make any utterance, gesture or display which outrages the
sensibilities of the group.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful
meeting. Except as otherwise provided in this division, disturbing a lawful
meeting is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Disturbing a lawful meeting is a
misdemeanor of the first degree if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The violation is committed with the intent to disturb or disquiet
any assemblage of people met for religious worship at a tax-exempt place of
worship, regardless of whether the conduct is within the place at which the
assemblage is held or is on the property on which that place is located and
disturbs the order and solemnity of the assemblage.
      (2)   The violation is committed with the intent to prevent, disrupt, or
interfere with a virtual meeting or gathering of people for religious worship,
through use of a computer, computer system, telecommunications device, or other
electronic device or system, or in any other manner.
   (c)   As used in this section:
      (1)   COMPUTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (2)   COMPUTER SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (3)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2913.01.
      (4)   VIRTUAL MEETING OR GATHERING. A meeting or gathering by interactive
video conference or teleconference, or by a combination thereof.
(R.C. § 2917.12)
§ 648.06 MISCONDUCT AT AN EMERGENCY.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement officer,
firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services person or
other authorized person engaged in the person’s duties at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind;
      (2)   Hamper the lawful activities of any emergency facility person who
is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility;
      (3)   Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement officer
engaged in the law enforcement officer’s duties at the scene of or in
connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind.
   (b)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or deny
information to any news media representative in the lawful exercise of the news
media representative’s duties.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an emergency.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, misconduct at an emergency is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If violation of this section creates a risk
of physical harm to persons or property, misconduct at an emergency is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   EMERGENCY FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.
      (2)   EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. The singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
      (3)   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. The singular of “emergency
medical services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
(R.C. § 2917.13)
§ 648.07 INDUCING PANIC.
   (a)   No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place, or otherwise
cause serious public inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false.
      (2)   Threatening to commit any offense of violence.
      (3)   Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the likelihood
that its commission will cause serious public inconvenience or alarm.
   (b)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to any person
conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing panic.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3), inducing panic is
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If a violation of this section results in physical harm to any
person, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of $1,000 or more,
inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the
public place involved in a violation of division (a)(1) is a school or an
institution of higher education, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. If a violation of this section pertains to a
purported, threatened or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, inducing
panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (d)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or these Codified Ordinances may be prosecuted under
this section, the other section, or both sections.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   BIOLOGICAL AGENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2917.33.
      (2)   ECONOMIC HARM. Any of the following:
         A.   All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary harm suffered
by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. “Economic harm” as described
in this division includes but is not limited to all of the following:
            1.   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            2.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            3.   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is
shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;
            4.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
         B.   All costs incurred by the state or any political subdivision as a
result of, or in making any response to, the criminal conduct that constituted
the violation of this section or R.C. § 2917.32, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, including but not limited to all costs so
incurred by any law enforcement officers, firefighters, rescue personnel or
emergency medical services personnel of the state or the political subdivision.
      (3)   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2133.21.
      (4)   INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION. Any of the following:
         A.   A state university or college as defined in R.C. § 3345.12(A)(1),
community college, state community college, university branch or technical
college;
         B.   A private, nonprofit college, university or other post-secondary
institution located in this state that possesses a certificate of authorization
issued by the Chancellor of Higher Education pursuant to R.C. Chapter 1713;
         C.   A post-secondary institution with a certificate of registration
issued by the State Board of Career Colleges and Schools pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 3332.
      (5)   SCHOOL. Any school operated by a board of education or any school
for which the Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards
under R.C. § 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular
activities or training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a
violation of this section is committed.
      (6)   WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION. Any of the following:
         A.   Any weapon that is designed or intended to cause death or serious
physical harm through the release, dissemination or impact of toxic or
poisonous chemicals, or other precursors;
         B.   Any weapon involving a disease organism or biological agent;
         C.   Any weapon that is designed to release radiation or radioactivity
at a level dangerous to human life;
         D.   Any of the following, except to the extent that the item or
device in question is expressly excepted from the definition of “destructive
device” pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(4) and regulations issued under that
section:
            1.   Any explosive, incendiary or poison gas bomb, grenade, rocket
having a propellant charge of more than four ounces, missile having an
explosive or incendiary charge of more than one-quarter ounce, mine or similar
device;
            2.   Any combination of parts either designed or intended for use
in converting any item or device into any item or device described in division
D.1. of this definition and from which an item or device described in that
division may be readily assembled.
(R.C. § 2917.31)
§ 648.08 MAKING FALSE ALARMS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to cause public inconvenience or alarm.
      (2)   Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be
transmitted to or within any organization, public or private, for dealing with
emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons or property.
      (3)   Report to any law enforcement agency an alleged offense or other
incident within its concern, knowing that the offense did not occur;
      (4)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to impede the operation of a critical
infrastructure facility.
   (b)   This section does not apply to any person conducting an authorized
fire or emergency drill.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making false alarms. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, making false alarms is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of
$1,000 or more, making false alarms is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If a violation of this section pertains to a purported,
threatened, or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, making false alarms
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (d)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or these Codified Ordinances may be prosecuted under
this section, the other section, or both sections.
   (e)   As used in this section:
      (1)   CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2911.21.
      (2)   ECONOMIC HARM and WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION. Have the same meaning
as in R.C. § 2917.31.
(R.C. § 2917.32)
§ 648.09 INCITING TO VIOLENCE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly engage in conduct designed to urge or incite
another to commit any offense of violence when either of the following apply:
      (1)   The conduct takes place under circumstances that create a clear and
present danger that any offense of violence will be committed.
      (2)   The conduct proximately results in the commission of any offense of
violence.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inciting to violence. If
the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or incited to
commit is a misdemeanor, inciting to violence is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or
incited to commit is a felony, inciting to violence is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2917.01)
§ 648.10 IMPEDING PUBLIC PASSAGE OF AN EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly obstruct any
highway, street, sidewalk, or any other public passage in such a manner as to
render the highway, street, sidewalk, or passage impassable without
unreasonable inconvenience or hazard if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The obstruction prevents an emergency vehicle from accessing a
highway or street, prevents an emergency service responder from responding to
an emergency, or prevents an emergency vehicle or an emergency service
responder from having access to an exit from an emergency.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a request or order from an emergency service
responder to remove or cease the obstruction, the person refuses to remove or
cease the obstruction.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not limit or affect the application
of R.C. § 2921.31 or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code. Any conduct
that is a violation of division (a) of this section and that also is a
violation of R.C. § 2921.31 or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code may
be prosecuted under this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code,
or both sections.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawfully impeding public
passage of an emergency service responder, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   As used in this section, EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2903.13.
(R.C. § 2917.14)
§ 648.11 NOISE.
   (a)   Definitions. The following words and phrases when used in this section
shall have the meanings herein described:
      (1)   AMPLIFIED SOUND means any sound augmented by any electronic means
that increases the sound level or volume.
      (2)   BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT means any commercial establishment,
including establishments that are required to obtain a liquor permit premise.
      (3)   DWELLING UNIT, also known as a "residence" means one or more rooms
connected together and containing sleeping facilities, which facilities are
occupied, whether or not fit for temporary or overnight rental by one or more
persons, and as defined in R.C. § 2909.01(c) as an "occupied structure".
      (4)   LIVE MUSIC means any sound comprised of instrumental music, song,
or a combination of instrumental music and song, produced in whole or in part
by a singer vocalizing or by a musician playing a musical instrument on the
same premises as the sound source.
      (5)   PERSON(S) means any individual, association of individuals,
business or legal entity.
      (6)   PLAINLY AUDIBLE SOUND means any sound for which the information
content of the sound is unambiguously communicated to the listener, including
(without limitation) understandable words, comprehensible musical rhythms, beat
or cadence, bells, horns, whistles, or other unreasonably loud noises.
      (7)   RECEIVING PROPERTY means any lot, parcel of land, public space,
institution or dwelling unit onto which sound, not originating therefrom,
travels.
      (8)   RECORDED MUSIC means any sound comprised of instrumental music or
song, or combination hereof, produced and generated by a speaker, loudspeaker,
radio, television, tape deck, recorder player, compact disc player, jukebox, or
other sound- producing device.
      (9)   SOUND SOURCE means the place from which amplified sound emanates
without limitation to a speaker, loudspeaker, or any other sound-producing
instrument or person.
   (b)   Unreasonably Loud Noise.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly or recklessly cause any amplified sound,
live music, recorded music, or other noise to cross real property boundaries at
such a volume as to:
         A.   Disrupt the normal daily activities, including, but not limited
to sleeping, studying, and dining of persons within a residence or disrupt the
normal daily activities, including, but not limited to, work of persons within
a place of business;
         B.   Noise shall be presumed "unreasonably loud" if uninvited noise is
plainly audible at a residential receiving property, or part thereof.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly or recklessly cause an uninvited or
disruptive level of plainly audible sound, amplified sounds, live music,
recorded music, or other noise, at a volume that causes actual interference
with a person's peaceful enjoyment of a residence or the peace and good order
of the community.
         A.   A disruptive or uninvited level of amplified sound, live or
recorded music, or other noise is any unreasonably loud or disturbing noise of
a character, intensity, raucousness or direction as to be detrimental to the
life, health or welfare of any person, whether on a steady or intermittent
basis. At all times, amplified sound, live music, recorded music, or other
noise that is plainly audible and that meets either of the following criteria
is prohibited:
            1.   Noise that is unreasonably loud or disturbing; or
            2.   Noise that crosses real property boundaries and interferes
with the peace, comfort, or enjoyment of persons residing in a dwelling unit or
a residence or a person located at a receiving property.
         B.   In addition to the criteria set forth in division (b)(2)A. of
this section, additional restrictions shall be placed on business
establishments which serve alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises.
Because it is reasonable that quieter standards are expected during nighttime
hours, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. from Sundays through
Thursdays, inclusive, and between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on
Fridays and Saturdays, owners and operators of such business be contained
entirely within the real property boundaries of the establishment or within the
soundproof area located on the premises of the establishment.
   (c)   Special Events/Outdoor Concerts.
      (1)   No person, business or organization shall knowingly or recklessly
hold a special event without first obtaining a special event permit pursuant to
Chapter 1135 of the Commercial Point Codified Ordinances.
      (2)   No person, owner or sponsor of an special event, as defined in §
1135.09 of the Commercial Point Codified Ordinances, shall fail or refuse to
lower or reduce the level, intensity or power of any loudspeaker or any other
device or equipment to amplify or enhance the sound from an outdoor concert
when directed to do so by the Chief of Police or his or her designee.
   (d)   Responsibility for Compliance: Complaint Procedures.
      (1)   For purposes of this section, any person(s) owning or having
responsibility for management of a business or who is in control of a
residential premise, and/or however temporarily; any paid performer or disc
jockey producing amplified sound, live music, recorded music, or other plainly
audible sound upon any business or residential premises or any person having
control of volume knobs or levels; and the business as named on the special use
permit or special event permit and/or the person controlling the residential
premise, shall be jointly and severally liable for compliance with this section
and shall be responsible for any violations of this section.
      (2)   Complaints under this section may be made by telephone contact with
the Village of Commercial Point Division of Police. The complainant shall
identify himself or herself by name, address and telephone number and shall
identify the general direction or vicinity of the apparent sound source, but
shall not be required to meet personally with the investigating officer to sign
a written complaint or otherwise participate in the investigation of the
complaint. The investigating officer is authorized to verify information
provided by the complainant. This provision provides no right of entry except
as is to the public generally, or except as is provided by law.
   (e)   Additional Sound Limitations.
      (1)   No person shall, on any public sidewalk, street, highway, park or
other public property, or in any vehicle located on any public street or
property, use, operate or play any radio, phonograph, stereo set, tape or CD
player, television, sound amplifier, or other electronic audio device which
produces or reproduces amplified sound, recorded music, or other plainly
audible sound, at a level which is plainly audible at a residential receiving
property, or part thereof. This provision shall not apply to live music.
         A.   This section does not apply to any of the following
circumstances:
            1.   The sound amplification system of the motor vehicle is being
operated to request medical or vehicular assistance or to warn others of a
hazardous road condition.
            2.   The motor vehicle is an emergency vehicle or public safety
vehicle and is on an emergency run.
            3.   The motor vehicle is owned and operated by the state, a
political subdivision, or a public utility.
            4.   The motor vehicle is participating in a parade for which the
sponsors of the parade have obtained the proper permits from all political
subdivisions with which the parade is held.
      (2)   The provisions of this division are in addition to the regulations
of division (b) of this section. Compliance with division (b) of this section
shall not constitute a defense or excuse for violation of any of the divisions
of this section.
      (3)   Under this chapter, the measurements of distance from a sound
source to a receiving property shall be measured in a straight line from the
property line of the property on which the sound source is located to the
property line of the receiving property or if the sound source is within a
walled and roofed structure, the measurement shall be taken from the exterior
of that structure, and if one or more open doors or windows are present, from
any of such open doors or windows, at the point closest to the receiving
property in a straight line to the property line of the receiving property.
   (f)   Exceptions. The following shall not constitute a violation under this
section:
      (1)   Emergency sirens and related apparatus used solely for public
purposes;
      (2)   Domestic power tools. Sound levels produced from any hand or
mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawn-garden tool or
reasonably similar tool, provided, however, that the use:
         A.   Must be only between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Sunday through
Thursday or 7:00 a.m. and 11:30 p.m. Friday and Saturday;
         B.   Must be in a non-business enterprise; and
         C.   Must produce a sound level that is not deemed unreasonably loud
under the circumstances.
      (3)   Noise generated in the case of emergency or necessity to repair or
protect a property owner's or tenant's property, by domestic power tools, or
otherwise.
   (g)   Enforcement and Penalties.
      (1)   Investigation of and enforcement of this section shall commence
upon the complaint of any affected property owner, tenant or other person, as
provided in division (d)(2), and lessee and lessor may pursue civil remedies
pursuant to the lease and the Ohio Revised Code.
      (2)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of:
         A.   A minor misdemeanor for the first offense; fine not to exceed
$120;
         B.   A misdemeanor of the fourth degree for the second offense within
12 months; the fine not to exceed $250 and/or 30 days in jail;
         C.   A misdemeanor of the third degree for the third offense within 12
months (or second or multiple offense within 30 days); fine not to exceed $500
and/or 60 days in jail.
      (3)   If any person, owner or sponsor of an special event violates
division (c) of this section, that person, owner or sponsor shall be guilty of
a minor misdemeanor for the first violation, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree
for the second violation in the same year, a misdemeanor of the third degree
for the third violation in the same year, and a misdemeanor of the first degree
for every further violation in the same year.
(Ord. 2022-30, passed 11-21-2022; Am. Ord. 2024-10, passed 8-5-2024)
§ 648.12 NUISANCES.
   (a)   To secure the peace and safety of the inhabitants.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to disturb the good
order or quiet of the village by clamor or noise or by drunkenness, fighting or
using obscene or profane language in the streets, public places or other places
to the annoyance of the citizens thereafter engages in exciting any quarrel
among other persons or otherwise violates the public peace and safety by
indecent or disorderly conduct or by loud or lascivious behavior.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons of the village to
allow his or her house, shop store, saloon or other places to be used,
frequented or resorted to by rioters noisy or disorderly persons, or by
gamblers, vagrants or prostitutes, or permit any boisterous, noisy or
disorderly conduct therein or thereabout, to the disturbance or annoyance of
the neighborhood or the public or to make or assist or countenance or abet the
making of any riot, row, noise, disorder or disturbance at, in, or about any
house, shop, store, saloon or other place whatsoever within the village.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to unlawfully
assault or threaten another in a menacing manner, or shall unlawfully strike or
wound another, or provoke another to commit a breach of the peace.
      (4)   Any person violating any provision of division (a) shall upon
conviction thereof be fined not more than $100 nor less than $10.
   (b)   Certain nuisances.
      (1)   Generally.
         A.   No person shall erect, continue, use or maintain a dwelling,
building, structure or place for a residence or for the exercise of a trade,
employment or business, or for the keeping or feeding of an animal which, by
occasioning noxious exhalations or noisome or offensive smells, becomes
injurious to the health, comfort or property of individuals or of the public.
         B.   No person shall cause or allow offal, filth or noisome substances
to be collected or remain in any place to the damage or prejudice of others or
of the public.
         C.   No person shall unlawfully obstruct or impede the passage of a
navigable river, harbor or collection of water, or corrupt or render
unwholesome or impure, a watercourse, stream or water, or unlawfully divert
such watercourse from its natural course or state to the injury or prejudice of
others.
         D.   No person shall keep or maintain on his or her premises an
abandoned service station in such condition as to constitute a danger to the
public health, welfare, safety, or morals. ABANDONED SERVICE STATION is defined
in R.C. § 3791.11 (A)(2) which is incorporated by reference herein.
      (2)   Correction of violation; notice.
         A.   Whoever violates any of the provisions of division (b)(1) hereof
shall be required to correct such violation within five days of notice to do so
served upon him or her by the Mayor or his or her authorized representative.
         B.   Such notice shall be by registered mail to the offender’s last
known address and, in the event such address is unknown, by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation in the village for a period of not less than
three days.
         C.   Upon failure to correct such violation pursuant to the terms of
such notice and order, the Mayor shall cause the same to be corrected by the
village.
         D.   The costs of such correction shall be certified by the Mayor to
the county auditor who shall assess such costs upon the offender to be
collected in like manner as other taxes are collected.
         E.   The remedy provided for herein is in addition to the penalty
provided in division (b)(3) hereof.
      (3)   Penalty. Whoever violates this section shall be fined no more than
$100. Each day the violation continues constitutes a second offense.
(Ord. 2-11-72, passed 11-6-1972; Am. Ord. 1500.28, passed 7-18-1983)
CHAPTER 654
Public Service, Administration and Enforcement
654.01   Falsification.
654.02   False report of child abuse or neglect.
654.03   Compounding a crime.
654.04   Failure to report a crime or death.
654.05   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer.
654.06   Obstructing official business.
654.07   Obstructing justice.
654.08   Resisting arrest.
654.09   Compliance with lawful order of police officer; fleeing.
654.10   Having an unlawful interest in a public contract.
654.11   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation.
654.12   Dereliction of duty.
654.13   Interfering with civil rights.
654.14   Impersonating an officer.
654.15   Display of law enforcement agency emblem.
654.16   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police
Department.
654.17   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property.
654.18   Failure to disclose personal information.
654.19   Misuse of 9-1-1 system.
654.20   Using sham legal process.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Arrest without warrant for misdemeanor, see R.C. § 2935.03
   Criteria for probation; conditions of probation, see R.C. § 2951.02
   Degree of offense; charge and verdict; prior conviction, see R.C. § 2945.75
   Discharge for delay in trial, see R.C. § 2945.73
   Extension of time for hearing or trial, see R.C. § 2945.72
   Procedure on affidavit or complaint; withdrawal of unexecuted warrants, see
R.C. § 2935.10
   Registration of sex offenders in cities and counties, see R.C. §§ 2950.01 et
seq.
   Right of trial by jury, see R.C. § 2945.17
   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served, see R.C. § 2947.14
   Time within which hearing or trial must be held, see R.C. § 2945.71
   Treatment of drug dependent persons in lieu of conviction, see R.C. §
2951.041
   Declaratory judgment in sex related offenses, see §
666.15
   Injunction and abatement of nuisance in sex related offenses, see §
666.16
   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot, see §
648.03
   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance, see §
678.06
   Making false alarms, see §
648.08
   Misconduct at an emergency, see §
648.06
   Penalties and sentencing, see Ch.
698
   Rabies quarantine, see §
618.12
   Registration of dogs, see §
618.08
   Rules of evidence in sex related offenses, see §
666.10
§ 654.01 FALSIFICATION.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly swear
or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, when any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The statement is made in any official proceeding.
      (2)   The statement is made with purpose to incriminate another.
      (3)   The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public official in
performing his or her official function.
      (4)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment of
unemployment compensation; Ohio Works First; prevention, retention and
contingency benefits and services; disability financial assistance; retirement
benefits or health care coverage from a state retirement system; economic
development assistance as defined in R.C. § 9.66; or other benefits
administered by a governmental agency or paid out of a public treasury.
      (5)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the issuance by a
governmental agency of a license, permit, authorization, certificate,
registration, release or provider agreement.
      (6)   The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary public or
another person empowered to administer oaths.
      (7)   The statement is in writing on or in connection with a report or
return that is required or authorized by law.
      (8)   The statement is in writing, and is made with purpose to induce
another to extend credit to or employ the offender, or to confer any degree,
diploma, certificate of attainment, award of excellence or honor on the
offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable
benefit or distinction, when the person to whom the statement is directed
relies upon it to his or her detriment.
      (9)   The statement is made with purpose to commit or facilitate the
commission of a theft offense.
      (10)   The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in connection
with any action, proceeding or other matter within its jurisdiction, either
orally or in a written document, including but not limited to an application,
petition, complaint or other pleading, or an inventory, account or report.
      (11)   The statement is made on an account, form, record, stamp, label or
other writing that is required by law.
      (12)   The statement is made in connection with the purchase of a
firearm, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, and in conjunction with the furnishing
to the seller of the firearm of a fictitious or altered driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit, a fictitious or altered identification card, or any
other document that contains false information about the purchaser’s identity.
      (13)   The statement is made in a document or instrument of writing that
purports to be a judgment, lien or claim of indebtedness and is filed or
recorded with the Secretary of State, a County Recorder, or the clerk of a
court of record.
      (14)   The statement is made in an application filed with a county
sheriff pursuant to R.C. § 2923.125 in order to obtain or renew a concealed
handgun license or is made in an affidavit submitted to a county sheriff to
obtain a concealed handgun license on a temporary emergency basis under R.C. §
2923.1213.
      (15)   The statement is required under R.C. § 5743.71 in connection with
the person’s purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products in a delivery sale.
   (b)   No person, in connection with the purchase of a firearm as defined in
R.C. § 2923.11, shall knowingly furnish to the seller of the firearm a
fictitious or altered driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, a
fictitious or altered identification card, or any other document that contains
false information about the purchaser’s identity.
   (c)   No person, in an attempt to obtain a concealed handgun license under
R.C. § 2923.125, shall knowingly present to a sheriff a fictitious or altered
document that purports to be certification of the person’s competence in
handling a handgun as described in division (B)(3) of that section.
   (d)   It is no defense to a charge under division (a)(6) of this section
that the oath or affirmation was administered or taken in an irregular manner.
   (e)   If contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made by the
offender within the period of the statute of limitations for falsification, it
is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which statement was false, but
only that one or the other was false.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), (a)
(5), (a)(6), (a)(7), (a)(8), (a)(10), (a)(11), (a)(13) or (a)(15) of this
section is guilty of falsification. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, falsification is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(9) of this section is guilty of
falsification in a theft offense. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, falsification in a theft offense is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the value of the property or services stolen is $1,000 or more,
falsification in a theft offense is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (a)(12) or (b) of this section is guilty
of falsification to purchase a firearm, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (a)(14) or (c) of this section is guilty
of falsification to obtain a concealed handgun license, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section in removal
proceedings under R.C. § 319.26, 321.37, 507.13 or 733.78 is guilty of
falsification regarding a removal proceeding, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.13)
   (g)   (1)   No person who has knowingly failed to maintain proof of
financial responsibility in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101 shall produce any
document or present to a peace officer an electronic wireless communications
device that is displaying any text or images with the purpose to mislead a
peace officer upon the request of a peace officer for proof of financial
responsibility made in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101(D)(2).
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (g) is guilty of falsification, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4509.102)
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability for violations of this section, see R.C. § 2921.13(G)
§ 654.02 FALSE REPORT OF CHILD ABUSE OR NEGLECT.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make or cause another person to make a false
report under R.C. § 2151.421(B) alleging that any person has committed an act
or omission that resulted in a child being an abused child as defined in R.C. §
2151.031 or a neglected child as defined in R.C. § 2151.03.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or causing a false
report of child abuse or child neglect, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.14)
§ 654.03 COMPOUNDING A CRIME.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly demand, accept or agree to accept anything
of value in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon a pending
criminal prosecution.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section when both
of the following apply:
      (1)   The pending prosecution involved is for a violation of R.C. §
2913.02, 2913.11, 2913.21(B)(2) or 2913.47, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, of which the actor under this section was the victim.
      (2)   The thing of value demanded, accepted or agreed to be accepted, in
consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon the prosecution, did not
exceed an amount that the actor reasonably believed due him or her as
restitution for the loss caused him or her by the offense.
   (c)   When a prosecuting witness abandons or agrees to abandon a prosecution
under division (b) of this section, the abandonment or agreement in no way
binds the state to abandoning the prosecution.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of compounding a crime, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.21)
§ 654.04 FAILURE TO REPORT A CRIME OR DEATH.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, no
person, knowing that a felony has been or is being committed, shall knowingly
fail to report the information to law enforcement authorities.
      (2)   No person, knowing that a violation of R.C. § 2913.04(B) has been
or is being committed or that the person has received information derived from
such a violation, shall knowingly fail to report the violation to law
enforcement authorities.
   (b)   Except for conditions that are within the scope of division (e) of
this section, no person giving aid to a sick or injured person shall
negligently fail to report to law enforcement authorities any gunshot or stab
wound treated or observed by the person, or any serious physical harm to
persons that the person knows or has reasonable cause to believe resulted from
an offense of violence.
   (c)   No person who discovers the body or acquires the first knowledge of
the death of a person shall fail to report the death immediately to a physician
or advanced practice registered nurse whom the person knows to be treating the
deceased for a condition from which death at such time would not be unexpected,
or to a law enforcement officer, an ambulance service, an emergency squad, or
the coroner in a political subdivision in which the body is discovered, the
death is believed to have occurred, or knowledge concerning the death is
obtained. For purposes of this division, “advanced practice registered nurse”
does not include a certified registered nurse anesthetist.
   (d)   No person shall fail to provide upon request of the person to whom a
report required by division (c) of this section was made, or to any law
enforcement officer who has reasonable cause to assert the authority to
investigate the circumstances surrounding the death, any facts within his or
her knowledge that may have a bearing on the investigation of the death.
   (e)   (1)   As used in this section, BURN INJURY means any of the following:
         A.   Second or third degree burns;
         B.   Any burns to the upper respiratory tract or laryngeal edema due
to the inhalation of super-heated air;
         C.   Any burn injury or wound that may result in death;
         D.   Any physical harm to persons caused by or as the result of the
use of fireworks, novelties and trick noisemakers, and wire sparklers, as each
is defined by R.C. § 3743.01.
      (2)   No physician, nurse, physician assistant, or limited practitioner
who, outside a hospital, sanitarium or other medical facility, attends or
treats a person who has sustained a burn injury inflicted by an explosion or
other incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a
violent, malicious or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury
immediately to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the
jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local
law enforcement authorities.
      (3)   No manager, superintendent or other person in charge of a hospital,
sanitarium or other medical facility in which a person is attended or treated
for any burn injury inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary device, or
that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent, malicious or
criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately to the local
arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the jurisdiction in which the person
is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement authorities.
      (4)   No person who is required to report any burn injury under division
(e)(2) or (e)(3) of this section shall fail to file, within three working days
after attending or treating the victim, a written report of the burn injury
with the office of the State Fire Marshal. The report shall be made on a form
provided by the State Fire Marshal.
      (5)   Anyone participating in the making of reports under division (e) of
this section or anyone participating in a judicial proceeding resulting from
the reports is immune from any civil or criminal liability that otherwise might
be incurred or imposed as a result of such actions. Notwithstanding R.C. §
4731.22, the physician-patient relationship or advanced practice registered
nurse-patient relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding a
person’s burn injury or the cause of the burn injury in any judicial proceeding
resulting from a report submitted under division (e) of this section.
   (f)   (1)   No person who knows that a licensed medical professional has
committed an offense under R.C. Chapter 2907, a violation of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to such offense, or a substantially
equivalent criminal offense in another jurisdiction, against a patient of the
licensed medical professional shall fail to report such knowledge to law
enforcement authorities within 30 days of obtaining the knowledge.
      (2)   Except for a self-report or participation in the offense or
violation being reported, any person who makes a report within the 30-day
period provided in division (f)(1) of this section or any person who
participates in a judicial proceeding that results from such report is immune
from civil or criminal liability that otherwise might be incurred or imposed as
a result of making that report or participating in that proceeding so long as
the person is acting in good faith without fraud or malice.
      (3)   The physician-patient relationship or physician assistant-patient
relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding the person’s
knowledge of a licensed medical professional’s commission of an offense or
violation reported under division (f)(1) of this section, against that licensed
medical professional in any judicial proceeding resulting from a report made
under that division.
      (4)   As used in division (f) of this section, “licensed medical
professional” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
   (g)   (1)   Any doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine, hospital intern
or resident, nurse, psychologist, social worker, independent social worker,
social work assistant, licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed
professional counselor, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage
and family therapist who knows or has reasonable cause to believe that a
patient or client has been the victim of domestic violence, as defined in R.C.
§ 3113.31, shall note that knowledge or belief and the basis for it in the
patient’s or client’s records.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 4731.22, the physician-patient privilege or
advanced practice registered nurse-patient privilege shall not be a ground for
excluding any information regarding the report containing the knowledge or
belief noted under division (g)(1) of this section, and the information may be
admitted as evidence in accordance with the Rules of Evidence.
   (h)   Division (a) or (d) of this section does not require disclosure of
information, when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The information is privileged by reason of the relationship between
attorney and client; physician and patient; advanced practice registered nurse
and patient; licensed psychologist or licensed school psychologist and client;
licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed professional counselor,
independent social worker, social worker, independent marriage and family
therapist, or marriage and family therapist and client; member of the clergy,
rabbi, minister, or priest and any person communicating information
confidentially to the member of the clergy, rabbi, minister, or priest for a
religious counseling purpose of a professional character; husband and wife; or
a communications assistant and those who are a party to a telecommunications
relay service call.
      (2)   The information would tend to incriminate a member of the actor’s
immediate family.
      (3)   Disclosure of the information would amount to revealing a news
source, privileged under R.C. § 2739.04 or 2739.12.
      (4)   Disclosure of the information would amount to disclosure by a
member of the ordained clergy of an organized religious body of a confidential
communication made to that member of the clergy in that member’s capacity as a
member of the clergy by a person seeking the aid or counsel of that member of
the clergy.
      (5)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of the actor’s duties in connection with a bona fide
program of treatment or services for persons with drug dependencies or persons
in danger of drug dependence, which program is maintained or conducted by a
hospital, clinic, person, agency, or community addiction services provider
whose alcohol and drug addiction services are certified pursuant to R.C. §
5119.36.
      (6)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of the actor’s duties in connection with a bona fide
program for providing counseling services to victims of crimes that are
violations of R.C. § 2907.02 or R.C. § 2907.05 or to victims of felonious
sexual penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12. As used in this
division, “counseling services” include services provided in an informal
setting by a person who, by education or experience, is competent to provide
those services.
   (i)   No disclosure of information pursuant to this section gives rise to
any liability or recrimination for a breach of privilege or confidence.
   (j)   Whoever violates division (a), (b), or (f)(1) of this section is
guilty of failure to report a crime. Violation of division (a)(1) or (f)(1) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Violation of division (a)
(2) or (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (k)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty of
failure to report knowledge of a death, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (l)   (1)   Whoever negligently violates division (e) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever knowingly violates division (e) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (m)   As used in this section, “nurse” includes an advanced practice
registered nurse, registered nurse, and licensed practical nurse.
(R.C. § 2921.22)
§ 654.05 FAILURE TO AID A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (a)   No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law enforcement
officer, when called upon for assistance in preventing or halting the
commission of an offense, or in apprehending or detaining an offender, when the
aid can be given without a substantial risk of physical harm to the person
giving it.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to aid a law
enforcement officer, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2921.23)
§ 654.06 OBSTRUCTING OFFICIAL BUSINESS.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to prevent,
obstruct or delay the performance by a public official of any authorized act
within the public official’s official capacity, shall do any act that hampers
or impedes a public official in the performance of the public official’s lawful
duties.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing official
business. Except as otherwise provided in this division, obstructing official
business is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If a violation of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, obstructing official business is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.31)
§ 654.07 OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension,
prosecution, conviction or punishment of another for crime, or to assist
another to benefit from the commission of a crime, and no person, with purpose
to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, adjudication as a
delinquent child, or disposition of a child for an act that if committed by an
adult would be a crime or to assist a child to benefit from the commission of
an act that if committed by an adult would be a crime, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Harbor or conceal the other person or child.
      (2)   Provide the other person or child with money, transportation, a
weapon, a disguise or other means of avoiding discovery or apprehension.
      (3)   Warn the other person or child of impending discovery or
apprehension.
      (4)   Destroy or conceal physical evidence of the crime or act, or induce
any person to withhold testimony or information or to elude legal process
summoning him or her to testify or supply evidence.
      (5)   Communicate false information to any person.
      (6)   Prevent or obstruct any person, by means of force, intimidation or
deception, from performing any act to aid in the discovery, apprehension or
prosecution of the other person or child.
   (b)   A person may be prosecuted for, and may be convicted of or adjudicated
a delinquent child for committing, a violation of division (a) of this section
regardless of whether the person or child aided ultimately is apprehended for,
is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to or is adjudicated a
delinquent child for committing the crime or act the person or child aided
committed. The crime or act the person or child aided committed shall be used
under division (c) of this section in determining the penalty for violation of
division (a) of this section, regardless of whether the person or child aided
ultimately is apprehended for, is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty
to or is adjudicated a delinquent child for committing the crime or act the
person or child aided committed.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing justice.
      (1)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a misdemeanor or if
the act committed by the child aided would be a misdemeanor if committed by an
adult, obstructing justice is a misdemeanor of the same degree as the crime
committed by the person aided or a misdemeanor of the same degree that the act
committed by the child aided would be if committed by an adult.
      (2)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a felony or if the
act committed by the child aided would be a felony if committed by an adult, or
if the crime or act committed by the person or child aided is an act of
terrorism, obstructing justice is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ACT OF TERRORISM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.21.
      (2)   ADULT and CHILD. Have the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.
      (3)   DELINQUENT CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
(R.C. § 2921.32)
§ 654.08 RESISTING ARREST.
   (a)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of himself, herself or another.
   (b)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person and, during the course of or as a
result of the resistance or interference, cause physical harm to a law
enforcement officer.
   (c)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person if either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The offender, during the course of or as a result of the resistance
or interference, recklessly causes physical harm to a law enforcement officer
by means of a deadly weapon; or
      (2)   The offender, during the course of the resistance or interference,
brandishes a deadly weapon.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest. A
violation of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. A violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (e)   As used in this section, DEADLY WEAPON has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2923.11.
(R.C. § 2921.33)
Statutory reference:
   Unlawful taking of deadly weapon from law enforcement officer, felony, see
R.C. § 2911.01
§ 654.09 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWFUL ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER; FLEEING.
   (a)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any police officer invested with authority to direct, control or regulate
traffic.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to elude or
flee a police officer after receiving a visible or audible signal from a police
officer to bring the person’s motor vehicle to a stop.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to comply
with an order or signal of a police officer.
      (2)   A violation of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (c)(4) and (c)(5) of this section,
a violation of division (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a felony and shall
be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier of fact
finds by proof beyond a reasonable doubt that in committing the offense, the
offender was fleeing immediately after the commission of a felony.
      (5)   A.   A violation of division (b) of this section is a felony and
shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier
of fact finds any of the following by proof beyond a reasonable doubt:
            1.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender was a
proximate cause of serious physical harm to persons or property.
            2.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender caused a
substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or property.
         B.   If a police officer pursues an offender who is violating division
(b) of this section and division (c)(5)A. of this section applies, the
sentencing court, in determining the seriousness of an offender’s conduct for
purposes of sentencing the offender for a violation of division (b) of this
section, shall consider, along with the factors set forth in R.C. §§ 2929.12
and 2929.13 that are required to be considered, all of the following:
            1.   The duration of the pursuit;
            2.   The distance of the pursuit;
            3.   The rate of speed at which the offender operated the motor
vehicle during the pursuit;
            4.   Whether the offender failed to stop for traffic lights or stop
signs during the pursuit;
            5.   The number of traffic lights or stop signs for which the
offender failed to stop during the pursuit;
            6.   Whether the offender operated the motor vehicle during the
pursuit without lighted lights during a time when lighted lights are required;
            7.   Whether the offender committed a moving violation during the
pursuit;
            8.   The number of moving violations the offender committed during
the pursuit;
            9.   Any other relevant factors indicating that the offender’s
conduct is more serious than conduct normally constituting the offense.
   (d)   In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of division
(a) of this section, the court shall impose a class five suspension from the
range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). If the offender previously has been
found guilty of an offense under this section or under R.C. § 2921.331 or any
other substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, in addition to any other
sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class one suspension
as described in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(1). The court may grant limited driving
privileges to the offender on a suspension imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of this section as set forth in R.C. § 4510.021. No judge shall suspend any
portion of the suspension under a class one suspension of an offender’s
license, permit, or privilege required by this division.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   MOVING VIOLATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2743.70.
      (2)   POLICE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F))
§ 654.10 HAVING AN UNLAWFUL INTEREST IN A PUBLIC CONTRACT.
   (a)   No public official shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Authorize or employ the authority of the public official’s office
to secure authorization of any public contract in which the public official, a
member of the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s
business associates has an interest.
      (2)   Authorize or employ the authority or influence of the public
official’s office to secure the investment of public funds in any share, bond,
mortgage or other security with respect to which the public official, a member
of the public official’s family or any of the public official’s business
associates either has an interest, is an underwriter or receives any brokerage,
origination or servicing fees.
      (3)   During the public official’s term of office or within one year
thereafter, occupy any position of profit in the prosecution of a public
contract authorized by the public official or by a legislative body, commission
or board of which the public official was a member at the time of
authorization, unless the contract was let by competitive bidding to the lowest
and best bidder.
      (4)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
entered into by or for the use of the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality with which the public official is connected.
      (5)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
that is not let by competitive bidding when required by law, and that involves
more than $150.
   (b)   In the absence of bribery or a purpose to defraud, a public official,
member of a public official’s family or any of a public official’s business
associates shall not be considered as having an interest in a public contract
or the investment of public funds, if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The interest of that person is limited to owning or controlling
shares of the corporation, or being a creditor of the corporation or other
organization, that is the contractor on the public contract involved, or that
is the issuer of the security in which public funds are invested.
      (2)   The shares owned or controlled by that person do not exceed 5% of
the outstanding shares of the corporation, and the amount due that person as
creditor does not exceed 5% of the total indebtedness of the corporation or
other organization.
      (3)   That person, prior to the time the public contract is entered into,
files with the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality
involved, an affidavit giving that person’s exact status in connection with the
corporation or other organization.
   (c)   This section does not apply to a public contract in which a public
official, member of a public official’s family, or one of a public official’s
business associates has an interest, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies or
services for the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved.
      (2)   The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for the same or
lower cost, or are being furnished to the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality as part of a continuing course of dealing established
prior to the public official’s becoming associated with the political
subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality involved.
      (3)   The treatment accorded the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality is either preferential to or the same as that
accorded other customers or clients in similar transactions.
      (4)   The entire transaction is conducted at arm’s length, with full
knowledge by the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved, of the interest of the public official, member of the
public official’s family, or business associate, and the public official takes
no part in the deliberations or decision of the political subdivision or
governmental agency or instrumentality with respect to the public contract.
   (d)   Division (a)(4) of this section does not prohibit participation by a
public employee in any housing program funded by public moneys if the public
employee otherwise qualifies for the program and does not use the authority or
influence of the public employee’s office or employment to secure benefits from
the program and if the moneys are to be used on the primary residence of the
public employee. This participation does not constitute an unlawful interest in
a public contract in violation of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful interest
in a public contract. Violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Violation of division
(a)(3), (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (f)   It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting attorney to
appoint assistants and employees in accordance with R.C. §§ 309.06 and
2921.421, or for a chief legal officer of a municipality or an official
designated as prosecutor in a municipality to appoint assistants and employees
in accordance with R.C. §§ 733.621 and 2921.421, or for a township law director
appointed under R.C. § 504.15 to appoint assistants and employees in accordance
with R.C. §§ 504.151 and 2921.421.
   (g)   Any public contract in which a public official, a member of the public
official’s family or any of the public official’s business associates has an
interest in violation of this section is void and unenforceable. Any contract
securing the investment of public funds in which a public official, a member of
the public official’s family or any of the public official’s business
associates has an interest, is an underwriter or receives any brokerage,
origination or servicing fees and that was entered into in violation of this
section is void and unenforceable.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CHIEF LEGAL OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 733.621.
      (2)   PUBLIC CONTRACT. Any of the following:
         A.   The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the purchase or
acquisition, of property or services by or for the use of the state or any of
its political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either,
including the employment of an individual by the state, any of its political
subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either.
         B.   A contract for the design, construction, alteration, repair or
maintenance of any public property.
(R.C. § 2921.42)
§ 654.11 SOLICITING OR RECEIVING IMPROPER COMPENSATION.
   (a)   No public servant shall knowingly solicit or accept and no person
shall knowingly promise or give to a public servant either of the following:
      (1)   Any compensation, other than as allowed by R.C. § 102.03(G), (H),
(I) or other provisions of law, to perform the public servant’s official
duties, to perform any other act or service in the public servant’s public
capacity, for the general performance of the duties of the public servant’s
public office or public employment, or as a supplement to the public servant’s
public compensation.
      (2)   Additional or greater fees or costs than are allowed by law to
perform the public servant’s official duties.
   (b)   No public servant for the public servant’s own personal or business
use and no person for the person’s own personal or business use or for the
personal or business use of a public servant or party official, shall solicit
or accept anything of value in consideration of either of the following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion or other
material aspects of employment.
   (c)   No person for the benefit of a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity shall coerce any contribution in consideration of either of the
following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion or other
material aspects of employment.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting improper
compensation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (e)   A public servant who is convicted of a violation of this section is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment or position of trust in
this state for a period of seven years from the date of conviction.
   (f)   Divisions (a), (b) and (c) of this section do not prohibit any person
from making voluntary contributions to a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity or prohibit a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign
fund, political action committee or political contributing entity from
accepting voluntary contributions.
(R.C. § 2921.43)
§ 654.12 DERELICTION OF DUTY.
   (a)   No law enforcement officer shall negligently do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to serve a lawful warrant without delay.
      (2)   Fail to prevent or halt the commission of an offense or to
apprehend an offender, when it is in the law enforcement officer’s power to do
so alone or with available assistance.
   (b)   No law enforcement, ministerial or judicial officer shall negligently
fail to perform a lawful duty in a criminal case or proceeding.
   (c)   No officer, having charge of a detention facility, shall negligently
do any of the following:
      (1)   Allow the detention facility to become littered or unsanitary.
      (2)   Fail to provide persons confined in the detention facility with
adequate food, clothing, bedding, shelter and medical attention.
      (3)   Fail to control an unruly prisoner, or to prevent intimidation of
or physical harm to a prisoner by another.
      (4)   Allow a prisoner to escape.
      (5)   Fail to observe any lawful and reasonable regulation for the
management of the detention facility.
   (d)   No public official shall recklessly create a deficiency, incur a
liability or expend a greater sum than is appropriated by the Council for the
use in any one year of the department, agency, or institution with which the
public official is connected.
   (e)   No public servant shall recklessly fail to perform a duty expressly
imposed by law with respect to the public servant’s office, or recklessly do
any act expressly forbidden by law with respect to the public servant’s office.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of dereliction of duty, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (g)   Except as otherwise provided by law, a public servant who is a county
treasurer; county auditor; township fiscal officer; city auditor; city
treasurer; village fiscal officer; village clerk-treasurer; village clerk; in
the case of a municipal corporation having a charter that designates an officer
who, by virtue of the charter, has duties and functions similar to those of the
city or village officers referred to in this section, the officer so designated
by the charter; school district treasurer; fiscal officer of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314; treasurer of a science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics school established under R.C. Chapter 3326; or
fiscal officer of a college-preparatory boarding school established under R.C.
Chapter 3328 and is convicted of or pleads guilty to dereliction of duty is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or position of trust
in this state for four years following the date of conviction or of entry of
the plea, and is not entitled to hold any public office until any repayment or
restitution required by the court is satisfied.
   (h)   As used in this section, “public servant” includes the following:
      (1)   An officer or employee of a contractor as defined in R.C. § 9.08;
      (2)   A fiscal officer employed by the operator of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314 or by the operator of a college-preparatory
boarding school established under R.C. Chapter 3328.
(R.C. § 2921.44)
§ 654.13 INTERFERING WITH CIVIL RIGHTS.
   (a)   No public servant, under color of the public servant’s office,
employment, or authority, shall knowingly deprive, or conspire or attempt to
deprive any person of a constitutional or statutory right.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interfering with civil
rights, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.45)
Statutory reference:
   Restraining or confining pregnant children or pregnant women, see R.C. §
2152.75(B) and R.C. § 2901.10
§ 654.14 IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. An employee of the United States
who serves in a position the duties of which are primarily the investigation,
apprehension or detention of individuals suspected or convicted of offenses
under the criminal laws of the United States.
      (2)   IMPERSONATE. To act the part of, assume the identity of, wear the
uniform or any part of the uniform of, or display the identification of a
particular person or of a member of a class of persons with purpose to make
another person believe that the actor is that particular person or is a member
of that class of persons.
      (3)   INVESTIGATOR OF THE BUREAU OF CRIMINAL IDENTIFICATION AND
INVESTIGATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.11.
      (4)   PEACE OFFICER. A Sheriff, Deputy Sheriff, Marshal, Deputy Marshal,
member of the organized police department of a municipal corporation or
township constable, who is employed by a political subdivision of this state; a
member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under
R.C. § 3735.31(D); a member of a police force employed by a regional transit
authority under R.C. § 306.35(Y); a state university law enforcement officer
appointed under R.C. § 3345.04; a veterans’ home police officer appointed under
R.C. § 5907.02; a special police officer employed by a port authority under
R.C. § 4582.04 or 4582.28; an officer, agent or employee of the state or any of
its agencies, instrumentalities or political subdivisions, upon whom, by
statute, a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is
imposed and the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within limits of
that statutory duty and authority; or a State Highway Patrol trooper whose
primary duties are to preserve the peace, to protect life and property and to
enforce the laws, ordinances or rules of the state or any of its political
subdivisions.
      (5)   PRIVATE POLICE OFFICER. Any security guard, special police officer,
private detective or other person who is privately employed in a police
capacity.
   (b)   No person shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation or
federal law enforcement officer.
   (c)   No person, by impersonating a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation or
federal law enforcement officer, shall arrest or detain any person, search any
person or search the property of any person.
   (d)   No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of an
offense, shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer, federal law
enforcement officer, an officer, agent or
employee of the municipality or the state, or investigator of the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation.
   (e)   No person shall commit a felony while impersonating a peace officer,
private police officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or
employee of the municipality or of the state or investigator of the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation.
   (f)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b) of this
section that the impersonation of the peace officer, private police officer,
federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the
municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation was for a lawful purpose.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the purpose of a
violation of division (d) of this section is to commit or facilitate the
commission of a felony, a violation of division (d) is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. Whoever violates division (e) of this
section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.51)
§ 654.15 DISPLAY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY EMBLEM.
   (a)   No person who is not entitled to do so shall knowingly display on a
motor vehicle the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law
enforcement officers.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of the unlawful display of the
emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law enforcement
officers, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2913.441)
§ 654.16 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED OR FORFEITED PROPERTY HELD BY POLICE
DEPARTMENT.
   (a)   Safekeeping of property in custody.
      (1)   A.   Any property that has been lost, abandoned, stolen, seized
pursuant to a search warrant, or otherwise lawfully seized or forfeited and
that is in the custody of the Police Department shall be kept safely by the
Police Department, pending the time it no longer is needed as evidence or for
another lawful purpose, and shall be disposed of pursuant to this section or
R.C. §§ 2981.12 and 2981.13.
         B.   This section does not apply to the custody and disposal of any of
the following:
            1.   Vehicles subject to forfeiture under R.C. Title 45, except as
provided in division (b)(1)F. of this section;
            2.   Abandoned junk motor vehicles or other property of negligible
value;
            3.   Property held by a department of rehabilitation and correction
institution that is unclaimed, that does not have an identified owner, that the
owner agrees to dispose of or that is identified by the Department as having
little value;
            4.   Animals taken, and devices used in unlawfully taking animals,
under R.C. § 1531.20;
            5.   Controlled substances sold by a peace officer in the
performance of the officer’s official duties under R.C. § 3719.141;
            6.   Property recovered by a township law enforcement agency under
R.C. §§ 505.105 to 505.109;
            7.   Property held and disposed of under an ordinance of the
municipality or under R.C. §§ 737.29 to 737.33, except that if the municipality
has received notice of a citizens’ reward program as provided in division (b)
(5) of this section and disposes of property under an ordinance shall pay 25%
of any moneys acquired from any sale or auction to the citizens’ reward
program.
      (2)   A.   The Police Department shall adopt and comply with a written
internal control policy that does all of the following:
            1.   Provides for keeping detailed records as to the amount of
property acquired by the Police Department and the date property was acquired;
            2.   Provides for keeping detailed records of the disposition of
the property, which shall include but not be limited to both of the following:
               a.   The manner in which it was disposed, the date of
disposition, detailed financial records concerning any property sold and the
name of any person who received the property. The record shall not identify or
enable identification of the individual officer who seized any item of
property.
               b.   An itemized list of the specific expenditures made with
amounts that are gained from the sale of the property and that are retained by
the agency, including the specific amount expended on each expenditure, except
that the policy shall not provide for or permit the identification of any
specific expenditure that is made in an ongoing investigation.
            3.   Complies with R.C. § 2981.13 if the Police Department has a
law enforcement trust fund or similar fund created under that section.
         B.   The records kept under the internal control policy shall be open
to public inspection during the Police Department’s regular business hours. The
policy adopted under this section is a public record open for inspection under
R.C. § 149.43.
      (3)   A.   The Police Department, with custody of property to be disposed
of under this section or R.C. § 2981.12 or 2981.13, shall make a reasonable
effort to locate persons entitled to possession of the property, to notify them
of when and where it may be claimed, and to return the property to them at the
earliest possible time. In the absence of evidence identifying persons entitled
to possession, it is sufficient notice to advertise using at least one of the
following methods:
            1.   In the print or digital edition of a newspaper of general
circulation in the county;
            2.   On the official public notice web site established under R.C.
§ 125.182;
            3.   On the web site and social media account of the county.
         B.   The notices shall briefly describe the nature of the property in
custody and inviting persons to view and establish their right to it.
      (4)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   CITIZENS’ REWARD PROGRAM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 9.92.
         B.   LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Includes correctional institutions.
         C.   TOWNSHIP LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. An organized police department
of a township, a township police district, a joint police district, or the
office of a township constable.
(R.C. § 2981.11)
   (b)   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property.
      (1)   Unclaimed or forfeited property in the custody of the Police
Department, other than property described in division (a)(1)B. of this section,
shall be disposed of by order of any court of record that has territorial
jurisdiction over the municipality, as follows:
         A.   Drugs shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 3719.11 or placed
in the custody of the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States for
disposal or use for medical or scientific purposes under applicable federal
law.
         B.   Firearms and dangerous ordnance suitable for police work may be
given to a law enforcement agency for that purpose. Firearms suitable for
sporting use or as museum pieces or collectors’ items may be sold at public
auction pursuant to division (b)(2) of this section. The Police Department may
sell other firearms and dangerous ordnance to a federally licensed firearms
dealer in a manner that the court considers proper. The Police Department shall
destroy any firearms or dangerous ordnance not given to a law enforcement
agency or sold or shall send them to the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation for destruction by the Bureau.
         C.   Obscene materials shall be destroyed.
         D.   Beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol seized from a person who
does not hold a permit issued under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or otherwise
forfeited to the state for an offense under R.C. § 4301.45 or 4301.53 shall be
sold by the Division of Liquor Control if the Division determines that it is
fit for sale or shall be placed in the custody of the Investigations Unit in
the Ohio Department of Public Safety and be used for training relating to law
enforcement activities. The Ohio Department of Public Safety, with the
assistance of the Division of Liquor Control, shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 to provide for the distribution to state or local law
enforcement agencies upon their request. If any tax imposed under R.C. Title 43
has not been paid in relation to the beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol, any
moneys acquired from the sale shall first be used to pay the tax. All other
money collected under this division (b)(1)D. shall be paid into the State
Treasury. Any beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol that the Division
determines to be unfit for sale shall be destroyed.
         E.   Money received by an inmate of a correctional institution from an
unauthorized source or in an unauthorized manner shall be returned to the
sender, if known, or deposited in the inmates’ industrial and entertainment
fund of the institution if the sender is not known.
         F.   1.   Any mobile instrumentality forfeited under R.C. Chapter 2981
may be given to the law enforcement agency that initially seized the mobile
instrumentality for use in performing its duties, if the agency wants the
mobile instrumentality. The agency shall take the mobile instrumentality
subject to any security interest or lien on the mobile instrumentality.
            2.   Vehicles and vehicle parts forfeited under R.C. §§ 4549.61 to
4549.63 may be given to a law enforcement agency for use in performing its
duties. Those parts may be incorporated into any other official vehicle. Parts
that do not bear vehicle identification numbers or derivatives of them may be
sold or disposed of as provided by rules of the Director of Public Safety.
Parts from which a vehicle identification number or derivative of it has been
removed, defaced, covered, altered or destroyed and that are not suitable for
police work or incorporation into an official vehicle shall be destroyed and
sold as junk or scrap.
         G.   Computers, computer networks, computer systems and computer
software suitable for police work may be given to a law enforcement agency for
that purpose or disposed of under division (b)(2) of this section.
         H.   Money seized in connection with a violation of R.C. § 2905.32,
2907.21, or 2907.22 shall be deposited in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund
created by R.C. § 5101.87.
      (2)   Unclaimed or forfeited property that is not described in division
(b)(1) of this section or division (a)(1)B. of this section, with court
approval, may be used by the law enforcement agency in possession of it. If it
is not used by the agency, it may be sold without appraisal at a public auction
to the highest bidder for cash or disposed of in another manner that the court
considers proper.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (b)(1) and (b)(5) of this section
and after compliance with division (b)(4) of this section when applicable, any
moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of pursuant to this section
shall be placed in the General Revenue Fund of the state, or the General Fund
of the municipality.
      (4)   If the property was in the possession of the Police Department in
relation to a delinquent child proceeding in a juvenile court, 10% of any
moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of under this section shall
be applied to one or more community addiction services providers, as defined in
R.C. § 5119.01. A juvenile court shall not specify a services provider, except
as provided in this division, unless the services provider is in the same
county as the court or in a contiguous county. If no services provider is
located in any of those counties, the juvenile court may specify a services
provider anywhere in Ohio. The remaining 90% of the proceeds or cash shall be
applied as provided in division (b)(3) of this section.
      (5)   A.   If the Board of County Commissioners recognizes a citizens’
reward program under R.C. § 9.92, the Board shall notify the Police Department
of the recognition by filing a copy of its resolution conferring that
recognition with the Police Department. When the Board recognizes a citizens’
reward program and the county includes a part, but not all, of the territory of
the municipality, the Board shall so notify the Police Department of the
recognition of the citizens’ reward program only if the county contains the
highest percentage of the municipality’s population.
         B.   Upon being so notified, the Police Department shall pay 25% of
any forfeited proceeds or cash derived from each sale of property disposed of
pursuant to this section to the citizens’ reward program for use exclusively to
pay rewards. No part of the funds may be used to pay expenses associated with
the program. If a citizens’ reward program that operates in more than one
county or in another state in addition to this state receives funds under this
section, the funds shall be used to pay rewards only for tips and information
to law enforcement agencies concerning offenses committed in the county from
which the funds were received.
      (6)   Any property forfeited under R.C. Chapter 2981 not be used to pay
any fine imposed upon a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to an
underlying criminal offense or a different offense arising out of the same
facts and circumstances.
      (7)   Any moneys acquired from the sale of personal effects, tools, or
other property seized because the personal effects, tools, or other property
were used in the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2905.32, 2907.21, or
2907.22 or derived from the proceeds of the commission of a violation of R.C. §
2905.32, 2907.21, or 2907.22 and disposed of pursuant to this division (b)
shall be placed in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund created by R.C. §
5101.87.
(R.C. § 2981.12)
   (c)   Disposition of contraband, proceeds, or instrumentalities. Except as
otherwise provided in R.C. § 2981.13, property ordered forfeited as contraband,
proceeds, or an instrumentality pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2981 shall be disposed
of, used or sold pursuant to division (b) of this section or R.C. § 2981.12. If
the property is to be sold under division (b) of this section or R.C. §
2981.12, the prosecutor shall cause notice of the proposed sale to be given in
accordance with law.
(R.C. § 2981.13(A))
Statutory reference:
   Forfeiture of property generally, see R.C. Chapter 2981
§ 654.17 DETENTION OF SHOPLIFTERS AND THOSE COMMITTING MOTION PICTURE PIRACY;
PROTECTION OF INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ARCHIVAL INSTITUTION. Any public or private building, structure, or
shelter in which are stored historical documents, devices, records, manuscripts
or items of public interest, which historical materials are stored to preserve
the materials or the information in the materials, to disseminate the
information contained in the materials, or to make the materials available for
public inspection or for inspection by certain persons who have a particular
interest in, use for, or knowledge concerning the materials.
      (2)   AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION and FACILITY. Have the same meaning
as in R.C. § 2913.07.
      (3)   MUSEUM. Any public or private nonprofit institution that is
permanently organized for primarily educational or aesthetic purposes, owns or
borrows objects or items of public interest, and cares for and exhibits to the
public the objects or items.
      (4)   PRETRIAL DIVERSION PROGRAM. Means a rehabilitative, educational
program designed to reduce recidivism and promote personal responsibility that
is at least four hours in length and that has been approved by any court in
this state.
   (b)   A merchant, or an employee or agent of a merchant, who has probable
cause to believe that things offered for sale by a mercantile establishment
have been unlawfully taken by a person, may, for the purposes set forth in
division (d) below, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable
length of time within the mercantile establishment or its immediate vicinity.
   (c)   Any officer, employee or agent of a library, museum or archival
institution may, for the purposes set forth in division (d) below or for the
purpose of conducting a reasonable investigation of a belief that the person
has acted in a manner described in divisions (c)(1) and (c)(2) below, detain a
person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time within, or in the
immediate vicinity of, the library, museum or archival institution, if the
officer, employee or agent has probable cause to believe that the person has:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly moved, defaced, damaged,
destroyed or otherwise improperly tampered with property owned by or in the
custody of the library, museum or archival institution; or
      (2)   With purpose to deprive the library, museum or archival institution
of property owned by it or in its custody, knowingly obtained or exerted
control over the property without the consent of the owner or person authorized
to give consent, beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the
owner or person authorized to give consent, by deception, or by threat.
   (d)   An officer, agent or employee of a library, museum or archival
institution pursuant to division (c) above or a merchant or an employee or
agent of a merchant pursuant to division (b) above may detain another person
for any of the following purposes:
      (1)   To recover the property that is the subject of the unlawful taking,
criminal mischief or theft;
      (2)   To cause an arrest to be made by a peace officer;
      (3)   To obtain a warrant of arrest;
      (4)   To offer the person, if the person is suspected of the unlawful
taking, criminal mischief, or theft and notwithstanding any other provision of
this Code or the Ohio Revised Code, an opportunity to complete a pretrial
diversion program and to inform the person of the other legal remedies
available to the library, museum, archival institution, or merchant.
   (e)   The owner or lessee of a facility in which a motion picture is being
shown, or the owner’s or lessee’s employee or agent, who has probable cause to
believe that a person is or has been operating an audiovisual recording
function of a device in violation of R.C. § 2917.07 may, for the purpose of
causing an arrest to be made by a peace officer or of obtaining an arrest
warrant, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of
time within the facility or its immediate vicinity.
   (f)   The officer, agent or employee of the library, museum or archival
institution, the merchant or an employee or agent of a merchant, or the owner,
lessee, employee or agent of the facility acting under divisions (b), (c) or
(e) above shall not search the person detained, search or seize any property
belonging to the person detained without the person’s consent, or use undue
restraint upon the person detained.
   (g)   Any peace officer may arrest without a warrant any person that the
officer has probable cause to believe has committed any act described in
division (c)(1) or (c)(2) above, that the officer has probable cause to believe
has committed an unlawful taking in a mercantile establishment, or that the
officer has reasonable cause to believe has committed an act prohibited by R.C.
§ 2913.07. An arrest under this division shall be made within a reasonable time
after the commission of the act or unlawful taking.
(R.C. § 2935.041)
§ 654.18 FAILURE TO DISCLOSE PERSONAL INFORMATION.
   (a)   No person who is in a public place shall refuse to disclose the
person’s name, address or date of birth, when requested by a law enforcement
officer who reasonably suspects either of the following:
      (1)   The person is committing, has committed or is about to commit a
criminal offense.
      (2)   The person witnessed any of the following:
         A.   An offense of violence that would constitute a felony under the
laws of this state;
         B.   A felony offense that causes or results in, or creates a
substantial risk of, serious physical harm to another person or property;
         C.   Any attempt or conspiracy to commit, or complicity in committing,
any offenses identified in division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this section;
         D.   Any conduct reasonably indicating that any offense identified in
division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this section or any attempt, conspiracy or
complicity described in division (a)(2)C. of this section has been, is being or
is about to be committed.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of failure to
disclose one’s personal information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (c)   Nothing in division (a) of this section requires a person to answer
any questions beyond that person’s name, address or date of birth. Nothing in
division (a) of this section authorizes a law enforcement officer to arrest a
person for not providing any information beyond the person’s name, address or
date of birth or for refusing to describe the offense observed.
   (d)   It is not a violation of division (a) of this section to refuse to
answer a question that would reveal a person’s age or date of birth if age is
an element of the crime that the person is suspected of committing.
(R.C. § 2921.29)
   (e)   No person entering an airport, train station, port or other similar
critical transportation infrastructure site shall refuse to show identification
when requested by a law enforcement officer when there is a threat to security
and the law enforcement officer is requiring identification of all persons
entering the site.
   (f)   A law enforcement officer may prevent any person who refuses to show
identification when asked under the circumstances described in division (e) of
this section from entering the critical transportation infrastructure site.
(R.C. § 2909.31)
§ 654.19 MISUSE OF 9-1-1 SYSTEM.
   (a)   As used in this section, “9-1-1 system” means a system through which
individuals can request emergency service using the access number 9-1-1.
(R.C. § 128.01(A))
   (b)   No person shall knowingly use the telephone number of a 9-1-1 system
established under R.C. Chapter 128 to report an emergency if the person knows
that no emergency exists.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly use a 9-1-1 system for a purpose other than
obtaining emergency service.
   (d)   No person shall disclose or use any information concerning telephone
numbers, addresses, or names obtained from the database that serves the public
safety answering point of a 9-1-1 system established under R.C. Chapter 128,
except for any of the following purposes or under any of the following
circumstances:
      (1)   For the purpose of the 9-1-1 system;
      (2)   For the purpose of responding to an emergency call to an emergency
service provider;
      (3)   In the circumstance of the inadvertent disclosure of such
information due solely to technology of the wireless telephone network portion
of the 9-1-1 system not allowing access to the database to be restricted to 9-
1-1 specific answering lines at a public safety answering point;
      (4)   In the circumstance of access to a database being given by a
telephone company that is a wireless service provider to a public utility or
municipal utility in handling customer calls in times of public emergency or
service outages. The charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of
the information for the purpose of such access to a database shall be subject
to the jurisdiction of the Steering Committee;
      (5)   In the circumstance of access to a database given by a telephone
company that is a wireline service provider to a state and local government in
warning of a public emergency, as determined by the Steering Committee. The
charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of that information for
the purpose of access to a database is subject to the jurisdiction of the
Steering Committee.
(R.C. § 128.96(F) - (H))
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 128.99(A), (B))
§ 654.20 USING SHAM LEGAL PROCESS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   LAWFULLY ISSUED. Adopted, issued or rendered in accordance with the
United States Constitution, the constitution of a state, and the applicable
statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances of the United States, a state and
the political subdivisions of a state.
      (2)   POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS. Municipal corporations, townships,
counties, school districts and all other bodies corporate and politic that are
organized under state law and are responsible for governmental activities only
in geographical areas smaller than that of a state.
      (3)   SHAM LEGAL PROCESS. An instrument that meets all of the following
conditions:
         A.   It is not lawfully issued.
         B.   It purports to do any of the following:
            1.   To be a summons, subpoena, judgment or order of a court, a law
enforcement officer, or a legislative, executive or administrative body.
            2.   To assert jurisdiction over or determine the legal or
equitable status, rights, duties, powers or privileges of any person or
property.
            3.   To require or authorize the search, seizure, indictment,
arrest, trial or sentencing of any person or property.
         C.   It is designed to make another person believe that it is lawfully
issued.
      (4)   STATE. A state of the United States, including without limitation
the state legislature, the highest court of the state that has statewide
jurisdiction, the offices of all elected state officers, and all departments,
boards, offices, commissions, agencies, institutions and other
instrumentalities of the state. “State” does not include the political
subdivisions of the state.
   (b)   No person shall, knowing the sham legal process to be a sham legal
process, do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly issue, display, deliver, distribute or otherwise use sham
legal process.
      (2)   Knowingly use sham legal process to arrest, detain, search or seize
any person or the property of another person.
      (3)   Knowingly commit or facilitate the commission of an offense using
sham legal process.
      (4)   Knowingly commit a felony by using sham legal process.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b)(1) or (b)
(2) of this section that the use of sham legal process was for a lawful
purpose.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using sham legal process. A
violation of division (b)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. A violation of division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the purpose of a violation of
division (b)(3) of this section is to commit or facilitate the commission of a
felony, a violation of division (b)(3) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (b)(4) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.52(A) - (D))
CHAPTER 660
Safety, Sanitation and Health
660.01   Venting of heaters and burners.
660.02   Spreading contagion.
660.03   Littering.
660.04   Noxious odors; filthy accumulations; polluting and diverting
watercourses.
660.05   Duty to keep sidewalks in repair and clean.
660.06   Abandoned refrigerators and airtight containers.
660.07   Storage of junk vehicles.
660.08   Open burning.
660.09   Barricades and warning lights.
660.10   Sidewalk obstructions; damage or injury.
660.11   Notice to fill lots, remove putrid substances.
660.12   Fences.
660.13   Smoking in places of public assembly.
660.14   Weeds and accumulation of litter in private property.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Excavation liability, see R.C. §§ 723.49 et seq.
   Nuisances, see R.C. Ch. 3767
   Animal nuisances, see §
618.14
   Inducing panic, see §
648.07
   Littering from motor vehicles, see §
432.43
   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required, see §
440.06
   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection, see §
636.16
   Placing injurious material or obstruction in street, see §
412.01
   Rabies quarantine, see §
618.12
   Riot, see §§
648.01 et seq.
   Safety and equipment for motor vehicles, see Ch.
438
   Weapons and explosives, see Ch.
678
   Willfully leaving vehicles on private or public property, see §
452.05
§ 660.01 VENTING OF HEATERS AND BURNERS.
   (a)   The use of a brazier, salamander, space heater, room heater, furnace,
water heater, or other burner or heater, using wood, coal, coke, fuel oil,
kerosene, gasoline, natural gas, liquid petroleum gas or similar fuel, and
tending to give off carbon monoxide or other harmful gases, must comply with
the following provisions;
      (1)   When used in living quarters, or in any enclosed building or space
in which persons are usually present, shall be used with a flue or vent so
designed, installed and maintained as to vent the products of combustion
outdoors; except in storage, factory or industrial buildings which are provided
with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning.
      (2)   When used as a portable or temporary burner or heater at a
construction site, or in a warehouse, shed or structure in which persons are
temporarily present, shall be vented as provided in division (a)(1) or used
with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning.
   (b)   This section does not apply to domestic ranges, laundry stoves, gas
logs installed in a fireplace with an adequate flue, or hot plates, unless the
same are used as space or room heaters.
   (c)   No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge
or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a burner or heater in
violation of the standards for venting and ventilation provided in this
section.
   (d)   Division (a) above does not apply to any kerosene-fired space or room
heater that is equipped with an automatic extinguishing tip-over device, or to
any natural gas-fired or liquid petroleum gas-fired space or room heater that
is equipped with an oxygen depletion safety shut-off system, and that has its
fuel piped from a source outside the building in which it is located, that are
approved by an authoritative source recognized by the State Fire Marshal in the
State Fire Code adopted by him or her under R.C. § 3737.82.
   (e)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules to ensure the safe use of
unvented kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas heaters exempted from
division (a) above when used in assembly buildings, business buildings, high
hazard buildings, institutional buildings, mercantile buildings and type R-
1 and R-2 residential buildings, as these groups of buildings are defined in
rules adopted by the Board of Building Standards under R.C. § 3781.10. No
person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge or occupant
of premises, negligently permit the use of a heater in violation of any rules
adopted under this division.
   (f)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules prescribing standards for
written instructions containing ventilation requirements and warning of any
potential fire hazards that may occur in using a kerosene, natural gas or
liquid petroleum gas heater. No person shall sell or offer for sale any
kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas heater unless the manufacturer
provides with the heater written instructions that comply with any rules
adopted under this division.
   (g)   No product labeled as a fuel additive for kerosene heaters and having
a flash point below 100°F or 37.8°C shall be sold, offered for sale or used in
any kerosene space heater.
   (h)   No device that prohibits any safety feature on a kerosene, natural gas
or liquid petroleum gas space heater from operating shall be sold, offered for
sale or used in connection with any kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum
gas space heater.
   (i)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any kerosene-fired, natural gas
or liquid petroleum gas-fired heater that is not exempt from division (a)
above, unless it is marked conspicuously by the manufacturer on the container
with the phrase “Not Approved For Home Use.”
   (j)   No person shall use a cabinet-type, liquid petroleum gas-fired heater
having a fuel source within the heater, inside any building, except as
permitted by the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him or
her under R.C. § 3737.82.
(R.C. § 3701.82)
   (k)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 3701.99(B))
§ 660.02 SPREADING CONTAGION.
   (a)   No person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the
person has a dangerous, contagious disease, shall knowingly fail to take
reasonable measures to prevent exposing self to other persons, except when
seeking medical aid.
   (b)   No person, having charge or care of a person whom the person having
charge or care knows or has reasonable cause to believe has a dangerous,
contagious disease, shall recklessly fail to take reasonable measures to
protect others from exposure to the contagion, and to inform health authorities
of the existence of the contagion.
   (c)   No person, having charge of a public conveyance or place of public
accommodation, amusement, resort or trade, and knowing or having reasonable
cause to believe that persons using the conveyance or place have been or are
being exposed to a dangerous, contagious disease, shall negligently fail to
take reasonable measures to protect the public from exposure to the contagion,
and to inform health authorities of the existence of the contagion.
(R.C. § 3701.81)
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
(R.C. § 3701.99(C))
§ 660.03 LITTERING.
   (a)   No person, regardless of intent, shall deposit litter or cause litter
to be deposited on any public property, on private property not owned by him or
her, or in or on waters of the state, unless one of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is directed to do so by a public official as part of a
litter collection drive.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, the person
deposits the litter in a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents its being
carried away by the elements.
      (3)   The person is issued a permit or license covering the litter
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3734 or 6111.
   (b)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly deposit litter,
or cause it to be deposited, in a litter receptacle located on any public
property or on any private property not owned by him or her, unless one of the
following applies:
      (1)   The litter was generated or located on the property on which the
litter receptacle is located.
      (2)   The person is directed to do so by a public official as part of a
litter collection drive.
      (3)   The person is directed to do so by a person whom he or she
reasonably believes to have the privilege to use the litter receptacle.
      (4)   The litter consists of any of the following:
         A.   The contents of a litter bag or container of a type and size
customarily carried and used in a motor vehicle.
         B.   The contents of an ash tray of a type customarily installed or
carried and used in a motor vehicle.
         C.   Beverage containers and food sacks, wrappings and containers of a
type and in an amount that reasonably may be expected to be generated during
routine commuting or business or recreational travel by a motor vehicle.
         D.   Beverage containers, food sacks, wrappings, containers and other
materials of a type and in an amount that reasonably may be expected to be
generated during a routine day by a person and deposited in a litter receptacle
by a casual passerby.
   (c)   (1)   As used in division (b)(1) of this section, “public property”
includes any private property open to the public for the conduct of business,
the provision of a service, or upon the payment of a fee, but does not include
any private property to which the public otherwise does not have a right of
access.
      (2)   As used in division (b)(4) of this section, “casual passerby” means
a person who does not have depositing litter in a litter receptacle as his or
her primary reason for traveling to or by the property on which the litter
receptacle is located.
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   AUXILIARY CONTAINER. A bag, can, cup, food or beverage service
item, container, keg, bottle, or other packaging to which all of the following
apply:
         A.   It is designed to be either single use or reusable.
         B.   It is made of cloth, paper, plastic, foamed or expanded plastic,
cardboard, corrugated material, aluminum, metal, glass, postconsumer recycled
material, or similar materials or substances, including coated, laminated, or
multilayered substrates.
         C.   It is designed for consuming, transporting, or protecting
merchandise, food, or beverages from or at a food service operation, retail
food establishment, grocery, or any other type of retail, manufacturing, or
distribution establishment.
      (2)   DEPOSIT. To throw, drop, discard or place.
      (3)   LITTER. Garbage, trash, waste, rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire,
paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts, furniture, glass, auxiliary
containers, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
      (4)   LITTER RECEPTACLE. A dumpster, trash can, trash bin, garbage can or
similar container in which litter is deposited for removal.
   (e)   This section may be enforced by any sheriff, deputy sheriff, police
officer of a municipal corporation, police constable or officer of a township,
or township or joint police district, wildlife officer designated under R.C. §
1531.13, natural resources officer appointed under R.C. § 1501.24, forest-fire
investigator appointed under R.C. § 1503.09, conservancy district police
officer, inspector of nuisances of a county, or any other law enforcement
officer within the law enforcement officer’s jurisdiction.
(R.C. § 3767.32)
   (f)   Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. The sentencing court may, in addition to or in
lieu of the penalty provided in this division, require a person who violates
this section to remove litter from any public or private property or in or on
waters of the state.
(R.C. § 3767.99(C))
§ 660.04 NOXIOUS ODORS; FILTHY ACCUMULATIONS; POLLUTING AND DIVERTING
WATERCOURSES.
   (a)   No person shall erect, continue to use or maintain a building,
structure or place for the exercise of a trade, employment or business or for
keeping or feeding an animal which, by occasioning noxious exhalations or
noisome or offensive smells, becomes injurious to the health, comfort or
property of individuals or of the public.
   (b)   No person shall cause or allow offal, filth or noisome substances to
be collected or remain in any place to the damage or prejudice of others or of
the public.
   (c)   No person shall unlawfully obstruct or impede the passage of a
navigable river, harbor or collection of water, or corrupt or render
unwholesome or impure a watercourse, stream of water or unlawfully divert the
watercourse from its natural course or state to the injury or prejudice of
others.
   (d)   Persons who are engaged in agriculture-related activities, as
AGRICULTURE is defined in R.C. § 519.01, and who are conducting those
activities outside the municipality, in accordance with generally accepted
agricultural practices, and in such a manner so as not to have a substantial,
adverse effect on the public health, safety or welfare, are exempt from
divisions (a) and (b) above and from any ordinances, resolutions, rules, or
other enactments of the municipality that prohibit excessive noise.
(R.C. § 3767.13)
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 3767.99(C))
§ 660.05 DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS IN REPAIR AND CLEAN.
   (a)   No owner or occupant of lots or lands abutting any sidewalk, curb or
gutter shall fail to keep the sidewalks, curbs and gutters in repair and free
from snow, ice or any nuisance, and to remove from the sidewalks, curbs or
gutters all snow and ice accumulated thereon within a reasonable time, which
will ordinarily not exceed 12 hours after any storm during which the snow and
ice has accumulated.
(R.C. § 723.011)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 660.06 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS AND AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS.
   (a)   No person shall abandon, discard or knowingly permit to remain on
premises under the person’s control, in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight
container which has a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more and an
opening of 50 square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with a
hinge, latch or other fastening device capable of securing the door or lid,
without rendering the equipment harmless to human life by removing the hinges,
latches or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein. This
section shall not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-
airtight container located in that part of a building occupied by a dealer,
warehouse or repairer.
(R.C. § 3767.29)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 3767.99(B))
§ 660.07 STORAGE OF JUNK VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   For purposes of this section, JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE means any motor
vehicle which is three years old or older; extensively damaged, the damage
including but not limited to any of the following: missing wheels, tires, motor
or transmission; apparently inoperable; and having a fair market value of
$1,500 or less, that is left uncovered in the open on private property for more
than 72 hours with the permission of the person having the right to possession
of the property, except if the person is operating a junk yard or scrap metal
processing facility licensed under the authority of R.C. §§ 4737.05 through
4737.12, or otherwise regulated under authority of a political subdivision; or
if the property on which the motor vehicle is left is not subject to licensure
or regulation by any governmental authority, unless the person having the right
to the possession of the property can establish that the motor vehicle is part
of a bona fide commercial operation; or if the motor vehicle is a collector’s
vehicle.
      (2)   The municipality shall not prevent a person from storing or
keeping, or restrict him or her in the method of storing or keeping, any
collector’s vehicle on private property with the permission of the person
having the right to the possession of the property, except that the
municipality may require a person having such permission to conceal, by means
of buildings, fences, vegetation, terrain or other suitable obstruction, any
unlicensed collector’s vehicle stored in the open.
      (3)   The Police Chief, the Legislative Authority, or the zoning
authority may send notice, by certified mail with return receipt requested, to
the person having the right to the possession of the property on which a junk
motor vehicle is left, that within ten days of receipt of the notice, the junk
motor vehicle either shall be covered by being housed in a garage or other
suitable structure, or shall be removed from the property.
      (4)   No person shall willfully leave a junk motor vehicle uncovered in
the open for more than ten days after receipt of a notice as provided in this
section. The fact that a junk motor vehicle is so left is prima facie evidence
of willful failure to comply with the notice, and each subsequent period of 30
days that a junk motor vehicle continues to be so left constitutes a separate
offense.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.65)
§ 660.08 OPEN BURNING.
   (a)   (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         AGRICULTURAL WASTE. Any waste material generated by crop,
horticultural, or livestock production practices, and includes such items as
woody debris and plant matter from stream flooding, bags, cartons, structural
materials, and landscape wastes that are generated in agricultural activities,
but does not include land clearing waste; buildings (including dismantled/
fallen barns);  garbage; dead animals; animal waste; motor vehicles and parts
thereof; nor economic poisons and containers thereof, unless the manufacturer
has identified open burning as a safe disposal procedure.
         AIR CURTAIN BURNER. An engineered apparatus consisting of a motorized
high-velocity fan and an air distribution system designed to aid in the
efficient combustion of materials placed in a manufactured steel structure and
for which a permit-to-install has been obtained as required in O.A.C. Chapter
3745-31 and a permit-to-operate has been obtained as required in O.A.C. Chapter
3745-77.
         AIR CURTAIN DESTRUCTOR. An engineered apparatus consisting of a
motorized high-velocity fan and an air distribution system designed to aid in
the efficient combustion of materials placed in an adjacent pit. An air curtain
burner may be used in place of an air curtain destructor, but an air curtain
destructor may not be used in place of an air curtain burner.
         BUILDING MATERIALS. Those materials resulting from the alteration,
construction, destruction, rehabilitation, or repair of any human-made physical
structure, including, without limitation, houses, buildings, industrial or
commercial facilities, or roadways.
         ECONOMIC POISONS. Include but are not restricted to pesticides such as
insecticides, fungicides, rodenticides, miticides, nematocides and fumigants;
herbicides; seed disinfectants; and defoliants.
         EMERGENCY BURNING. The burning of clean wood waste or deceased animals
caused by a natural disaster or an uncontrolled event such as the following:
            1.   A tornado.
            2.   High winds.
            3.   An earthquake.
            4.   An explosion.
            5.   A flood.
            6.   A hail storm, a rain storm, or an ice storm.
         GARBAGE. Any waste material resulting from the handling, processing,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food or food products.
         INHABITED BUILDING. Any inhabited private dwelling house and any
public structure which may be used as a place of resort, assembly, education,
entertainment, lodging, trade, manufacture,  repair, storage, traffic, or
occupancy by the public. Examples would include, but are not limited to,
highway rest stops, restaurants, motels, hotels and gas stations.
         LAND CLEARING WASTE. Plant waste material which is removed from land,
including plant waste material removed from stream banks during projects
involving more than one property owner, for the purpose of rendering the land
useful for residential, commercial, or industrial development. Land clearing
waste also includes the plant waste material generated during the clearing of
land for new agricultural development.
         LANDSCAPE WASTE. Any plant waste material, except garbage, including
trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass,
shrubbery, yard trimmings, and crop residues.
         OHIO EPA. The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency Director or
agencies delegated authority by the Director of the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency pursuant to R.C. § 3704.03 or the Chief of any Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency District Office.
         OPEN BURNING. The burning of any materials wherein air contaminants
resulting from combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without
passing through a stack or chimney. Open burning includes the burning of any
refuse or salvageable material in any device not subject to or designed
specifically to comply with the requirements of O.A.C. 3745-17-09 or O.A.C.
3745-17-10.
         RESIDENTIAL WASTE. Any waste material, including landscape waste,
generated on the property of a one-, two- or three-family residence as a result
of residential activities, but not including garbage, rubber, grease, asphalt,
liquid petroleum products, or plastics.
         RESTRICTED AREA. The area within the boundary of the municipality,
plus a zone extending 1,000 feet beyond the boundaries of a municipality having
a population of 1,000 to 10,000 persons and a zone extending one mile beyond
any municipality having a population of 10,000 persons or more according to the
latest federal census.
         UNRESTRICTED AREA. All areas outside the boundaries of a restricted
area as defined in this section.
      (2)   Referenced materials. This section includes references to certain
matter or materials. The text of the referenced materials is not included in
the legislation contained in this section. Information on the availability of
the referenced materials as well as the date of, and/or the particular edition
or version of the material is included in this section. For materials subject
to change, only the specific versions specified in this section are referenced.
Material is referenced as it exists on the effective date of this section.
Except for subsequent annual publication of existing (unmodified) Code of
Federal Regulation compilations, any amendment or revision to a referenced
document is not applicable unless and until this section has been amended to
specify the new dates.
         A.   Availability. The referenced materials are available as follows:
            1.   Clean Air Act. Information and copies may be obtained by
writing to: Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders, PO Box 371954,
Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. The full text of the act as amended in 1990 is also
available in electronic format at www.epa.gov/oar/caa/. A copy of the act is
also available for inspection and use at most public libraries and the State
Library of Ohio.
            2.   Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.). Information and copies
may be obtained by writing to: Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders,
PO Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. The full text of the C.F.R. is also
available in electronic format at http://www.ecfr.gov. The C.F.R. compilations
are also available for inspection and use at most public libraries and the
State Library of Ohio.
            3.   National Fire Protection Association. Information on the
National Fire Protection Association codes may be obtained by contacting the
Association at 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02169-7471, 617-770-
3000. Codes may be ordered at www.nfpa.org/catalog/home/index.asp. Copies of
the code exist or are available at most public libraries and the State Library
of Ohio.
         B.   Referenced materials.
            1.   40 C.F.R. § 60.2974: “Am I required to apply for and obtain a
title V operating permit for my air curtain incinerator that burns only wood
waste, clean lumber, and yard waste?” as published in the July 1, 2017 Code of
Federal Regulations.
            2.   40 C.F.R. § 60.3069: “Am I required to apply for and obtain a
title V operating permit for my air curtain incinerator that burns only wood
waste, clean lumber, and yard waste?” as published in the July 1, 2017 Code of
Federal Regulations.
            3.   NFPA publication 1403: “Standard on Live Fire Training
Evolutions, Chapter 4, Acquired Structures” published April 30, 2007.
            4.   Section 129 of the Clean Air Act, contained in 42 U.S.C. §
7429: “Solid waste combustion” published January 6, 2017 in Supplement IV of
the 2012 Edition of the United States Code.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-01)
   (b)   Relation to other laws.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any provision in O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19, no open
burning shall be conducted in an area where an air alert, warning or emergency
under O.A.C. Chapter 3745-25 is in effect.
      (2)   No provisions of O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19 permitting open burning,
and no permission to open burn granted by the Ohio EPA, shall exempt any person
from compliance with any section of the Ohio Revised Code, or any regulation of
any state department, or any local ordinance or regulation dealing with open
burning.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-02)
   (c)   Open burning in restricted areas.
      (1)   No person or property owner shall cause or allow open burning in a
restricted area except as provided in divisions (c)(2) to (c)(4) of this
section or in R.C. § 3704.11.
      (2)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes without
notification to or permission from the Ohio EPA:
         A.   Heating tar, welding, acetylene torches, highway safety flares,
heating for warmth of outdoor workers and strikers, smudge pots and similar
occupational needs.
         B.   Bonfires, campfires and outdoor fireplace equipment, whether for
cooking food for human consumption, pleasure, religious, ceremonial, warmth,
recreational or similar purposes, if the following conditions are met:
            1.   They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or
equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or
lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood;
            2.   They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and
            3.   They shall have a total fuel area of three feet or less in
diameter and two feet or less in height.
         C.   Disposal of hazardous explosive materials, military munitions or
explosive devices that require immediate action to prevent endangerment of
human health, public safety, property or the environment and that are excluded
from the requirement to obtain a hazardous waste permit pursuant to O.A.C.
3745-50-45(D)(1)(d).
         D.   Recognized training in the use of fire extinguishers for
commercial or industrial fire prevention.
         E.   Fires set at the direction of federal, state, and local law
enforcement officials for the purpose of destruction of cannabis sativa
(marijuana) plant vegetation, processed marijuana material and/or other drugs
seized by federal, state, or local law enforcement officials.
         F.   Fires allowed by divisions (c)(2)A., (c)(2)B. and (c)(2)D. of
this section shall not be used for waste disposal purposes and shall be of
minimum size sufficient for their intended purpose; the fuel shall be chosen to
minimize the generation and emission of air contaminants.
      (3)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes with prior
notification to the Ohio EPA in accordance with division (d)(2) of this
section:
         A.   Prevention or control of disease or pests, with written or oral
verification to the Ohio EPA from the Ohio Department of Health or local health
department, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, cooperative
extension service, Ohio Department of Agriculture or U.S. Department of
Agriculture, that open burning is the only appropriate disposal method.
         B.   Bonfires or campfires used for ceremonial purposes that do not
meet the requirements of division (c)(2)B. of this section, provided the
following conditions are met:
            1.   They have a total fuel area no greater than five feet in
diameter by five feet in height and burn no longer than three hours;
            2.   They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and
            3.   They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or
equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or
lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood.
         C.   Disposal of agricultural waste generated on the premises if the
following conditions are observed:
            1.   The fire is set only when atmospheric conditions will readily
dissipate contaminants;
            2.   The fire does not create a visibility hazard on the roadways,
railroad tracks or air fields;
            3.   The fire is located at a point on the premises no less than
1,000 feet from any inhabited building not located on the premises;
            4.   The wastes are stacked and dried to provide the best
practicable condition for efficient burning; and
            5.   No materials are burned which contain rubber, grease, asphalt,
liquid petroleum products, plastics or building materials.
         D.   Recognized horticultural, silvicultural (forestry), range
management, prairie and grassland management, invasive species management, or
wildlife management practices, if all of the following conditions are met:
            1.   The fire shall be performed within 180 days of submitting the
notification.
            2.   The fire shall be performed when it is anticipated weather
conditions will minimize the dispersion of smoke near populated areas and the
smoke does not create a visibility hazard on roadways, railroad tracks, or air
fields. Smoke dispersion conditions shall be evaluated before, during, and
after the fire and actions taken to minimize smoke impacts.
            3.   The person making the notification shall notify the local fire
department having jurisdiction over the burn area at least 24 hours before the
fire is anticipated to occur.
            4.   The person making the notification shall provide reasonable
notification to populations potentially impacted by the smoke before the fire
occurs. Populations potentially impacted shall include, at a minimum, those
within one-quarter mile of the burn site. Reasonable notification shall include
one of the following:
               a.   Posting notice of intent to burn, including contact
information for the person making the notification and the anticipated date
that the fire will occur, within open view from a public roadway adjacent to
and outside of the property on which the fire will occur.
               b.   Posting a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in
the local community in which the fire will occur. The notice shall include, at
a minimum, the address of the property at which the fire will occur, contact
information for the person making the notification and the anticipated date
that the fire will occur.
               c.   Delivering written notice directly to residences and
businesses within a minimum of one-quarter mile of the burn site. Notices shall
include, at a minimum, the address of the property at which the fire will
occur, contact information for the person making the notification and the
anticipated date that the fire will occur.
            5.   The person making the notification shall document information
on the weather, smoke conditions, any air quality concerns before, during, and
after the fire, the actual number of acres burned, the time the fire was
initially kindled, the time when active kindling ceased and the time at which
mop up activities ceased. The person making the notification shall maintain
this information for a minimum of one year from the date of the fire and shall
provide this information to the appropriate Ohio EPA district office or local
air agency within ten days upon request.
            6.   Reasonable access to the burn site shall be provided to Ohio
EPA representatives at any time during the fire.
      (4)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes upon
receipt of written permission from the Ohio EPA, in accordance with division
(d)(1) of this section, provided that any conditions specified in the
permission are followed:
         A.   Disposal of ignitable or explosive materials where the Ohio EPA
determines that there is no practical alternate method of disposal, excluding
those materials identified in division (c)(2)C. of this section;
         B.   Instruction in methods of fire fighting or for research in the
control of fires as recognized by the State Fire Marshal Division of the Ohio
Department of Commerce and the guidelines set forth in the National Fire
Protection Association’s (NFPA) publication 1403, Standard on Live Fire
Training Evolutions, Chapter 4, Acquired Structures, provided that the
application required in division (d)(1)A. of this section is submitted by the
commercial or public entity responsible for the instruction;
         C.   In emergency or other extraordinary circumstances for any purpose
determined to be necessary by the Director and performed as identified in the
appendix to O.A.C. § 3745-19-03. If deemed necessary, the open burning may be
authorized with prior oral approval by the Director followed by the issuance of
a written permission to open burn within seven working days of the oral
approval;
         D.   Fires or pyrotechnic effects, for purposes other than waste
disposal, set as part of commercial film-making or video production activities
for motion pictures and television.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-03)
   (d)   Permission to individuals and notification to the Ohio EPA.
      (1)   Permission.
         A.   An application for permission to open burn shall be submitted in
writing to Ohio EPA. The applicant shall allow Ohio EPA at least ten working
days to review the permit. Applicant may proceed with burn upon receipt of
written permission from Ohio EPA. Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays shall
not be considered working days. The application shall be in such form and
contain such information as required by the Ohio EPA.
         B.   Except as provided in divisions (d)(1)F. and (d)(1)G. of this
section, the applications shall contain, as a minimum, the following
information:
            1.   The purpose of the proposed burning;
            2.   The quantity or acreage and the nature of the materials to be
burned;
            3.   The date or dates when the burning will take place;
            4.   The location of the burning site, including a map showing
distances to residences, populated areas, roadways, air fields and other
pertinent landmarks; and
            5.   The methods or actions which will be taken to reduce the
emissions of air contaminants.
         C.   Permission to open burn shall not be granted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Ohio EPA that open burning is necessary
to the public interest; will be conducted in a time, place and manner as to
minimize the emission of air contaminants, when atmospheric conditions are
appropriate; and will have no serious detrimental effect upon adjacent
properties or the occupants thereof. The Ohio EPA may impose such conditions as
may be necessary to accomplish the purpose of O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19.
         D.   Except as provided in division (d)(1)F. of this section,
permission to open burn must be obtained for each specific project. In
emergencies where public health or environmental quality will be seriously
threatened by delay while written permission is sought, the fire may be set
with oral permission of the Ohio EPA.
         E.   Violations of any of the conditions set forth by the Ohio EPA in
granting permission to open burn shall be grounds for revocation of that
permission and refusal to grant future permission, as well as for the
imposition of other sanctions provided by law.
         F.   The Ohio Department of Commerce, Division of State Fire Marshal,
may request permission to open burn on an annual basis for the purpose of
training firefighters on pre- flashover conditions using the Ohio Fire
Academy’s mobile training laboratory at either the academy or at other training
sites in Ohio. The annual application required pursuant to division (d)(1)A. of
this section shall contain information as required in division (d)(1)B. of this
section, except the information required in divisions (d)(1)B.3. and (d)(1)B.4.
of this section need not be provided unless it is available at the time of
submittal of the application. The Academy shall contact the appropriate Ohio
EPA District Office or local air agency at least five working days before each
training session of the date or dates when the training session will take place
and its location. Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays shall not be considered a
working day.
         G.   For open burning defined under division (c)(4)B. of this section
and O.A.C. 3745-19-04(C)(2), permission to open burn shall not be granted
unless the applicant provides proof of written notice of intent to demolish
received by the appropriate Ohio EPA field office in accordance with O.A.C.
3745-20-03.
      (2)   Notification.
         A.   Notification shall be submitted in writing at least ten working
days before the fire is to be set. Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays shall
not be considered a working day. It shall be in such form and contain such
information as shall be required by the Ohio EPA.
         B.   Such notification shall inform the Ohio EPA regarding the
following:
            1.   The purpose of the proposed burning;
            2.   The nature and quantities of materials to be burned;
            3.   The date or dates when the burning will take place; and
            4.   The location of the burning site.
         C.   The Ohio EPA, after receiving notification, may determine that
the open burning is not allowed under O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19 and the Ohio EPA
shall notify the applicant to this effect.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-05)
   (e)   Penalty. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition, the
offender shall be required to pay the cost of proper disposal of the materials
burned. The cost of proper disposal of the materials burned shall be the amount
it would have cost to dispose of the materials in a manner that is consistent
with the air, water and solid waste laws, ordinances and regulations of the
municipality and the state.
§ 660.09 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
   (a)   No person shall abandon or knowingly permit to remain on public or
private property, any excavation, well, cesspool or structure which is in the
process of construction, reconstruction, repair or alteration unless the same
is adequately protected by suitable barricades and guarded by warning devices
or lights at night so that the condition will not reasonably prove dangerous to
life or limb.
   (b)   No person shall destroy, remove, damage or extinguish any barricade or
warning light that is placed for the protection of the public so as to prevent
injury to life or limb.
   (c)   Any owner or agent in control of a premises upon which a basement,
cellar, well or cistern has been abandoned due to demolition, failure to build
or any other reason shall cause the same to be filled to the ground surface
with rock, gravel, earth or other suitable material.
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 660.10 SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS; DAMAGE OR INJURY.
   (a)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a sidewalk or
playground any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or other articles which may
damage property of another or injure any person or animal traveling along or
upon the sidewalk or playground.
   (b)   No person shall walk on, or allow any animal upon, or injure or deface
in any way, any soft or newly laid sidewalk pavement.
   (c)   No person shall place, deposit or maintain any merchandise, goods,
material or equipment upon any sidewalk so as to obstruct pedestrian traffic
thereon except for such reasonable time as may be actually necessary for the
delivery or pickup of the articles. In no case shall the obstruction remain on
the sidewalk for more than one hour.
   (d)   No person shall unload upon, or transport any heavy merchandise,
goods, material or equipment over or across any sidewalk or curb without first
placing some sufficient protection over the pavement to protect against damage
or injury.
   (e)   No person shall allow any cellar or trap door, coal chute or elevator
or lift opening in any sidewalk to remain open without providing suitable
safeguards to protect and warn pedestrian traffic of the dangerous conditions.
   (f)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 660.11 NOTICE TO FILL LOTS, REMOVE PUTRID SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall fail to comply with the following requirements within
the lawful time after service or publication of the notice or resolution is
made as required by law: to fill or drain any lot or land or remove all putrid
substances therefrom, or remove all obstructions from culverts, covered drains
or natural watercourses as provided in R.C. § 715.47.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 660.12 FENCES.
   (a)   No person shall erect or maintain any fence charged with electrical
current.
   (b)   No person shall erect or maintain a barbed wire fence which abuts or
is adjacent to any public street or sidewalk. This division (b) does not
prevent the placement and use of not more than two strands of barbed wire on
top of a fence other than a barbed wire fence, provided the strands are not
less than 48 inches from the ground.
   (c)   Barbed wire partition fences may be erected and maintained as provided
in R.C. § 971.03.
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 660.13 SMOKING IN PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY.
   (a)   As used in this section, PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY means:
      (1)   Enclosed theaters, except the lobby; opera houses; auditoriums;
classrooms; elevators; rooms in which persons are confined as a matter of
health care, including but not limited to a hospital room and a room in a
residential care facility serving as the residence of a person living in the
residential care facility.
      (2)   All buildings and other enclosed structures owned by the state, its
agencies, or political subdivisions, including but not limited to hospitals and
state institutions for persons with mental illnesses and persons with
intellectual disabilities; university and college buildings, except rooms
within those buildings used primarily as the residences of students or other
persons affiliated with the university or college; office buildings; libraries;
museums; and vehicles used in public transportation. That portion of a building
or other enclosed structure that is owned by the state, a state agency or a
political subdivision, and that is used primarily as a food service
establishment, is not a place of public assembly.
      (3)   Each portion of a building or enclosed structure that is not
included in division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is a place of public
assembly if it has a seating capacity of 50 or more persons and is available to
the public. Restaurants, food service establishments, dining rooms, cafes,
cafeterias or other rooms used primarily for the service of food, as well as
bowling alleys and places licensed by the Ohio Division of Liquor Control to
sell intoxicating beverages for consumption on the premises, are not places of
public assembly.
   (b)   For the purpose of separating persons who smoke from persons who do
not smoke for the comfort and health of persons not smoking, in every place of
public assembly there shall be an area where smoking is not permitted, which
shall be designated a no smoking area, provided that not more than one-half of
the rooms in any health care facility in which persons are confined as a matter
of health care may be designated as smoking areas in their entirety. The
designation shall be made before the place of public assembly is made available
to the public. In places included in division (a)(1) of this section, the local
fire authority having jurisdiction shall designate the no smoking area. In
places included in division (a)(2) of this section that are owned by the state
or its agencies, the Ohio Director of Administrative Services shall designate
the area, and if the place is owned by a political subdivision, its legislative
authority shall designate an officer who shall designate the area. In places
included in division (a)(3) of this section, the person having control of the
operations of the place of public assembly shall designate the no smoking area.
In places included in division (a)(2) of this section which are also included
in division (a)(1) of this section, the officer who has authority to designate
the area in places in division (a)(2) of this section shall designate the no
smoking area. A no smoking area may include the entire place of public
assembly. Designations shall be made by the placement of signs that are clearly
visible and that state “no smoking.” No person shall remove signs from areas
designated as no smoking areas.
   (c)   This section does not affect or modify the prohibition contained in
R.C. § 3313.751(B).
   (d)   No person shall smoke in any area designated as a no smoking area in
accordance with division (b) of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3791.031)
§ 660.14 WEEDS AND ACCUMULATION OF LITTER IN PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   Weed growth restrictions on private property.
      (1)   Cutting and removing of noxious weeds.
         A.   Any person owning or having the right to the possession of any
lot or land within the village shall at all times keep the property free and
clear from all noxious weeds and rank vegetation and shall be required to cut
all such weeds and vegetation on the lots owned or controlled by him or her at
least twice in every year, once between June 1 and July 1 and once between
August 1 and September 1.
         B.   Any person owning or having the right to possession of lots or
land within the village shall at all times keep any weeds or vegetation on such
lot or land below 12 inches in height at all times even if this requires
cutting such weeds or vegetation more than twice in every year.
         C.   Such cutting and removal as required by this division shall not
be applicable to those lands zoned and being used as agricultural property.
      (2)   Definition of noxious weeds. Noxious weeds and rank vegetation
shall include, but not be limited to:
         A.   Any weeds such as poison ivy, poison oak, jimson weed, burdock,
ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, milkweed, mulleins, or other weeds of a like kind;
         B.   Bushes of the species of tall, common, or European barberry,
further known as berberis vulgaris or its horticultural varieties;
         C.   Any weeds, grass, or plants other than trees, bushes, flowers, or
other ornamental plants, growing to a height exceeding 12 inches; and
         D.   Any weed or wild growth which, by reason of the pollen or seed it
spreads/produces, or the density of its growth, or its unsightliness,
injuriously affects the public health, safety, or welfare.
      (3)   Noxious weeds and public nuisances. All noxious weeds are declared
to be public nuisances.
      (4)   Frequency of cutting of noxious weeds. All noxious weeds shall be
cut and removed or destroyed by the owner or other person having the right to
possession of any lot or land within the village on which the weeds or wild
growths are growing, as often as necessary to prevent the development of pollen
and/or seed, and at least 100 feet from all lot lines which abut upon any
occupied premises or any public thoroughfare.
   (b)   Accumulation of litter on private property.
      (1)   Removal of litter. Any person owning or having a right to
possession of any lot or land within the village shall at all times keep the
property free and clear from all litter, solid waste, or demolition materials
and shall not permit such materials to be collected or remain upon such land
which constitutes or may cause a detriment to the public health.
      (2)   Definition of litter and solid waste.
         A.   As used in this section, LITTER or SOLID WASTE includes any
unwanted solid or semi-solid materials which result from residential,
industrial, commercial, agricultural, or community operations including, but
not limited to, garbage, waste, peelings from fruits or vegetables, rubbish,
ashes, cans, bottles, wire, oil, paper, cartons, boxes, parts of automobiles,
tires, wagons, furniture, glass, combustible or non-combustible material,
street dirt, debris, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
         B.   SOLID WASTE does not include demolition material or other
substances that are not harmful or inimical to the public health.
      (3)   Definition of demolition materials. As used in this section,
DEMOLITION MATERIAL means material from construction or demolition operations,
which are those items affixed to the structure being constructed or demolished
such as brick, concrete, asphalt, stone, glass, wallboard, framing, finishing
lumber, roofing materials, plumbing, plumbing fixtures, wiring, and insulation,
but excludes materials whose removal has been required prior to demolition.
      (4)   Periods of storage for solid waste or demolition materials. No
person owning or having the right to the possession of any lot or land within
the village shall cause or allow solid waste or demolition materials to collect
or remain upon such land for a period longer than seven days.
      (5)   Containers for solid waste.
         A.   Except for materials too large for containers, all litter or
solid waste shall be stored in watertight containers which are constructed of
durable, rust resistant materials that are substantially impervious to animals,
rodents, or insects.
         B.   Such containers shall have covers, lids, and/or doors which shall
be tight fitting.
      (6)   Bulk containers. Structures with multiple dwelling units, multiple
structures, or other establishments producing litter or solid waste shall be
supplied with containers as defined in division (b)(5) above which are
sufficient in size to meet the needs of the tenant or occupant.
      (7)   Solid waste and litter are public nuisances. All litter, solid
waste, or demolition materials permitted to accumulate for a period in excess
of seven days is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
   (c)   Notice to abate.
      (1)   Written notice required. In the event that the owner or the person
having the right to possession of any lot or land within the village fails to
cut or remove noxious weeds are required pursuant to division (a) above or
permits litter, solid waste, or demolition materials to collect or remain upon
such land for a period longer than seven days in violation of division (b)
above, then the village solicitor, Mayor, public health department official, or
police officer, shall cause written notice to be served on the owner or the
person having the right to possession of such lot or land, notifying him or her
of such violation and requiring that the noxious weeds be cut or removed or the
litter, solid waste, or demolition materials removed within five days after
service of such notice.
      (2)   Service of notice. For purposes of this section, notice may be
served in any manner permitted under the Ohio Rules of Civil Procedure. If the
address of the titled owner of the lot or land or the person having the right
to possession of such property is unknown, it shall be sufficient to publish
the notice of the violation once in the Circleville Herald or other newspaper
of general circulation in this municipality.
      (3)   Contents of notice. The notice required to be given as set forth in
this section shall state the following information:
         A.   A statement that the noxious weeds, litter, solid waste, or
demolition materials are considered to be a public nuisance;
         B.   The description and location of the lot or land within the
village where such noxious weeds, liter, solid waste, or demolition materials
are situated;
         C.   A statement that the noxious weeds, vegetation, litter, solid
waste, or demolition materials must be removed from the premises within five
days after service of such notice and order of the same;
         D.   A statement of the penalties provided for noncompliance; and
         E.   A statement that in the event that the noxious weeds, vegetation,
litter, solid waste, or demolition materials are not removed within five days,
that the village will cause the same to be removed and that the property owner
will be assessed the costs incurred by the village in removing such noxious
weeds, vegetation, litter, solid waste, or demolition materials.
   (d)   Remedy upon failure to comply.
      (1)   If the owner of the lot or land or the person upon whom notice is
given pursuant to division (c) above fails to comply with this section within
five days of receipt of the notice, then the Mayor, public health department
official, or police officer is authorized to enter upon such lot or land and
cause the litter, solid waste, or demolition materials to be collected and
removed or the noxious weeds and vegetation constituting a nuisance or
endangering the public health to be cut or destroyed, by the direct employment
of labor or by authorizing another person to perform the services on behalf of
the village.
      (2)   The fact that the noxious weeds, vegetation, litter, solid waste,
or demolition materials are not removed from any lot or land within the village
within five days after receipt of the notice as set forth in division (c) is
prima-facia evidence of willful failure to simply with the notice and shall
subject the owner or person upon whom notice was served to the penalties set
forth in division (f).
   (e)   Written return to county auditor; village costs entered as lien upon
property.
      (1)   In the event that it is necessary for the village to remove any
noxious weeds, vegetation, litter, solid waste, or demolition material from a
lot or land within the village as a result of the owner or the person having
the possession of the property within the village failing to comply with
division (c), then the Mayor, public health department official, or police
officer shall report the costs of removal to the Village Council, including the
costs of investigation, handling of the nuisance complaint, and the costs of
service and notification, and thereafter, upon approval of Village Council, the
Clerk of Council shall cause a written return to be made to the county auditor
with a statement of such costs together with a description of the premises
concerned.
      (2   This written return shall be in the form as prescribed under the
provisions of the Ohio Revised Code and the amounts, when allowed, shall be
entered upon the tax duplicate so as to constitute a lien upon such lands from
and after the date of entry, to be collected as other taxes and returned to the
municipality with the general fund upon collection.
      (3)   Such remedy shall be in addition to the penalty provided in
division (f).
   (f)   Penalty. Whoever violates any provision of divisions (a) or (b) shall
be guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first offense; on a second offense
within one year after the first offense, such person is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the
first offense such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 6-8-1998)
CHAPTER 666
Sex Related Offenses
666.01   Definitions.
666.02   Unlawful sexual conduct with a minor.
666.03   Sexual imposition.
666.04   Public indecency.
666.05   Voyeurism.
666.06   Polygraph examinations for victims; restrictions on use.
666.07   Procuring; engagement in sexual activity for hire.
666.08   Soliciting.
666.09   Loitering to engage in solicitation.
666.10   Prostitution.
666.11   Rules of evidence.
666.12   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles.
666.13   Displaying matter harmful to juveniles.
666.14   Deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles.
666.15   Presumptions; notice.
666.16   Declaratory judgment.
666.17   Injunction; abatement of nuisance.
666.18   Unlawful operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct.
666.19   Juveniles on the premises of adult entertainment establishments
prohibited.
666.20   Sexually oriented businesses; illegal operation and activity.
666.21   Unlawful advertising of massage.
666.22   Nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images.
666.23   Grooming.
666.99   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators;
registration.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Assistance to victims of sexual assault, see R.C. §§ 2907.28 through 2907.30
   Child victim, disposition of, see R.C. § 2945.481
   Examination and treatment for venereal disease; HIV tests, see R.C. §
2907.27
   Registration of sex offenders in cities and counties, see R.C. §§ 2950.01 et
seq.
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Sentencing generally, see Ch.
698
   Sexual conduct with an animal, see §
618.17
   Spreading contagion, see §
660.02
§ 666.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HARMFUL TO JUVENILES. That quality of any material or performance describing
or representing nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-masochistic
abuse in any form to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, appeals to
the prurient interest of juveniles in sex.
      (2)   The material or performance is patently offensive to prevailing
standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable
for juveniles.
      (3)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, lacks
serious literary, artistic, political, and scientific value for juveniles.
   JUVENILE. Any unmarried person under 18 years of age.
   LICENSED MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL. Any of the following medical professionals:
      (1)   A physician assistant licensed under R.C. Chapter 4730;
      (2)   A physician authorized under R.C. Chapter 4731 to practice medicine
and surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric medicine and
surgery;
      (3)   A massage therapist licensed under R.C. Chapter 4731.
   MATERIAL. Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print, picture,
figure, image, description, motion picture film, video cassette, laser disc,
phonograph record, cassette tape, compact disc, or other tangible thing capable
of arousing interest through sight, sound, or touch and includes an image or
text appearing on a computer monitor, television screen, liquid crystal
display, or similar display device or an image or text recorded on a computer
hard disk, computer floppy disk, compact disk, magnetic tape, or similar data
storage device.
   MENTAL HEALTH CLIENT OR PATIENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.51.
   MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.115.
   MINOR. A person under the age of 18.
   NUDITY. The showing, representation, or depiction of human male or female
genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full, opaque covering, or of
a female breast with less than a full, opaque covering of any portion thereof
below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state.
   OBSCENE. When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to ordinary
adults or, if it is designed for sexual deviates or other specially susceptible
group, judged with reference to that group, any material or performance is
“obscene” if any of the following apply:
      (1)   Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest.
      (2)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, or nudity in a way that tends
to represent human beings as mere objects of sexual appetite.
      (3)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality.
      (4)   Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological interest by
displaying or depicting human bodily functions of elimination in a way that
inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary sensibilities, without
serving any genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or artistic
purpose.
      (5)   It contains a series of displays or descriptions of sexual
activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme or
bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality, or human bodily functions of
elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal to
prurient or scatological interest, when the appeal to such an interest is
primarily for its own sake or for commercial exploitation, rather than
primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or
artistic purpose.
   PERFORMANCE. Any motion picture, preview, trailer, play, show, skit, dance,
or other exhibition performed before an audience.
   PLACE WHERE A PERSON HAS A REASONABLE EXPECTATION OF PRIVACY. A place where
a reasonable person would believe that the person could fully disrobe in
private.
   PRIVATE AREA. The genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or female breast below the
top of the areola, where nude or covered by an undergarment.
   PROSTITUTE. A male or female who promiscuously engages in sexual activity
for hire, regardless of whether the hire is paid to the prostitute or to
another.
   SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person or the
condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained.
   SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both.
   SEXUAL CONDUCT. Vaginal intercourse between a male and female; anal
intercourse, fellatio, and cunnilingus between persons regardless of sex; and,
without privilege to do so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of the
body or any instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal or anal
opening of another. Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to complete
vaginal or anal intercourse.
   SEXUAL CONTACT. Any touching of an erogenous zone of another, including
without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if the
person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually arousing or
gratifying either person.
   SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when in a
state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   SPOUSE. A person married to an offender at the time of an alleged offense,
except that such person shall not be considered the spouse when any of the
following apply:
      (1)   When the parties have entered into a written separation agreement
pursuant to R.C. § 3103.06.
      (2)   When an action is pending between the parties for annulment,
divorce, dissolution of marriage, or legal separation.
      (3)   In the case of an action for legal separation, after the effective
date of the judgment for legal separation.
(R.C. § 2907.01)
§ 666.02 UNLAWFUL SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH A MINOR.
   (a)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in sexual
conduct with another when the offender knows the other person is 13 years of
age or older but less than 16 years of age, or the offender is reckless in that
regard.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful sexual conduct
with a minor.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2), unlawful sexual
conduct with a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(3) of this section, if
the offender is less than four years older than the other person, unlawful
sexual conduct with a minor is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03 or 2907.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of former R.C. § 2907.12, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, unlawful sexual conduct with a
minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.04)
§ 666.03 SEXUAL IMPOSITION.
   (a)   No person shall have sexual contact with another; cause another to
have sexual contact with the offender; or cause two or more other persons to
have sexual contact when the offender knows that the sexual contact is
offensive to the other person, or one of the other persons, or is reckless in
that regard.
   (b)   No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section solely
upon the victim’s testimony unsupported by other evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of sexual imposition, a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section, R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, former R.C. § 2907.12, or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, R.C. § 2907.02,
2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, former R.C. § 2907.12, or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any combination of those
sections, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree and,
notwithstanding the range of jail terms prescribed in R.C. § 2929.24, the court
may impose on the offender a definite jail term of not more than one year.
(R.C. § 2907.06)
Statutory reference:
   Gross sexual imposition, felony, see R.C. § 2907.05
   Notice to licensing board or agency upon indictment, conviction or guilty
plea of mental health professional, see R.C. §§ 2907.17 and 2907.18
§ 666.04 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (a)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following, under
circumstances in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and
affront others who are in the person’s physical proximity and who are not
members of the person’s household:
      (1)   Expose the person’s private parts.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following, under circumstances
in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and affront another
person who is in the person’s physical proximity, who is a minor, and who is
not the spouse of the offender:
      (1)   Engage in masturbation.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (4)   Expose the person’s private parts with the purpose of personal
sexual arousal or gratification or to lure the minor into sexual activity.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public indecency and
shall be punished as provided in divisions (c)(2), (c)(3), (c)(4) and (c)(5) of
this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(2), a violation
of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the third degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
a violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the
offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(3), a violation
of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was likely to view
and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if any person who was
likely to view and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(4), a violation
of division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(5), a violation
of division (b)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (b)(4) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (d)   (1)   If either of the following applies, the court may determine at
the time of sentencing whether to classify the offender as a tier I sex
offender/child-victim offender for a violation of division (b)(4) of this
section:
         A.   The offender is less than ten years older than the other person.
         B.   The offender is ten or more years older than the other person and
the offender has not previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any
violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance.
      (2)   If the offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (b)(4) of this section, is ten or more years older than the other
person, and previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation
of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the court shall issue an order at the time of sentencing that
classifies the offender as a tier I sex offender/child-victim offender subject
to registration under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05, and 2950.06.
(R.C. § 2907.09)
   (e)   A mother is entitled to breast-feed her baby in any location of a
place of public accommodation, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, wherein the mother
otherwise is permitted.
(R.C. § 3781.55)
Statutory reference:
   Bail considerations for persons charged, see R.C. § 2907.41
§ 666.05 VOYEURISM.
   (a)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself
or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the
privacy of another, to spy or eavesdrop upon another.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly commit trespass or otherwise secretly or
surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, broadcast, stream, or otherwise
record another person, in a place where a person has a reasonable expectation
of privacy, for the purpose of viewing the private areas of that person.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly commit trespass or otherwise secretly or
surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, broadcast, stream, or otherwise
record a minor, in a place where a person has a reasonable expectation of
privacy, for the purpose of viewing the private areas of the minor.
   (d)   No person shall secretly or surreptitiously videotape, film,
photograph, or otherwise record another person above, under, or through the
clothing being worn by that other person for the purpose of viewing the body
of, or the undergarments worn by, that other person.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of voyeurism.
      (1)   A violation of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (d) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (4)   A violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.08)
§ 666.06 POLYGRAPH EXAMINATIONS FOR VICTIMS; RESTRICTIONS ON USE.
   (a)   (1)   A peace officer, prosecutor, other public official, defendant,
defendant's attorney, alleged juvenile offender, or alleged juvenile offender's
attorney shall not ask or require a victim of an alleged sex offense to submit
to a polygraph examination as a condition for proceeding with the investigation
or prosecution of the alleged sex offense.
      (2)   The refusal of the victim of an alleged sex offense to submit to a
polygraph examination shall not prevent the investigation of the alleged sex
offense, the filing of criminal charges with respect to the alleged sex
offense, or the prosecution of the alleged perpetrator of the alleged sex
offense.
   (b)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ALLEGED JUVENILE OFFENDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2930.01.
      (2)   PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.51.
      (3)   POLYGRAPH EXAMINATION. Any mechanical or electrical instrument or
device of any type used or allegedly used to examine, test or question an
individual for the purpose of determining the individual’s truthfulness.
      (4)   PROSECUTION. The prosecution of criminal charges in a criminal
prosecution or the prosecution of a delinquent child complaint in a delinquency
proceeding.
      (5)   PROSECUTOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
      (6)   PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 117.01.
      (7)   SEX OFFENSE. A violation of any provision of §§
666.02 to
666.05 or R.C. §§ 2907.02 to 2907.09.
(R.C. § 2907.10)
§ 666.07 PROCURING; ENGAGEMENT IN SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE.
   (a)   Procuring.
      (1)   No person, knowingly and for gain, shall do either of the
following:
         A.   Entice or solicit another to patronize a prostitute or brothel;
         B.   Procure a prostitute for another to patronize, or take or direct
another at the other’s request to any place for the purpose of patronizing a
prostitute.
      (2)   No person, having authority or responsibility over the use of
premises, shall knowingly permit the premises to be used for the purpose of
engaging in sexual activity for hire.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (a)(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this section is
guilty of procuring. Except as otherwise provided in this division, procuring
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the prostitute who is procured,
patronized, or otherwise involved in a violation of division (a)(1)B. of this
section is under 18 years of age at the time of the violation, regardless of
whether the offender who violates division (a)(1)B. of this section knows the
prostitute’s age, or if a prostitute who engages in sexual activity for hire in
premises used in violation of division (a)(2) of this section is under 18 years
of age at the time of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who
violates division (a)(2) of this section knows the prostitute’s age, procuring
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.23)
   (b)   Engagement in sexual activity for hire.
      (1)   As used in this division (b):
         A.   PERSON WITH A DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY. Has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2905.32.
         B.   SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE. An implicit or explicit agreement to
provide sexual activity in exchange for anything of value paid to the person
engaging in such sexual activity, to any person trafficking that person, or to
any person associated with either such person.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly induce, entice, or procure another to
engage in sexual activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything
of value to the other person.
      (3)   No person shall recklessly induce, entice, or procure another to
engage in sexual activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything
of value to the other person if the other person is a person with a
developmental disability and the offender knows or has reasonable cause to
believe that the other person is a person with a developmental disability.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (b)(2) of this section is guilty of
engaging in prostitution, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates
division (b)(3) of this section is guilty of engaging in prostitution with a
person with a developmental disability, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. In sentencing an offender under this division for a
violation of division (b)(2) of this section, the court shall require the
offender to attend an education or treatment program aimed at preventing
persons from inducing, enticing, or procuring another to engage in sexual
activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything of value to the
other person. Notwithstanding the fine specified in R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a) for
a misdemeanor of the first degree, in sentencing an offender under this
division for a violation of division (b)(2) of this section, the court may
impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $1,500.
(R.C. § 2907.231)
§ 666.08 SOLICITING.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly solicit another to engage in sexual activity
for hire in exchange for the person receiving anything of value from the other
person.
   (b)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in conduct in violation of division (a) of this section.
   (c)   As used in division (a) of this section, SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE
means an implicit or explicit agreement to provide sexual activity in exchange
for anything of value paid to the person engaging in such sexual activity, to
any person trafficking that person, or to any person associated with either
such person.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
soliciting. Soliciting is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of engaging
in solicitation after a positive HIV test, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.24)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 666.09 LOITERING TO ENGAGE IN SOLICITATION.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to solicit another to engage in sexual
activity for hire and while in or near a public place, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Beckon to, stop or attempt to stop another;
      (2)   Engage or attempt to engage another in conversation;
      (3)   Stop or attempt to stop the operator of a vehicle or approach a
stationary vehicle;
      (4)   If the offender is the operator of or a passenger in a vehicle,
stop, attempt to stop, beckon to, attempt to beckon to, or entice another to
approach or enter the vehicle of which the offender is the operator or in which
the offender is the passenger;
      (5)   Interfere with the free passage of another.
   (b)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in conduct in violation of division (a) of this section.
   (c)   As used in division (a) of this section:
      (1)   PUBLIC PLACE. Any of the following:
         A.   A street, road, highway, thoroughfare, bikeway, walkway,
sidewalk, bridge, alley, alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot or
transportation facility.
         B.   A doorway or entrance way to a building that fronts on a place
described in division (1)A. of this definition.
         C.   A place not described in division (1)A. or (1)B. of this
definition that is open to the public.
      (2)   VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
loitering to engage in solicitation, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
loitering to engage in solicitation after a positive HIV test, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.241)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 666.10 PROSTITUTION.
   (a)   No person shall engage in sexual activity for hire.
   (b)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in sexual activity for hire.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
prostitution, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of engaging
in prostitution after a positive HIV test, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.25)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 666.11 RULES OF EVIDENCE.
   (a)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a place is a
brothel, evidence as to the reputation of the place and as to the reputation of
the persons who inhabit or frequent it is admissible on the question of whether
the place is or is not a brothel.
   (b)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a person is a
prostitute, evidence as to the reputation of the person is admissible on the
question of whether the person is or is not a prostitute.
   (c)   In any prosecution for a violation of §§
666.07 to
666.10, proof of a prior conviction of the accused of any such offense or
substantially equivalent offense is admissible in support of the charge.
   (d)   The prohibition contained in R.C. § 2317.02(D) against testimony by a
husband or wife concerning communications between them does not apply, and the
accused’s spouse may testify concerning any such communication in any of the
following cases:
      (1)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §
666.07 and the spouse testifying was the prostitute involved in the offense or
the person who used the offender’s premises to engage in sexual activity for
hire;
      (2)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §
666.08 or
666.10.
(R.C. § 2907.26)
§ 666.12 DISSEMINATING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall
recklessly do any of following:
      (1)   Directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit,
rent or present to a juvenile any material or performance that is obscene or
harmful to juveniles;
      (2)   Offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide,
exhibit, rent or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles;
      (3)   While in the physical proximity of the juvenile or law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, allow any juvenile or law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile to review or peruse any material or view any live
performance that is harmful to juveniles.
   (b)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section
that involves material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles but not
obscene:
      (1)   The defendant is the parent, guardian or spouse of the juvenile
involved.
      (2)   The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in question, was
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian who, with knowledge of its
character, consented to the material or performance being furnished or
presented to the juvenile.
      (3)   The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or his or her agent or
employee a draft card, driver’s license, birth record, marriage license or
other official or apparently official document purporting to show that the
juvenile was 18 years of age or over or married, and the person to whom the
document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe that
the juvenile was under the age of 18 and unmarried.
   (c)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section,
involving material or a performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles,
that the material or performance was furnished or presented for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial or other proper
purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher,
librarian, clergy, prosecutor, judge or other proper person.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (b)(3) of this section, mistake of
age is not a defense to a charge under this section.
   (d)   (1)   A person directly sells, delivers, furnishes, disseminates,
provides, exhibits, rents or presents or directly offers or agrees to sell,
deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent or present material or a
performance to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section by means of an electronic method of
remotely transmitting information if the person knows or has reason to believe
that the person receiving the information is a juvenile or the group of persons
receiving the information are juveniles.
      (2)   A person remotely transmitting information by means of a method of
mass distribution does not directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate,
provide, exhibit, rent or present or directly offer or agree to sell, deliver,
furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent or present the material or
performance in question to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section if either of the following applies:
         A.   The person has inadequate information to know or have reason to
believe that a particular recipient of the information or offer is a juvenile.
         B.   The method of mass distribution does not provide the person the
ability to prevent a particular recipient from receiving the information.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disseminating matter
harmful to juveniles. If the material or performance involved is harmful to
juveniles except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the material or performance
involved is obscene, violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.31)
§ 666.13 DISPLAYING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person who has custody, control or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character or content of the material
involved, shall display at the establishment any material that is harmful to
juveniles and that is open to view by juveniles as part of the invited general
public.
   (b)   It is not a violation of division (a) of this section if the material
in question is displayed by placing it behind “blinder racks” or similar
devices that cover at least the lower two-thirds of the material, if the
material in question is wrapped or placed behind the counter, or if the
material in question otherwise is covered or located so that the portion that
is harmful to juveniles is not open to the view of juveniles.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of displaying matter harmful
to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day during which the
offender is in violation of this section constitutes a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2907.311)
§ 666.14 DECEPTION TO OBTAIN MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person, for the purpose of enabling a juvenile to obtain any
material or gain admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles,
shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is the parent, guardian or spouse
of the juvenile.
      (2)   Furnish the juvenile with any identification or document purporting
to show that the juvenile is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (b)   No juvenile, for the purpose of obtaining any material or gaining
admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles, shall do either of
the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is 18 years of age or over or
married.
      (2)   Exhibit any identification or document purporting to show that he
or she is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of deception to obtain matter
harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the second degree. A juvenile who
violates division (b) of this section shall be adjudged an unruly child, with
the disposition of the case as may be appropriate under R.C. Chapter 2151.
(R.C. § 2907.33)
§ 666.15 PRESUMPTIONS; NOTICE.
   (a)   An owner or manager, or agent or employee of an owner or manager, of a
bookstore, newsstand, theater or other commercial establishment engaged in
selling material or exhibiting performances, who, in the course of business
does any of the acts prohibited by §
666.12 is presumed to have knowledge of the character of the material or
performance involved if the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner
or manager has actual notice of the nature of the material or performance,
whether or not the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner or manager
has precise knowledge of its contents.
   (b)   Without limitation on the manner in which the notice may be given,
actual notice of the character of material or a performance may be given in
writing by the chief legal officer of the municipality. This notice, regardless
of the manner in which it is given, shall identify the sender, identify the
material or performance involved, state whether it is obscene or harmful to
juveniles, and bear the date of the notice.
   (c)   Section
666.12 does not apply to a motion picture operator or projectionist acting
within the scope of employment as an employee of the owner or manager of the
theater or other place for the showing of motion pictures to the general
public, and having no managerial responsibility or financial interest in the
operator’s or projectionist’s place of employment, other than wages.
   (d)   (1)   The provisions of §§
666.12,
666.13 and
666.14(a) do not apply to a person solely because the person provided access or
connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information
not under that person’s control, including having provided capabilities that
are incidental to providing access or connection to or from the electronic
method of remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the
creation of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or
connection.
      (2)   Division (d)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with an entity actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of §
666.12,
666.13 or
666.14 or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
      (3)   Division (d)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
provides access or connection to an electronic method of remotely transferring
information that is engaged in the violation of §
666.12,
666.13 or
666.14 and that contain content that person has selected and introduced into
the electronic method of remotely transferring information or content over
which that person exercises editorial control.
   (e)   An employer is not guilty of a violation of §
666.12,
666.13 or
666.14 based on the actions of an employee or agent of the employer unless the
employee’s or agent’s conduct is within the scope of the employee’s or agent’s
employment or agency, and the employer does either of the following:
      (1)   With knowledge of the employee’s or agent’s conduct, the employer
authorizes or ratifies the conduct.
      (2)   The employer recklessly disregards the employee’s or agent’s
conduct.
   (f)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under §
666.12 or
666.13 as the section applies to an image transmitted through the internet or
other electronic method of remotely transmitting information that the person
charged with violating the section has taken, in good faith, reasonable,
effective and appropriate actions under the circumstances to restrict or
prevent access by juveniles to material that is harmful to juveniles, including
any method that is feasible under available technology.
(R.C. § 2907.35)
§ 666.16 DECLARATORY JUDGMENT.
   (a)   Without limitation on the persons otherwise entitled to bring an
action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2721, involving the
same issue, the following persons have standing to bring a declaratory judgment
action to determine whether particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles:
      (1)   The chief legal officer of the municipality if and when there is
reasonable cause to believe that R.C. § 2907.31 or 2907.32, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be violated;
      (2)   Any person who, pursuant to R.C. § 2907.35(B) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, has received notice in writing from the chief
legal officer stating that particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles.
   (b)   Any party to an action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to division
(a) of this section is entitled, upon the party’s request, to trial on the
merits within five days after joinder of the issues, and the court shall render
judgment within five days after trial is concluded.
   (c)   An action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to division (a) of this
section shall not be brought during the pendency of any civil action or
criminal prosecution when the character of the particular materials or
performances involved is at issue in the pending case, and either of the
following applies:
      (1)   Either of the parties to the action for a declaratory judgment is a
party to the pending case;
      (2)   A judgment in the pending case will necessarily constitute res
judicata as to the character of the materials or performances involved.
   (d)   A civil action or criminal prosecution in which the character of
particular materials or performances is at issue, brought during the pendency
of an action for a declaratory judgment involving the same issue, shall be
stayed during the pendency of the action for a declaratory judgment.
   (e)   The fact that a violation of R.C. § 2907.31 or 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, occurs prior to a judicial
determination of the character of the material or performance involved in the
violation does not relieve the offender of criminal liability for the
violation, even though prosecution may be stayed pending the judicial
determination.
(R.C. § 2907.36)
§ 666.17 INJUNCTION; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (a)   Where it appears that R.C. § 2907.31 or 2907.32, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be violated, the chief
legal officer of the municipality may bring an action to enjoin the violation.
The defendant, upon his or her request, is entitled to trial on the merits
within five days after the joinder of the issues, and the court shall render
judgment within five days after the trial is concluded.
   (b)   Premises used or occupied for repeated violations of R.C. § 2907.31 or
2907.32, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2907.37)
§ 666.18 UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF VIEWING BOOTHS DEPICTING SEXUAL CONDUCT.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. An entity that is open to the public and
to which either of the following applies:
         A.   It has a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade
of the sale, rental or viewing of visual materials or performances depicting
sexual conduct.
         B.   It has as a principal business purpose the sale, rental or
viewing of visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct.
      (2)   VISUAL MATERIALS OR PERFORMANCES. Films, videos, CD-ROM discs,
streaming video or other motion pictures.
   (b)   No person who has custody, control or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character of the visual material or
performance involved, shall knowingly permit the use of, or offer the use of,
viewing booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room located in the
commercial establishment for the purpose of viewing visual materials or
performances depicting sexual conduct unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The inside of each booth, stall or partitioned room is visible
from, and at least one side of each booth, stall or partitioned room is open
to, a continuous and contiguous main aisle or hallway that is open to the
public areas of the commercial establishment and is not obscured by any
curtain, door or other covering or enclosure.
      (2)   No booth, stall or partitioned room is designed, constructed,
pandered or allowed to be used for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating
nudity or sexual activity on the part of or between patrons or members of the
public, and no booth, stall or partitioned room has any aperture, hole or
opening for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating nudity or sexual
activity.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that
either of the following applies to the involved visual materials or
performances:
      (1)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct are
disseminated or presented for a bona fide medical, scientific, educational,
religious, governmental, judicial or other proper purpose and by or to a
physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher, person pursuing bona
fide studies or research, librarian, member of the clergy, prosecutor, judge or
other person having a proper interest in the visual materials or performances.
      (2)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct,
taken as a whole, would be found by a reasonable person to have serious
literary, artistic, political or scientific value or are presented or
disseminated in good faith for a serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific purpose and are not pandered for their prurient appeal.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting unlawful
operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 2907.38)
§ 666.19 JUVENILES ON THE PREMISES OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
PROHIBITED.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ADULT ARCADE. Means any place to which the public is permitted or invited
in which coin-operated, slug-operated, or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other
image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and in which the images so displayed
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, or ADULT VIDEO STORE.
         A.   Means a commercial establishment that, for any form of
consideration, has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-
trade in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues from,
devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display
space for the sale or rental of any of the following:
            1.   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or
other visual representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas;
            2.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for
use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of self or others.
         B.   Includes a commercial establishment as defined in R.C. § 2907.38.
An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve
the offering for sale, rental, or viewing of materials exhibiting or describing
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be
categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store.
The existence of other principal business purposes does not exempt an
establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes
is offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, such materials
that exhibit or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      ADULT CABARET. Means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle
club, or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages
are served, that regularly features any of the following:
         A.   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity;
         B.   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities;
         C.   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. Means the sale, rental, or exhibition, for any form
of consideration, of books, films, video cassettes, magazines, periodicals, or
live performances that are characterized by an emphasis on the exposure or
display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. Means an adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, nude or seminude model studio, or sexual
encounter establishment. An establishment in which a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the
state engages in medically approved and recognized therapy, including but not
limited to massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is not an
“adult entertainment establishment”.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. Means a commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon
the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
      ADULT THEATER. Means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or live
performances that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
      DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY THEIR EMPHASIS UPON. Means the dominant
or principal character and theme of the object described by this phrase. For
instance, when the phrase refers to films “that are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas”, the films so described are
those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      NUDE OR SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO. Means any place where a person, who
regularly appears in a state of nudity or seminudity, is provided for money or
any other form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. A modeling
class or studio is not a nude or seminude model studio and is not subject to
this chapter if it is operated in any of the following ways:
         A.   By a college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation;
         B.   By a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs, the credits for which are transferable to a college or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
         C.   In a structure that has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising indicating that a person appearing in a
state of nudity or seminudity is available for viewing, if in order to
participate in a class in the structure, a student must enroll at least three
days in advance of the class and if not more than one nude or seminude model is
on the premises at any one time.
      NUDITY, NUDE, or STATE OF NUDITY. Means the showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft, or cleavage with less
than a fully opaque covering; or the showing of the female breasts with less
than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple.
      REGULARLY FEATURES or REGULARLY SHOWN. Means a consistent or substantial
course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a
substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the
ongoing business of the adult entertainment establishment.
      SEMINUDE or STATE OF SEMINUDITY. Means a state of dress in which opaque
clothing covers not more than the genitals, pubic region, and nipple of the
female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or
devices.
      SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT.
         A.   Means a business or commercial establishment that, as one of its
principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration a place where
either of the following occur:
            1.   Two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for
the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities.
            2.   Two or more persons appear nude or seminude for the purpose of
displaying their nude or seminude bodies for their receipt of consideration or
compensation in any type or form.
         B.   An establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized therapy, including but not limited to massage
therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is not a “sexual encounter
establishment”.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Means the cleft of the buttocks, anus, male
or female genitals, or the female breast.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Means any of the following:
         A.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, or actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy;
         B.   Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the
activities described in division (a) of this definition.
   (b)   No person knowingly shall allow an individual, including but not
limited to a patron, customer, or employee, who is under 18 years of age on the
premises of an adult entertainment establishment.
   (c)   No individual who is under 18 years of age knowingly shall show or
give false information concerning the individual’s name or age, or other false
identification, for the purpose of gaining entrance to an adult entertainment
establishment.
   (d)   A person shall not be found guilty of a violation of division (b) of
this section if the person raises as an affirmative defense and if the jury or,
in a nonjury trial, the court finds the person has established by a
preponderance of the evidence, all of the following:
      (1)   The individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment exhibited to an operator, employee, agent or independent
contractor of the adult entertainment establishment a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 and
4507.52 showing that the individual was then at least 18 years of age.
      (2)   The operator, employee, agent or independent contractor made a bona
fide effort to ascertain the true age of the individual gaining entrance to the
adult entertainment establishment by checking the identification presented, at
the time of entrance, to ascertain that the description on the identification
compared with the appearance of the individual and that the identification had
not been altered in any way.
      (3)   The operator, employee, agent or independent contractor had reason
to believe that the individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment was at least 18 years of age.
   (e)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense described in
division (d) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or the
Deputy Registrar who issued a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 and 4507.52 shall be permitted to
submit certified copies of the records, in the Registrar’s or Deputy
Registrar’s possession, of the issuance of the license or identification card
in question, in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles in the action.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
permitting a juvenile on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment,
a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day a person violates this division
constitutes a separate offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of use by a
juvenile of false information to enter an adult entertainment establishment, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if committed by
an adult.
(R.C. § 2907.39)
§ 666.20 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES; ILLEGAL OPERATION AND ACTIVITY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. Means a commercial establishment
that has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade or
inventory in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues
from, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display
space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of books,
magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual
representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT CABARET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. Means a commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions that are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown
to more than five individuals for any form of consideration.
      CHARACTERIZED BY. Describing the essential character or quality of an
item.
      EMPLOYEE. Means any individual who performs any service on the premises
of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis,
regardless of whether the individual is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent, or otherwise, but does not include an individual exclusively
on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery
of goods to the premises.
      NUDE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      NUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      OPERATOR. Means any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented
business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation
the business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise overall
operational control of the business premises.
      PATRON. Means any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented
business except for any of the following:
         A.   An operator or an employee of the sexually oriented business;
         B.   An individual who is on the premises exclusively for repair or
maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises;
         C.   A public employee or a volunteer firefighter emergency medical
services worker acting within the scope of the public employee’s or volunteer’s
duties as a public employee or volunteer.
      PREMISES. Means the real property on which the sexually oriented business
is located and all appurtenances to the real property, including, but not
limited, to the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and
parking lots or parking garages adjacent to the real property under the
ownership, control, or supervision of the owner or operator of the sexually
oriented business.
      REGULARLY. Means consistently or repeatedly.
      SEMINUDE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      SEXUAL DEVICE. Means any three-dimensional object designed and marketed
for stimulation of the male or female human genitals or anus or female breasts
or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others, including but not
limited to dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical representations of the
human genital organs, but not including devices primarily intended for
protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy.
      SEXUAL DEVICE SHOP. Means a commercial establishment that regularly
features sexual devices, but not including any pharmacy, drug store, medical
clinic, or establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare
products or services, and not including any commercial establishment that does
not restrict access to its premises by reason of age.
      SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. Means a business or commercial enterprise that,
as one of its principal business purposes, purports to offer for any form of
consideration physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
individuals of the opposite sex when one or more of the individuals is nude or
seminude.
      SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Means an adult bookstore, adult video store,
adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, sexual device shop, or sexual
encounter center, but does not include a business solely by reason of its
showing, selling, or renting materials that may depict sex.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Includes human genitals, pubic region, and
buttocks and the human female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Means sexual intercourse, oral copulation,
masturbation, or sodomy, or excretory functions as a part of or in connection
with any of these activities.
      STATE OF NUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      STATE OF SEMINUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
   (b)   No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business
between midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day, except that a sexually oriented
business that holds a liquor permit pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4303 may remain
open until the hour specified in that permit if it does not conduct, offer or
allow sexually oriented entertainment activity in which the performers appear
nude.
   (c)   (1)   No patron who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family
shall knowingly touch any employee while that employee is nude or seminude or
touch the clothing of any employee while that employee is nude or seminude.
      (2)   No employee who regularly appears nude or seminude on the premises
of a sexually oriented business, while on the premises of that sexually
oriented business and while nude or seminude, shall knowingly touch a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or the clothing of a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or allow a patron who is not
a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who is not a
member of the employee’s immediate family to touch the employee or the clothing
of the employee.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of illegally
operating a sexually oriented business, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of illegal
sexually oriented activity in a sexually oriented business. If the offender
touches a specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing
covering a specified anatomical area, a violation of division (c) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender does not touch a
specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing covering a
specified anatomical area, a violation of division (c) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2907.40)
Statutory reference:
   State indemnification for certain municipal liability stemming from local
adult business regulations, see R.C. § 715.55
§ 666.21 UNLAWFUL ADVERTISING OF MASSAGE.
   (a)   No person, by means of a statement, solicitation, or offer in a print
or electronic publication, sign, placard, storefront display, or other medium,
shall advertise massage, relaxation massage, any other massage technique or
method, or any related service, with the suggestion or promise of sexual
activity.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful advertising of
massage, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (c)   Nothing in this section prevents the municipality from enacting any
regulation of the advertising of massage further than and in addition to the
provisions of divisions (a) and (b) of this section.
   (d)   As used in this section, SEXUAL ACTIVITY has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2907.01.
(R.C. § 2927.17)
§ 666.22 NONCONSENSUAL DISSEMINATION OF PRIVATE SEXUAL IMAGES.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      CABLE SERVICE PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.01.
      DIRECT-TO-HOME SATELLITE SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. §
303, as amended.
      DISSEMINATE. Means to post, distribute, or publish on a computer device,
computer network, web site, or other electronic device or medium of
communication.
      IMAGE. Means a photograph, film, videotape, digital recording, or other
depiction or portrayal of a person.
      INTERACTIVE COMPUTER SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in the
“Telecommunications Act of 1996”, 47 U.S.C. § 230, as amended.
      INTERNET PROVIDER. Means a provider of internet service, including all of
the following:
         A.   Broadband service, however defined or classified by the Federal
Communications Commission;
         B.   Information service or telecommunications service, both as
defined in the “Telecommunications Act of 1996”, 47 U.S.C. § 153, as amended;
         C.   Internet protocol-enabled services, as defined in R.C. § 4927.01.
      MOBILE SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153, as amended.
      SEXUAL ACT. Means any of the following:
         A.   Sexual activity;
         B.   Masturbation;
         C.   An act involving a bodily substance that is performed for the
purpose of sexual arousal or gratification;
         D.   Sado-masochistic abuse.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153,
as amended.
      VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly disseminate an image of another person if
all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person in the image is 18 years of age or older.
      (2)   The person in the image can be identified from the image itself or
from information displayed in connection with the image and the offender
supplied the identifying information.
      (3)   The person in the image is in a state of nudity or is engaged in a
sexual act.
      (4)   The image is disseminated without consent from the person in the
image.
      (5)   The image is disseminated with intent to harm the person in the
image.
   (c)   This section does not prohibit the dissemination of an image if any of
the following apply:
      (1)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of a criminal
investigation that is otherwise lawful.
      (2)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of, or in connection
with, the reporting of unlawful conduct.
      (3)   The image is part of a news report or commentary or an artistic or
expressive work, such as a performance, work of art, literary work, theatrical
work, musical work, motion picture, film, or audiovisual work.
      (4)   The image is disseminated by a law enforcement officer, or a
corrections officer or guard in a detention facility, acting within the scope
of the person’s official duties.
      (5)   The image is disseminated for another lawful public purpose.
      (6)   The person in the image is knowingly and willingly in a state of
nudity or engaged in a sexual act and is knowingly and willingly in a location
in which the person does not have a reasonable expectation of privacy.
      (7)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of medical treatment or
examination.
   (d)   The following entities are not liable for a violation of this section
solely as a result of an image or other information provided by another person:
      (1)   A provider of interactive computer service;
      (2)   A mobile service;
      (3)   A telecommunications carrier;
      (4)   An internet provider;
      (5)   A cable service provider;
      (6)   A direct-to-home satellite service;
      (7)   A video service provider.
   (e)   Any conduct that is a violation of this section and any other section
of this Code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, the
other section, or both sections.
   (f)   (1)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (f)(1)B., (f)
(1)C., or (f)(1)D. of this section, whoever violates this section is guilty of
nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images, a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state or
local law, nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images is a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
         C.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or any substantially
equivalent state or local law, nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual
images is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         D.   If the offender is under 18 years of age and the person in the
image is not more than five years older than the offender, the offender shall
not be prosecuted under this section.
      (2)   In addition to any other penalty or disposition authorized or
required by law, the court may order any person who is convicted of a violation
of this section or who is adjudicated delinquent by reason of a violation of
this section to criminally forfeit all of the following property to the state
under R.C. Chapter 2981:
         A.   Any profits or proceeds and any property the person has acquired
or maintained in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines
to have been acquired or maintained as a result of the violation;
         B.   Any interest in, securities of, claim against, or property or
contractual right of any kind affording a source of influence over any
enterprise that the person has established, operated, controlled, or conducted
in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines to have been
acquired or maintained as a result of the violation.
   (g)   A victim of a violation of this section may commence a civil cause of
action against the offender, as described in R.C. § 2307.66.
(R.C. § 2917.211)
§ 666.23 GROOMING.
   (a)   As used in this section, “pattern of conduct” has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2903.211.
   (b)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in a pattern of
conduct with a minor who is less than 16 years of age and who is four or more
years younger than the person, when the pattern of conduct would cause a
reasonable adult person to believe that the person is communicating with the
minor with purpose to do either of the following:
      (1)   Entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity,
and when the person’s purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to
entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity with the
person or a third person;
      (2)   Prepare the minor to engage in sexual activity, and when the
person’s purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to prepare the minor
to engage in sexual activity with the person or a third person that would be a
violation of R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, or 2907.07.
   (c)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in a pattern of
conduct with a minor if the person and the minor are in any of the
relationships described in R.C. § 2907.03(A)(5) to (A)(13), when the pattern of
conduct would cause a reasonable adult person to believe that the person is
communicating with the minor with purpose to do either of the following:
      (1)   Entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity,
and when the person’s purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to
entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity with the
person or a third person;
      (2)   Prepare the minor to engage in sexual activity, and when the
person’s purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to prepare the minor
to engage in sexual activity with the person or a third person that would be a
violation of R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, or 2907.07.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of grooming.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of
division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
victim of the offense is less than 13 years of age or if the offender supplied
alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the offense, a violation of
division (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. If the victim of the offense is less than 13 years of age and if the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
this section or a sexually oriented offense or a child-victim oriented offense
or the offender supplied alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the
offense, a violation of division (b) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or a sexually
oriented offense or a child- victim oriented offense and the offender supplied
alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the offense, a violation of
division (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of
division (c) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender supplied alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the offense, a
violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If the victim of the offense is less than 13 years of
age or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of this section or a sexually oriented offense or a child-victim
oriented offense, a violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the victim of the offense is less
than 13 years of age and if the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or a sexually oriented offense or
a child-victim oriented offense or the offender supplied alcohol or a drug of
abuse to the victim of the offense, a violation of division (c) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (e)   A prosecution for a violation of this section does not preclude a
prosecution of a violation of any other section of the this code or the Ohio
Revised Code. One or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that
can be prosecuted under this section or any other section of this code or the
Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, the other section of
this code or the Revised Code, or both sections.
(R.C. § 2907.071)
§ 666.99 SENTENCING FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED OFFENSES; SEXUAL PREDATORS;
REGISTRATION.
   (a)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, and the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim
offender relative to the offense or the offense is any offense listed in R.C. §
2901.07(D)(1) to (D)(3), the judge shall include in the offender’s sentence a
statement that the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim offender,
shall comply with the requirements of R.C. § 2950.03, and shall require the
offender to submit to a DNA specimen collection procedure pursuant to R.C. §
2901.07.
   (b)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or a
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, the judge shall include in the sentence a summary of the
offender’s duties imposed under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05 and 2950.06,
and the duration of the duties. The judge shall inform the offender, at the
time of sentencing, of those duties and of their duration. If required under
R.C. § 2950.03(A)(2), the judge shall perform the duties specified in that
section or, if required under R.C. § 2950.03(A)(6), the judge shall perform the
duties specified in that division.
(R.C. § 2929.23)
CHAPTER 672
Theft and Fraud
672.01   Theft.
672.02   Receiving stolen property.
672.03   Determining property value in theft offense.
672.04   Degree of offense when certain property involved.
672.05   Evidence of theft of rented property.
672.06   Tampering with coin machines.
672.07   Prosecutions for theft of utilities.
672.08   Misconduct involving a public transportation system.
672.09   Unauthorized use of a vehicle; vehicle trespass.
672.10   Passing bad checks.
672.11   Misuse of credit cards.
672.12   Recording credit card, telephone or Social Security numbers.
672.13   Forging or selling forged identification cards.
672.14   Criminal simulation.
672.15   Making or using slugs.
672.16   Prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud.
672.17   Tampering with records.
672.18   Securing writings by deception.
672.19   Personating an officer.
672.20   Defrauding creditors.
672.21   Insurance fraud.
672.22   Workers’ compensation fraud.
672.23   Medicaid fraud.
672.24   Diminishing or interfering with forfeitable property.
672.25   Motion picture piracy.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police Department,
see §
654.16
   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property, see §
654.17
   Definitions relating to theft and fraud, see §
642.01
   Possession of municipal property, see §
642.02
   Unauthorized use of property, see §
642.03
   Possessing criminal tools, see §
678.14
§ 672.01 THEFT.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to deprive the owner of property or services,
shall knowingly obtain or exert control over either the property or services in
any of the following ways:
      (1)   Without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give
consent;
      (2)   Beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent;
      (3)   By deception;
      (4)   By threat;
      (5)   By intimidation.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of theft. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, a violation of this section is misdemeanor
theft, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the elements set forth in R.C. §
2913.02(B) for felony theft, grand theft, or aggravated theft are met, then a
violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (2)   In addition to the penalties described in division (b)(1) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by causing a motor vehicle to
leave the premises of an establishment at which gasoline is offered for retail
sale without the offender making full payment for gasoline that was dispensed
into the fuel tank of the motor vehicle or into another container, the court
may do one of the following:
         A.   Unless division (b)(2)B. of this section applies, suspend for not
more than six months the offenders driver’s license, probationary driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or
nonresident operating privilege;
         B.   If the offender’s driver’s license, probationary driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or
nonresident operating privilege has previously been suspended pursuant to
division (b)(2)A. of this section, or any other substantially equivalent state
or local law, impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s license,
permit, or privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7), provided
that the suspension shall be at least six months;
         C.   The court, in lieu of suspending the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, probationary driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege pursuant to division (b)
(2)A. or (b)(2)B of this section, instead may require the offender to perform
community service for a number of hours determined by the court.
      (3)   In addition to the penalties described in division (b)(1) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by stealing rented property or
rental services, the court may order that the offender make restitution
pursuant to R.C. § 2929.18 or R.C. § 2929.28. Restitution may include, but is
not limited to, the cost of repairing or replacing the stolen property, or the
cost of repairing the stolen property and any loss of revenue resulting from
deprivation of the property due to theft of rental services that is less than
or equal to the actual value of the property at the time it was rented.
Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental services shall
be determined pursuant to the provisions of R.C. § 2913.72.
   (c)   The sentencing court that suspends an offender’s license, permit, or
nonresident operating privilege under division (b)(2) of this section may grant
the offender limited driving privileges during the period of the suspension in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 4510.
(R.C. § 2913.02)
Statutory reference:
   Felony theft provisions, see R.C. § 2913.02(B)
§ 672.02 RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall receive, retain or dispose of property of another
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the property has been
obtained through commission of a theft offense.
   (b)   It is not a defense to a charge of receiving stolen property in
violation of this section that the property was obtained by means other than
through the commission of a theft offense if the property was explicitly
represented to the accused person as being obtained through the commission of a
theft offense.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of receiving stolen property.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, receiving stolen property is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If any of the following criteria are met, then
a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law:
      (1)   The value of the property involved is $1,000 or more;
      (2)   The property involved is any of the property listed in R.C. §
2913.71;
      (3)   The property involved is a firearm or dangerous ordnance, as
defined in R.C. § 2923.11;
      (4)   The property involved is a motor vehicle as defined in R.C. §
4501.01;
      (5)   The property involved is any dangerous drug, as defined in R.C. §
4729.01; or
      (6)   The property involved in violation of this section is a special
purchase article as defined in R.C. § 4737.04 or a bulk merchandise container
as defined in R.C. § 4737.012.
(R.C. § 2913.51)
§ 672.03 DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE IN THEFT OFFENSE.
   (a)   If more than one item of property or services is involved in a theft
offense or in a violation of R.C. § 1716.14(A) involving a victim who is an
elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose of
determining the value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value
of all property or services involved in the offense.
   (b)   (1)   When a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of
violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or
complicity in violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A), 2913.02, 2913.03 or 2913.04,
2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or 2913.31 or 2913.43 involving a victim who is an
elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance to any of these offenses, is committed by the offender in the
offender’s same employment, capacity or relationship to another, all of those
offenses shall be tried as a single offense. When a series of offenses under
R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation
of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or
2913.43 involving a victim who is an active duty service member or spouse of an
active duty service member, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance
to any of these offenses, is committed by the offender in the offender’s same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another, all of those offenses shall
be tried as a single offense. The value of the property or services involved in
the series of offenses for the purpose of determining the value as required by
R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and services involved
in all offenses in the series.
      (2)   If an offender commits a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02
that involves a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims, all of
the offenses may be tried as a single offense. If an offender is being tried
for the commission of a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation
of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A),
2913.02, 2913.03 or 2913.04, 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or 2913.31 or 2913.43,
whether committed against one victim or more than one victim, involving a
victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, pursuant to a scheme
or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a single offense.
If an offender is being tried for the commission of a series of violations of,
attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in
violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, whether committed against one
victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who is an active duty
service member or spouse of an active duty service member pursuant to a scheme
or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a single offense.
If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the value of the property or
services involved for the purpose of determining the value as required by R.C.
§ 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and services involved in
all of the offenses in the course of conduct.
      (3)   When a series of two or more offenses under R.C. § 2913.40,
2913.48, or 2921.41 is committed by the offender in the offender’s same
employment, capacity or relationship to another, all of those offenses may be
tried as a single offense. If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the
value of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the
value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property
and services involved in all of the offenses in the series of two or more
offenses.
      (4)   In prosecuting a single offense under division (b)(1), (b)(2) or
(b)(3) of this section, it is not necessary to separately allege and prove each
offense in the series. Rather, it is sufficient to allege and prove that the
offender, within a given span of time, committed one or more theft offenses or
violations of R.C. § 2913.40, 2913.48, or 2921.41 in the offender’s same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another as described in division (b)
(1) or (b)(3) of this section, or committed one or more theft offenses that
involve a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims or a scheme or
course of conduct as described in division (b)(2) of this section. While it is
not necessary to separately allege and prove each offense in the series in
order to prosecute a single offense under division (b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(3) of
this section, it remains necessary in prosecuting them as a single offense to
prove the aggregate value of the property or services in order to meet the
requisite statutory offense level sought by the prosecution.
   (c)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   The value of an heirloom, memento, collector’s item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record or other thing that has intrinsic
worth to its owner and that either is irreplaceable or is replaceable only on
the expenditure of substantial time, effort or money, is the amount which would
compensate the owner for its loss.
      (2)   The value of personal effects and household goods, and of
materials, supplies, equipment and fixtures used in the profession, business,
trade, occupation, or avocation of its owner, which property is not covered
under division (c)(1) of this section, and which retains substantial utility
for its purpose regardless of its age or condition, is the cost of replacing
the property with new property of like kind and quality.
      (3)   The value of any real or personal property that is not covered
under division (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section, and the value of services, is
the fair market value of the property or services. As used in this section,
“fair market value” is the money consideration which a buyer would give and a
seller would accept for property or services, assuming that the buyer is
willing to buy and the seller is willing to sell, that both are fully informed
as to all facts material to the transaction, and that neither is under any
compulsion to act.
   (d)   Without limitation on the evidence which may be used to establish the
value of property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   When the property involved is personal property held for sale at
wholesale or retail, the price at which the property was held for sale is prima
facie evidence of its value.
      (2)   When the property involved is a security or commodity traded on an
exchange, the closing price or, if there is no closing price, the asked price,
given in the latest marked quotation prior to the offense, is prima facie
evidence of the value of the security or commodity.
      (3)   When the property involved is livestock, poultry or raw
agricultural products for which a local market price is available, the latest
local market price prior to the offense is prima facie evidence of the value of
the livestock, poultry or products.
      (4)   When the property involved is a negotiable instrument, the face
value is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (5)   When the property involved is a warehouse receipt, bill of lading,
pawn ticket, claim check or other instrument entitling the holder or bearer to
receive property, the face value or, if there is no face value, the value of
the property covered by the instrument less any payment necessary to receive
the property, is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (6)   When the property involved is a ticket of admission, ticket for
transportation, coupon, token or other instrument entitling the holder or
bearer to receive property or services, the face value or, if there is no face
value, the value of the property or services which may be received by the
instrument is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (7)   When the services involved are gas, electricity, water, telephone,
transportation, shipping or other services for which the rate is established by
law, the duly established rate is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
      (8)   When the services involved are services for which the rate is not
established by law, and the offender has been notified prior to the offense of
the rate for the services, either in writing or orally, or by posting in a
manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential offenders,
the rate contained in the notice is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
(R.C. § 2913.61(B) - (E))
§ 672.04 DEGREE OF OFFENSE WHEN CERTAIN PROPERTY INVOLVED.
   Regardless of the value of the property involved, and regardless of whether
the offender previously has been convicted of a theft offense, a violation of §
672.01 or 672.02 is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law if
the property involved is any of the following:
   (a)   A credit card;
   (b)   A printed form for a check or other negotiable instrument, that on its
face identifies the drawer or maker for whose use it is designed or identifies
the account on which it is to be drawn, and that has not been executed by the
drawer or maker or on which the amount is blank;
   (c)   A motor vehicle identification license plate as prescribed by R.C. §
4503.22, a temporary motor vehicle license registration as prescribed by R.C. §
4503.182, or any comparable temporary motor vehicle license registration as
prescribed by the applicable law of another state or the United States;
   (d)   A blank form for a certificate of title or a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate to a motor vehicle, as prescribed by R.C. § 4505.07;
   (e)   A blank form for any license listed in R.C. § 4507.01.
(R.C. § 2913.71)
§ 672.05 EVIDENCE OF THEFT OF RENTED PROPERTY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   RENTEE. A person who pays consideration to a renter for the use of
rented property.
      (2)   RENTER. A person who owns rented property.
   (b)   Each of the following shall be considered evidence of intent to commit
theft of rented property or rental services:
      (1)   At the time of entering into the rental contract, the rentee
presented the renter with identification that was materially false, fictitious
or not current with respect to name, address, place of employment or other
relevant information.
      (2)   After receiving a notice demanding the return of the rented
property as provided in division (c) of this section, the rentee neither
returned the rented property nor made arrangements acceptable with the renter
to return the rented property.
   (c)   To establish that a rentee has an intent to commit theft of rented
property or rental services under division (b)(2) above, a renter may issue a
notice to a rentee demanding the return of the rented property. The renter
shall mail the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
rentee at the address the rentee gave when the rental contract was executed, or
to the rentee at the last address the rentee or the rentee’s agent furnished in
writing to the renter.
   (d)   A demand for the return of the rented property is not a prerequisite
for the prosecution of a rentee for theft of rented property or rental
services. The evidence specified in division (b) above does not constitute the
only evidence that may be considered as evidence of intent to commit theft of
rented property or rental services.
(R.C. § 2913.72)
§ 672.06 TAMPERING WITH COIN MACHINES.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to commit theft or to defraud, shall knowingly
enter, force an entrance into, tamper with or insert any part of an instrument
into any coin machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with coin
machines, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of this section or of any theft offense as
defined in R.C. § 2913.01, tampering with coin machines is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2911.32)
§ 672.07 PROSECUTIONS FOR THEFT OF UTILITIES.
   (a)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in R.C. § 2913.01,
that involves alleged tampering with a gas, electric, steam or water meter,
conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the utility,
proof that a meter, conduit or attachment of a utility has been tampered with
is prima facie evidence that the person who is obligated to pay for the service
rendered through the meter, conduit or attachment, and who is in possession or
control of the meter, conduit or attachment at the time the tampering occurred
has caused the tampering with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (b)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in R.C. § 2913.01,
that involves the alleged reconnection of a gas, electric, steam or water
meter, conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the
utility, proof that a meter, conduit or attachment disconnected by a utility
has been reconnected without the consent of the utility is prima facie evidence
that the person in possession or control of the meter, conduit or attachment at
the time of the reconnection has reconnected the meter, conduit or attachment
with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (c)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   TAMPER. To interfere with, damage or bypass a utility meter,
conduit or attachment with the intent to impede the correct registration of a
meter or the proper functions of a conduit or attachment so as to reduce the
amount of utility service that is registered on the meter.
      (2)   UTILITY. Any electric light company, gas company, natural gas
company, pipe- line company, water-works company or heating or cooling company,
as defined in R.C. § 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), its lessees,
trustees or receivers, or any similar utility owned or operated by a political
subdivision.
(R.C. § 4933.18)
   (d)   Each electric light company, gas company, natural gas company,
pipeline company, waterworks company or heating or cooling company, as defined
by R.C. § 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), or its lessees, trustees or
receivers, and each similar utility owned or operated by a political
subdivision, shall notify its customers, on an annual basis, that tampering
with or bypassing a meter constitutes a theft offense that could result in the
imposition of criminal sanctions.
(R.C. § 4933.19)
§ 672.08 MISCONDUCT INVOLVING A PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM.
   (a)   As used in this section, PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM means a county
transit system operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.01 to 306.13, a regional
transit authority operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.30 to 306.71, or a
regional transit commission operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.80 to
306.90.
   (b)   No person shall evade the payment of the known fares of a public
transportation system.
   (c)   No person shall alter any transfer, pass, ticket or token of a public
transportation system with the purpose of evading the payment of fares or of
defrauding the system.
   (d)   No person shall do any of the following while in any facility or on
any vehicle of a public transportation system:
      (1)   Play sound equipment without the proper use of a private earphone;
      (2)   Smoke, eat or drink in any area where the activity is clearly
marked as being prohibited; or
      (3)   Expectorate upon a person, facility or vehicle.
   (e)   No person shall write, deface, draw or otherwise mark on any facility
or vehicle of a public transportation system.
   (f)   No person shall fail to comply with a lawful order of a public
transportation system police officer, and no person shall resist, obstruct or
abuse a public transportation police officer in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
   (g)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of
misconduct involving a public transportation system.
      (1)   A violation of division (b), (c) or (f) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (d) of this section is a minor misdemeanor
on a first offense. If a person previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of any division of this section or of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any division of this section, a
violation of division (d) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (e) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
   (h)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 75% of each fine paid to
satisfy a sentence imposed for a violation of any of the provisions of this
section shall be deposited into the Treasury of the county and 25% shall be
deposited with the county transit board, regional transit authority or regional
transit commission that operates the public transportation system involved in
the violation, unless the Board of County Commissioners operates the public
transportation system, in which case 100% of each fine shall be deposited into
the Treasury of the county.
(R.C. § 2917.41)
§ 672.09 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF A VEHICLE; VEHICLE TRESPASS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorcycle, motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of
the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent, and either remove it from this state or keep
possession of it for more than 48 hours.
   (c)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section:
      (1)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor, though mistaken,
reasonably believed that he or she was authorized to use or operate the
property.
      (2)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor reasonably believed
that the owner or person empowered to give consent would authorize the actor to
use or operate the property.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized use of a
vehicle.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (d)(1), a violation
of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult and if the victim
incurs a loss as a result of the violation, a violation of division (a) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.03)
Statutory reference:
   Theft offense involving motor vehicle, offender to pay towing and storage
fees, see R.C. § 2913.82
§ 672.10 PASSING BAD CHECKS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CHECK. Includes any form of debit from a demand deposit account,
including but not limited to any of the following:
         A.   A check, bill of exchange, draft, order of withdrawal, or similar
negotiable or non-negotiable instrument;
         B.   An electronic check, electronic transaction, debit card
transaction, check card transaction, substitute check, web check or any form of
automated clearing house transaction.
      (2)   ISSUE A CHECK. Causing any form of debit from a demand deposit
account.
   (b)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall issue or transfer or cause
to be issued or transferred a check or other negotiable instrument, knowing
that it will be dishonored or knowing that a person has ordered or will order
stop payment on the check or other negotiable instrument.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a check
or other negotiable instrument is presumed to know that it will be dishonored
if either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The drawer has no account with the drawee at the time of issue or
the stated date, whichever is later.
      (2)   The check or other negotiable instrument was properly refused
payment for insufficient funds upon presentment within 30 days after issue or
the stated date, whichever is later, and the liability of the drawer, indorser,
or any party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by payment or
satisfaction within ten days after receiving notice of dishonor.
   (d)   In determining the value of the payment for purposes of division (e)
of this section, the court may aggregate all checks and other negotiable
instruments that the offender issued or transferred or caused to be issued or
transferred in violation of division (b) of this section within a period of 180
consecutive days.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of passing bad checks. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, passing bad checks is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the check or checks or other negotiable instrument or
instruments are issued or transferred to a single vendor or single other person
for the payment of $1,000 or more, or if the check or checks or other
negotiable instrument or instruments are issued or transferred to multiple
vendors or persons for the payment of $1,500 or more, passing bad checks is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.11)
§ 672.11 MISUSE OF CREDIT CARDS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Practice deception for the purpose of procuring the issuance of a
credit card, when a credit card is issued in actual reliance thereon;
      (2)   Knowingly buy or sell a credit card from or to a person other than
the issuer;
      (3)   As an officer, employee, or appointee of a political subdivision or
as a public servant as defined under R.C. § 2921.01, knowingly misuse a credit
card account held by a political subdivision.
   (b)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Obtain control over a credit card as security for a debt;
      (2)   Obtain property or services by the use of a credit card, in one or
more transactions, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the card
has expired or been revoked, or was obtained, is retained or is being used in
violation of law;
      (3)   Furnish property or services upon presentation of a credit card,
knowing that the card is being used in violation of law;
      (4)   Represent or cause to be represented to the issuer of a credit card
that property or services have been furnished, knowing that the representation
is false.
   (c)   No person, with purpose to violate this section, shall receive,
possess, control or dispose of a credit card.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misuse of credit cards.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(3) of this section, a
violation of division (a), (b)(1) or (c) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (d)(3) of
this section, a violation of division (b)(2), (b)(3) or (b)(4) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the cumulative retail value of the
property and services involved in one or more violations of division (b)(2),
(b)(3) or (b)(4) of this section which violations involve one or more credit
card accounts and occur within a period of 90 consecutive days commencing on
the date of the first violation, is $1,000 or more, misuse of credit cards is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, and if the offense involves a violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of
this section, misuse of credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.21)
§ 672.12 RECORDING CREDIT CARD, TELEPHONE OR SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS.
   (a)   No person shall record or cause to be recorded either of the
following:
      (1)   A credit card account number of the other party to a transaction,
when a check, bill of exchange or other draft is presented for payment; or
      (2)   The telephone number or Social Security account number of the other
party to a transaction, when payment is made by credit card charge agreement,
check, bill of exchange or other draft.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a transaction, if all
of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number is recorded for a legitimate business purpose, including
collection purposes.
      (2)   The other party to the transaction consents to the recording of the
credit card account number, Social Security account number or telephone number.
      (3)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number that is recorded during the course of the transaction is not
disclosed to any third party for any purposes other than collection purposes
and is not used to market goods or services unrelated to the goods or services
purchased in the transaction.
   (c)   Nothing in this section prohibits the recording of the number of a
credit card account when given in lieu of a deposit to secure payment in the
event of default, loss, damage or other occurrence, or requires a person to
accept a check presented for payment, if the other party to the transaction
refuses to consent to the recording of the number of the party’s Social
Security account or license to operate a motor vehicle. (R.C. § 1349.17)
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1349.99(A))
§ 672.13 FORGING OR SELLING FORGED IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Forge an identification card.
      (2)   Sell or otherwise distribute a card that purports to be an
identification card, knowing it was forged.
   (b)   As used in this section, IDENTIFICATION CARD means a card that
includes personal information or characteristics of an individual, a purpose of
which is to establish the identity of the bearer described on the card, whether
the words “identity”, “identification”, “identification card” or other similar
words appear on the card.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of forging
identification cards or selling or distributing forged identification cards.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, forging identification cards or
selling or distributing forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (a) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, forging identification cards or selling or distributing
forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the first degree and, in
addition, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine not less than $250.
      (2)   If the victim of a violation of this section is an elderly person,
R.C. § 2913.31(C)(2)(b) applies and the offense shall be prosecuted under R.C.
§ 2913.31.
(R.C. § 2913.31(B), (C)(2))
Statutory reference:
   Forgery, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2913.31(A), (C)(1)
   Forgery of originating address or other routing information in connection
with the transmission of an electronic mail advertisement, felony provisions,
see R.C. § 2307.64
§ 672.14 CRIMINAL SIMULATION.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud, or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Make or alter any object so that it appears to have value because
of antiquity, rarity, curiosity, source or authorship, which it does not in
fact possess.
      (2)   Practice deception in making, retouching, editing or reproducing
any photograph, movie film, video tape, phonograph record or recording tape.
      (3)   Falsely or fraudulently make, simulate, forge, alter or counterfeit
any wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control
Commission under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, falsely or fraudulently cause to
be made, simulated, forged, altered or counterfeited any wrapper, label, stamp,
cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under R.C. Chapters
4301 and 4303, or use more than once any wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap
prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303.
      (4)   Offer, or possess with the purpose to offer, any object that the
person knows to have been simulated as provided in divisions (a)(1), (a)(2) or
(a)(3) of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal simulation. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, criminal simulation is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more, criminal
simulation is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.32)
§ 672.15 MAKING OR USING SLUGS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Insert or deposit a slug in a coin machine, with purpose to
defraud;
      (2)   Make, possess or dispose of a slug, with purpose of enabling
another to defraud by inserting or depositing it in a coin machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or using slugs, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2913.33)
§ 672.16 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF PURPOSE TO DEFRAUD.
   In a prosecution of a person for a theft offense that alleges that the
person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she was facilitating a
fraud, hired or rented an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy or other property or equipment, kept or
operated any of the same that has been hired or rented, or engaged
accommodations at a hotel, motel, inn, campground or other hostelry, it is
prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud if the person did any of the
following:
   (a)   Used deception to induce the rental agency to furnish the person with
the aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat, camper, trailer,
horse, buggy or other property or equipment, or used deception to induce the
hostelry to furnish the person with accommodations;
   (b)   Hired or rented any aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy or other property or equipment, or
engaged accommodations, knowing that he or she is without sufficient means to
pay the hire or rental;
   (c)   Absconded without paying the hire or rental;
   (d)   Knowingly failed to pay the hire or rental as required by the contract
of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure;
   (e)   Knowingly failed to return hired or rented property as required by the
contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure.
(R.C. § 2913.41)
§ 672.17 TAMPERING WITH RECORDS.
   (a)   No person, knowing that he or she has no privilege to do so, and with
purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is facilitating a fraud, shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Falsify, destroy, remove, conceal, alter, deface or mutilate any
writing, computer software, data or record;
      (2)   Utter any writing or record, knowing it to have been tampered with
as provided in division (a)(1) of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with records.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(3) of this section, if the
offense does not involve data or computer software, tampering with records is
whichever of the following is applicable:
         A.   If division (b)(1)B. of this section does not apply, it is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   If the writing or record is a will unrevoked at the time of the
offense, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (b)(3) of this section, if the
offense involves a violation of division (a) of this section involving data or
computer software, tampering with records is whichever of the following is
applicable:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2)B. of this
section, it is a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         B.   If the value of the data or computer software involved in the
offense or the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more or if the offense is
committed for the purpose of devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to
obtain property or services and the value of the property or services or the
loss to the victim is $7,500 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the writing, data, computer software or record is kept by or
belongs to a local, state or federal governmental entity, it is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.42)
§ 672.18 SECURING WRITINGS BY DECEPTION.
   (a)   No person, by deception, shall cause another to execute any writing
that disposes of or encumbers property, or by which a pecuniary obligation is
incurred.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of securing writings by
deception. Except as otherwise provided in this division, securing writings by
deception is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property or
the obligation involved is $1,000 or more, securing writings by deception is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate to state law. If the victim of the
offense is an elderly person, disabled adult, active duty service member, or
spouse of an active duty service member, securing writings by deception is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.43)
§ 672.19 PERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is
facilitating a fraud, or with purpose to induce another to purchase property or
services, shall personate a law enforcement officer, or an inspector,
investigator or agent of any governmental agency.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of personating an officer, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2913.44)
§ 672.20 DEFRAUDING CREDITORS.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud one or more of his or her
creditors, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Remove, conceal, destroy, encumber, convey or otherwise deal with
any of his or her property;
      (2)   Misrepresent or refuse to disclose to a fiduciary appointed to
administer or manage his or her affairs or estate, the existence, amount or
location of any of his or her property, or any other information regarding the
property which he or she is legally required to furnish to the fiduciary.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding creditors.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, defrauding creditors is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property involved is
$1,000 or more, defrauding creditors is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.45)
§ 672.21 INSURANCE FRAUD.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   DATA. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01 and additionally
includes any other representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or
instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner.
      (2)   DECEPTIVE. A statement, in whole or in part, would cause another to
be deceived because it contains a misleading representation, withholds
information, prevents the acquisition of information, or by any other conduct,
act or omission creates, confirms or perpetuates a false impression, including
but not limited to a false impression as to law, value, state of mind or other
objective or subjective fact.
      (3)   INSURER. Any person that is authorized to engage in the business of
insurance in this state under R.C. Title 39, the Ohio Fair Plan Underwriting
Association created under R.C. § 3929.43, any health insuring corporation, and
any legal entity that is self-insured and provides benefits to its employees or
members.
      (4)   POLICY. A policy, certificate, contract or plan that is issued by
an insurer.
      (5)   STATEMENT. Includes but is not limited to any notice, letter, or
memorandum; proof of loss; bill of lading; receipt for payment; invoice,
account or other financial statement; estimate of property damage; bill for
services; diagnosis or prognosis; prescription; hospital, medical or dental
chart or other record; x-ray, photograph, videotape or movie film; test result;
other evidence of loss, injury or expense; computer-generated document; and
data in any form.
   (b)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Present to, or cause to be presented to, an insurer any written or
oral statement that is part of, or in support of, an application for insurance,
a claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement,
is false or deceptive;
      (2)   Assist, aid, abet, solicit, procure or conspire with another to
prepare or make any written or oral statement that is intended to be presented
to an insurer as part of, or in support of, an application for insurance, a
claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement,
is false or deceptive.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of insurance fraud. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, insurance fraud is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the amount of the claim that is false or deceptive is $1,000
or more, insurance fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
   (d)   This section shall not be construed to abrogate, waive or modify R.C.
§ 2317.02(A).
(R.C. § 2913.47)
§ 672.22 WORKERS’ COMPENSATION FRAUD.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Receive workers’ compensation benefits to which the person is not
entitled;
      (2)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false or
misleading statement with the purpose to secure payment for goods or services
rendered under R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127 or 4131 or to secure workers’
compensation benefits;
      (3)   Alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any record or document
that is necessary to fully establish the validity of any claim filed with, or
necessary to establish the nature and validity of all goods and services for
which reimbursement or payment was received or is requested from the Bureau of
Workers’ Compensation, or a self-insuring employer under R.C. Chapter 4121,
4123, 4127 or 4131;
      (4)   Enter into an agreement or conspiracy to defraud the Bureau of
Workers’ Compensation or a self-insuring employer by making or presenting or
causing to be made or presented a false claim for workers’ compensation
benefits;
      (5)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false statement
concerning manual codes, classification or employees, payroll, paid
compensation or number of personnel, when information of that nature is
necessary to determine the actual workers’ compensation premium or assessment
owed to the Bureau by an employer;
      (6)   Alter, forge or create a workers’ compensation certificate or
falsely show current or correct workers’ compensation coverage;
      (7)   Fail to secure or maintain workers’ compensation coverage as
required by R.C. Chapter 4123 with the intent to defraud the Bureau of Workers’
Compensation.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of workers’ compensation
fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, workers’ compensation
fraud is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of premiums and
assessments unpaid pursuant to actions described in division (a)(5), (a)(6) or
(a)(7) of this section, or goods, services, property or money stolen is $1,000
or more, workers’ compensation fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (c)   Upon application of the governmental body that conducted the
investigation and prosecution of a violation of this section, the court shall
order the person who is convicted of the violation to pay the governmental body
its costs of investigating and prosecuting the case. These costs are in
addition to any other costs or penalty provided under federal, state or local
law.
   (d)   The remedies and penalties provided in this section are not exclusive
remedies and penalties and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or
civil remedy or penalty for any act that is in violation of this section.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CLAIM. Any attempt to cause the Bureau of Workers’ Compensation, an
independent third party with whom the administrator or an employer contracts
under R.C. § 4121.44, or a self-insuring employer to make payment or
reimbursement for workers’ compensation benefits.
      (2)   EMPLOYER, EMPLOYEE, and SELF-INSURING EMPLOYER. Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 4123.01.
      (3)   EMPLOYMENT. Participating in any trade, occupation, business,
service or profession for substantial gainful remuneration.
      (4)   FALSE. Wholly or partially untrue or deceptive.
      (5)   GOODS. Includes but is not limited to medical supplies, appliances,
rehabilitative equipment and any other apparatus or furnishing provided or used
in the care, treatment or rehabilitation of a claimant for workers’
compensation benefits.
      (6)   RECORDS. Any medical, professional, financial or business record
relating to the treatment or care of any person, to goods or services provided
to any person, or to rates paid for goods or services provided to any person,
or any record that the administrator of workers’ compensation requires pursuant
to rule.
      (7)   REMUNERATION. Includes but is not limited to wages, commissions,
rebates and any other reward or consideration.
      (8)   SERVICES. Includes but is not limited to any service provided by
any health care provider to a claimant for workers’ compensation benefits and
any and all services provided by the Bureau as part of workers’ compensation
insurance coverage.
      (9)   STATEMENT. Includes but is not limited to any oral, written,
electronic, electronic impulse or magnetic communication notice, letter,
memorandum, receipt for payment, invoice, account, financial statement or bill
for services; a diagnosis, prognosis, prescription, hospital, medical or dental
chart or other record; and a computer generated document.
      (10)   WORKERS’ COMPENSATION BENEFITS. Any compensation or benefits
payable under R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127 or 4131.
(R.C. § 2913.48)
§ 672.23 MEDICAID FRAUD.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   PROVIDER. Any person who has signed a provider agreement with the
Department of Medicaid to provide goods or services pursuant to the Medicaid
program or any person who has signed an agreement with a party to such a
provider agreement under which the person agrees to provide goods or services
that are reimbursable under the Medicaid program.
      (2)   PROVIDER AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
      (3)   RECIPIENT. Any individual who receives goods or services from a
provider under the Medicaid program.
      (4)   RECORDS. Any medical, professional, financial or business records
relating to the treatment or care of any recipient, to goods or services
provided to any recipient, or to rates paid for goods or services provided to
any recipient, and any records that are required by the rules of the Medicaid
Director to be kept for the Medicaid program.
      (5)   STATEMENT OR REPRESENTATION. Any oral, written, electronic,
electronic impulse or magnetic communication that is used to identify an item
of goods or a service for which reimbursement may be made under the Medicaid
program or that states income and expense and is or may be used to determine a
rate of reimbursement under the Medicaid program.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a false or
misleading statement or representation for use in obtaining reimbursement from
the Medicaid program.
   (c)   No person, with purpose to commit fraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Contrary to the terms of the person’s provider agreement, charge,
solicit, accept or receive for goods or services that the person provides under
the Medicaid program any property, money or other consideration in addition to
the amount of reimbursement under the Medicaid program and the person’s
provider agreement for the goods or services and any cost-sharing expenses
authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid Director
regarding the Medicaid program.
      (2)   Solicit, offer or receive any remuneration, other than any cost-
sharing expenses authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid
Director regarding the Medicaid program, in cash or in kind, including but not
limited to a kickback or rebate, in connection with the furnishing of goods or
services for which whole or partial reimbursement is or may be made under the
Medicaid program.
   (d)   No person, having submitted a claim for or provided goods or services
under the Medicaid program, shall do either of the following for a period of at
least six years after a reimbursement pursuant to that claim, or a
reimbursement for those goods or services, is received under the Medicaid
program:
      (1)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to fully disclose the nature of all goods or services for
which the claim was submitted, or for which reimbursement was received, by the
person; or
      (2)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to disclose fully all income and expenditures upon which
rates of reimbursements were based for the person.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of Medicaid fraud. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, Medicaid fraud is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the value of the property, services or funds obtained in
violation of this section is $1,000 or more, Medicaid fraud is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (f)   Upon application of the governmental agency, office or other entity
that conducted the investigation and prosecution in a case under this section,
the court shall order any person who is convicted of a violation of this
section for receiving any reimbursement for furnishing goods or services under
the Medicaid program to which the person is not entitled to pay to the
applicant its cost of investigating and prosecuting the case. The costs of
investigation and prosecution that a defendant is ordered to pay pursuant to
this division shall be in addition to any other penalties for the receipt of
that reimbursement that are provided in this section, R.C. § 2913.40 or
5164.35, or any other provision of law.
   (g)   The provisions of this section are not intended to be exclusive
remedies and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 2913.40)
   (h)   Medicaid eligibility fraud.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following in an application
for enrollment in the Medicaid program or in a document that requires a
disclosure of assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for the
Medicaid program:
         A.   Make or cause to be made a false or misleading statement;
         B.   Conceal an interest in property;
         C.   1.   Except as provided in division (h)(1)C.2. of this section,
fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during the period
beginning 36 months before submission of the application or document and ending
on the date the application or document was submitted;
            2.   Fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during
the period beginning 60 months before submission of the application or document
and ending on the date the application or document was submitted and that was
made to an irrevocable trust a portion of which is not distributable to the
applicant for or recipient of Medicaid or to a revocable trust.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates this division (h) is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation
of this division (h) is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the
Medicaid services paid as a result of the violation is $1,000 or more, a
violation of this division (h) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
         B.   In addition to imposing a sentence under division (h)(2)A. of
this section, the court shall order that a person who is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud make restitution in the full amount of any Medicaid services
paid on behalf of an applicant for or recipient of Medicaid for which the
applicant or recipient was not eligible, plus interest at the rate applicable
to judgments on unreimbursed amounts from the date on which the Medicaid
services were paid to the date on which restitution is made.
         C.   The remedies and penalties provided in this division (h) are not
exclusive and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this division (h).
      (3)   This division (h) does not apply to a person who fully disclosed in
an application for Medicaid or in a document that requires a disclosure of
assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for Medicaid all of the
interests in property of the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, all
transfers of property by the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, and the
circumstances of all those transfers.
      (4)   Any amounts of Medicaid services recovered as restitution under
this division (h) and any interest on those amounts shall be credited to the
General Revenue Fund, and any applicable federal share shall be returned to the
appropriate agency or department of the United States.
      (5)   For the purpose of this division (h), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         A.   MEDICAID SERVICES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
         B.   PROPERTY. Any real or personal property or other asset in which a
person has any legal title or interest.
(R.C. § 2913.401)
§ 672.24 DIMINISHING OR INTERFERING WITH FORFEITABLE PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall destroy, damage, remove or transfer property that is
subject to forfeiture or otherwise take any action in regard to property that
is subject to forfeiture with purpose to do any of the following:
      (1)   Prevent or impair the state’s or political subdivision’s lawful
authority to take the property into its custody or control under R.C. Chapter
2981 or to continue holding the property under its lawful custody or control;
      (2)   Impair or defeat the court’s continuing jurisdiction over the
person and property;
      (3)   Devalue property that the person knows, or has reasonable cause to
believe, is subject to forfeiture proceedings under R.C. Chapter 2981.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with or
diminishing forfeitable property. Except as otherwise provided in this division
(b), interference with or diminishing forfeitable property is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the property is $1,000 or more, interference
with or diminishing forfeitable property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2981.07)
§ 672.25 MOTION PICTURE PIRACY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION means the capability of a device to
record or transmit a motion picture or any part of a motion picture by means of
any technology existing on, or developed after, March 9, 2004.
      (2)   FACILITY means a movie theater.
   (b)   No person, without the written consent of the owner or lessee of the
facility and of the licensor of the motion picture, shall knowingly operate an
audiovisual recording function of a device in a facility in which the motion
picture is being shown.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of motion
picture piracy, a misdemeanor of the first degree on the first offense and a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
   (d)   This section does not prohibit or restrict a lawfully authorized
investigative, law enforcement, protective or intelligence gathering employee
or agent of the government of this state or a political subdivision of this
state, or of the federal government, when acting in an official capacity, from
operating an audiovisual recording function of a device in any facility in
which a motion picture is being shown.
   (e)   Division (b) of this section does not limit or affect the application
of any other prohibition in this code or the Ohio Revised Code. Any act that is
a violation of both division (b) of this section and another provision of this
code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, under the
other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, or under both this
section and the other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
(R.C. § 2913.07)
CHAPTER 678
Weapons and Explosives
678.01   Definitions.
678.02   Carrying concealed weapons.
678.03   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention.
678.04   Using weapons while intoxicated.
678.05   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle.
678.06   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance.
678.07   Failure to secure dangerous ordnance.
678.08   Unlawful transactions in weapons.
678.09   Underage purchase of a firearm or handgun.
678.10   Pointing and discharging firearms and other weapons.
678.11   Discharge of a firearm on or near prohibited premises.
678.12   Fireworks.
678.13   Endangering aircraft and airport operations.
678.14   Possessing criminal tools.
678.15   Possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school
safety zone.
678.16   Concealed handgun licenses: possession of a revoked or suspended
license; additional restrictions; posting of signs prohibiting possession.
678.17   Defaced firearms.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives in riot areas, see R.C. §
3761.16
   Arson, see §
642.06
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Hunting prohibited, see §
618.13
   Posting firearm warning signs, see §
612.06
   Reporting gunshot wounds, see §
654.04
   Vehicles transporting explosives, see §
440.04
§ 678.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTIVE DUTY. Has the same meaning as defined in 10 U.S.C. § 101.
   ALIEN REGISTRATION NUMBER. The number issued by the United States
Citizenship and Immigration Services Agency that is located on the alien’s
permanent resident card and may also be commonly referred to as the “USCIS
number” or the “alien number”.
   AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a
succession of cartridges with a single function of the trigger.
   BALLISTIC KNIFE. A knife with a detachable blade that is propelled by a
spring-operated mechanism.
   CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED HANDGUN.
      (1)   Means, subject to division (2) of this definition, a license or
temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun issued under R.C. §
2923.125 or R.C. § 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed handgun issued
by another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
      (2)   A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed handgun
license issued under R.C. § 2923.125 or a license to carry a concealed handgun
issued under R.C. § 2923.125 means only a license of the type that is specified
in that section. A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed
handgun license issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, a license to carry a concealed
handgun issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, or a license to carry a concealed
handgun on a temporary emergency basis means only a license of the type that is
specified in R.C. § 2923.1213. A reference in any provision of this Code to a
concealed handgun license issued by another state or a license to carry a
concealed handgun issued by another state means only a license issued by
another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
      (1)   Any of the following, except as provided in division (2) of this
definition:
         A.   Any automatic or sawed-off firearm, zip-gun, or ballistic knife.
         B.   Any explosive device or incendiary device.
         C.   Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitrostarch, PETN, cyclonite, TNT,
picric acid, and other high explosives; amatol, tritonal, tetrytol, pentolite,
pecretol, cyclotol, and other high explosive compositions; plastic explosives;
dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin dynamite, sensitized ammonium nitrate,
liquid-oxygen blasting explosives, blasting powder, and other blasting agents;
and any other explosive substance having sufficient brisance or power to be
particularly suitable for use as a military explosive, or for use in mining,
quarrying, excavating, or demolitions.
         D.   Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery piece, grenade,
mine, bomb, torpedo, or similar weapon, designed and manufactured for military
purposes, and the ammunition for that weapon.
         E.   Any firearm muffler or suppressor.
         F.   Any combination of parts that is intended by the owner for use in
converting any firearm or other device into a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   The term does not include any of the following:
         A.   Any firearm, including a military weapon and the ammunition for
that weapon, and regardless of its actual age, that employs a percussion cap or
other obsolete ignition system, or that is designed and safe for use only with
black powder.
         B.   Any pistol, rifle, or shotgun, designed or suitable for sporting
purposes, including a military weapon as issued or as modified, and the
ammunition for that weapon, unless the firearm is an automatic or sawed-off
firearm.
         C.   Any cannon or other artillery piece that, regardless of its
actual age, is of a type in accepted use prior to 1887, has no mechanical,
hydraulic, pneumatic, or other system for absorbing recoil and returning the
tube into battery without displacing the carriage, and is designed and safe for
use only with black powder.
         D.   Black powder, priming quills, and percussion caps possessed and
lawfully used to fire a cannon of a type defined in division (2)C. of this
definition during displays, celebrations, organized matches or shoots, and
target practice, and smokeless and black powder, primers, and percussion caps
possessed and lawfully used as a propellant or ignition device in small- arms
or small-arms ammunition.
         E.   Dangerous ordnance that is inoperable or inert and cannot readily
be rendered operable or activated, and that is kept as a trophy, souvenir,
curio, or museum piece.
         F.   Any device that is expressly excepted from the definition of a
destructive device pursuant to the Gun Control Act of 1968, 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)
(4), as amended, and regulations issued under that act.
         G.   Any firearm with an overall length of at least 26 inches that is
approved for sale by the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and
Explosives under the “Gun Control Act of 1968”, 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. § 921
(a)(3), but that is found by the Bureau not to be regulated under the “National
Firearms Act”, 68A Stat. 725 (1934), 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).
   DEADLY WEAPON. Any instrument, device, or thing capable of inflicting death,
and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon, or possessed, carried,
or used as a weapon.
   EXPLOSIVE. Any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or common
purpose of which is to function by explosion. The term includes all materials
that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division 1.3, or
division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of Transportation in
its regulations and includes but is not limited to dynamite, black powder,
pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps, electric blasting caps,
safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs,  cordeau detonant fuses, instantaneous
fuses, and igniter cords and igniters. The term does not include “fireworks”,
as defined in R.C. § 3743.01, or any substance or material otherwise meeting
the definition of explosive set forth in this section that is manufactured,
sold, possessed, transported, stored, or used in any activity described in R.C.
§ 3743.80, provided the activity is conducted in accordance with all applicable
laws, rules, and regulations, including but not limited to the provisions of
R.C. § 3743.80 and the rules of the Fire Marshal adopted pursuant to R.C. §
3737.82.
   EXPLOSIVE DEVICE. Any device designed or specially adapted to cause physical
harm to persons or property by means of an explosion, and consisting of an
explosive substance or agency and a means to detonate it. The term includes
without limitation any bomb, any explosive demolition device, any blasting cap
or detonator containing an explosive charge, and any pressure vessel that has
been knowingly tampered with or arranged so as to explode.
   FIREARM.
      (1)   Any deadly weapon capable of expelling or propelling one or more
projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible propellant. The term
includes an unloaded firearm, and any firearm that is inoperable but that can
readily be rendered operable.
      (2)   When determining whether a firearm is capable of expelling or
propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible
propellant, the trier of fact may rely upon circumstantial evidence, including
but not limited to the representations and actions of the individual exercising
control over the firearm.
   HANDGUN. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be held and
fired by the use of a single hand;
      (2)   Any combination of parts from which a firearm of a type described
in division (1) of this definition can be assembled.
   INCENDIARY DEVICE. Any firebomb, and any device designed or specially
adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of fire, and
consisting of an incendiary substance or agent and a means to ignite it.
   MISDEMEANOR PUNISHABLE BY IMPRISONMENT FOR A TERM EXCEEDING ONE YEAR. The
phrase does not include any of the following:
      (1)   Any federal or state offense pertaining to antitrust violations,
unfair trade practices, restraints of trade, or other similar offenses relating
to the regulation of business practices;
      (2)   Any misdemeanor offense punishable by a term of imprisonment of two
years or less.
   SAWED-OFF FIREARM. A shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches long, or a
rifle with a barrel less than 16 inches long, or a shotgun or rifle less than
26 inches long overall. “Sawed-off firearm” does not include any firearm with
an overall length of at least 26 inches that is approved for sale by the
Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives under the “Gun
Control Act of 1968”, 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(3), but that is found
by the Bureau not to be regulated under the “National Firearms Act”, 68A Stat.
725 (1934), 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).
   SEMI-AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a
single cartridge and automatically chamber a succeeding cartridge ready to
fire, with a single function of the trigger.
   VALID CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or VALID LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED
HANDGUN. A concealed handgun license that is currently valid, that is not under
a suspension under R.C. § 2923.128(A)(1), under R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a
suspension provision of the state other than this state in which the license
was issued, and that has not been revoked under R.C. § 2923.128(B)(1), under
R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a revocation provision of the state other than this
state in which the license was issued.
   ZIP-GUN. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm of crude and extemporized manufacture.
      (2)   Any device, including without limitation a starter’s pistol, not
designed as a firearm, but that is specially adapted for use as a firearm.
      (3)   Any industrial tool, signaling device, or safety device, not
designed as a firearm, but that as designed is capable of use as such, when
possessed, carried, or used as a firearm.
(R.C. § 2923.11)
§ 678.02 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly carry or have, concealed on the person’s
person or concealed ready at hand, any of the following:
      (1)   A deadly weapon other than a handgun;
      (2)   A handgun other than a dangerous ordnance;
      (3)   A dangerous ordnance.
   (b)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license shall do any
of the following:
      (1)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, before or at the time a law enforcement officer
asks if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to disclose
that the person then is carrying a concealed handgun, provided that it is not a
violation of this division if the person fails to disclose that fact to an
officer during the stop and the person already has notified another officer of
that fact during the same stop;
      (2)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins approaching
the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless
the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer;
      (3)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose, if the
person is carrying a concealed handgun, and if the person is approached by any
law enforcement officer while stopped, knowingly remove or attempt to remove
the loaded handgun from the holster, pocket or other place in which the person
is carrying it, knowingly grasp or hold the loaded handgun, or knowingly have
contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with the person’s hands or
fingers at any time after the law enforcement officer begins approaching and
before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the person removes, attempts
to remove, grasps, holds or has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to and
in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer;
      (4)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any
lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the person is stopped,
including but not limited to a specific order to the person to keep the
person’s hands in plain sight.
   (c)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         A.   An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or to a law enforcement officer, who is authorized to carry
concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry handguns and
is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s or employee’s duties;
         B.   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry
handguns, and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C.
§ 109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly
specified that the exemption provided in this division (c)(1)B. does not apply
to the person.;
         C.   A person’s transportation or storage of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in a motor vehicle for any
lawful purpose if the firearm is not on the actor’s person;
         D.   A person’s storage or possession of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in the actor’s own home for any
lawful purpose.
      (2)   Division (a)(2) of this section does not apply to any person who
has been issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time of the
alleged carrying or possession of a handgun or who, at the time of the alleged
carrying or possession of a handgun, is an active duty member of the armed
forces of the United States and is carrying a valid military identification
card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets
or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), unless
the person knowingly is in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a)(1) of this
section of carrying or having control of a weapon other than a handgun and
other than a dangerous ordnance, that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by
law from having the weapon, and that any of the following applies:
      (1)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in or was going to or from the
actor’s lawful business or occupation, which business or occupation was of a
character or was necessarily carried on in a manner or at a time or place as to
render the actor particularly susceptible to criminal attack, such as would
justify a prudent person in going armed.
      (2)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in a lawful activity and had
reasonable cause to fear a criminal attack upon the actor, a member of the
actor’s family, or the actor’s home, such as would justify a prudent person in
going armed.
      (3)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for any
lawful purpose and while in the actor’s own home.
   (e)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of this section shall
be required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a condition for the
dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to, or
has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (b)(1) of this section as it
existed prior to June 13, 2022, the person may file an application under R.C. §
2953.35 requesting the expungement of the record of conviction.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of carrying concealed
weapons. Except as otherwise provided in this division or divisions (f)(2), (f)
(6), and (f)(7) of this section, carrying concealed weapons in violation of
division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Except as
otherwise provided in this division or divisions (f)(2), (f)(6), and (f)(7) of
this section, if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance
or of any offense of violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is
either loaded or for which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the
weapon involved is dangerous ordnance, carrying concealed weapons in violation
of division (a) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. Except as otherwise provided in divisions (f)(2), (f)(6), and (f)(7)
of this section, if the offense is committed aboard an aircraft, or with
purpose to carry a concealed
weapon aboard an aircraft, regardless of the weapon involved, carrying
concealed weapons in violation of division (a) of this section is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A person shall not be arrested for a violation of division (a)(2)
of this section solely because the person does not promptly produce a valid
concealed handgun license. If a person is arrested for a violation of division
(a)(2) of this section and is convicted of or pleads guilty to the violation,
the offender shall be punished as follows:
         A.   The offender shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor if both of
the following apply:
            1.   Within ten days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license, which license was valid at the time of the arrest to
the law enforcement agency that employs the arresting officer.
            2.   At the time of the arrest, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
         B.   The offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined
$500 if all of the following apply:
            1.   The offender previously had been issued a concealed handgun
license, and that license expired within the two years immediately preceding
the arrest.
            2.   Within 45 days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license to the law enforcement agency that employed the
arresting officer, and the offender waives in writing the offender’s right to a
speedy trial on the charge of the violation that is provided in R.C. § 2945.71.
            3.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
not knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
         C.   If divisions (f)(2)A. and (f)(2)B. and (f)(6) of this section do
not apply, the offender shall be punished under division (f)(1) or (f)(7) of
this section.
      (3)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (b)(1) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (b)(2) or (b)
(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(b)(2) or (b)(4) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of division (b)(2) or (b)(4) of this section, the offender’s concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2).
      (5)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (b)(3) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (6)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (a)(2) of
this section is an active duty m ember of the armed forces of the United States
and is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of
successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), and if at the time of the
violation the person was not knowingly in a place described in R.C. 2923.126
(B), the officer shall not arrest the person for a violation of that division.
If the person is not able to promptly produce a valid military identification
card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets
or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) and if
the person is not in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B), the officer shall
issue a citation and the offender shall be assessed a civil penalty of not more
than $500. The citation shall be automatically dismissed and the civil penalty
shall not be assessed if both of the following apply:
         A.   Within ten days after the issuance of the citation, the offender
presents a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), which were both valid at the time of the
issuance of the citation to the law enforcement agency that employs the citing
officer.
         B.   At the time of the citation, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
      (7)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (a)(2) of
this section is knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B)(5) and is
not authorized to carry a handgun or have a handgun concealed on the person’s
person or concealed ready at hand under that division, the penalty shall be as
follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person
produces a valid concealed handgun license within ten days after the arrest and
has not previously been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(a)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a minor misdemeanor;
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (a)
(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
         C.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division
(a)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree;
         D.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of
division (a)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, or convicted of or pleaded guilty to any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is a
dangerous ordnance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (g)   If a law enforcement officer stops a person to question the person
regarding a possible violation of this section, for a traffic stop, or for any
other law enforcement purpose, if the person surrenders a firearm to the
officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the officer,
and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this section
or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise prohibited by
law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not contraband, the officer
shall return the firearm to the person at the termination of the stop. If a
court orders a law enforcement officer to return a firearm to a person pursuant
to the requirement set forth in this division, R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.
   (h)   For purposes of this section, “deadly weapon” or “weapon” does not
include any knife, razor, or cutting instrument if the instrument was not used
as a weapon.
(R.C. § 2923.12)
Statutory reference:
   Carrying concealed handguns, licensing through County Sheriff, see R.C. §§
2923.124 et seq.
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance on school
premises, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122
   Conveyance, possession, or control of deadly weapon or dangerous ordinance
in a courthouse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.123
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offense, see R.C.
§ 2923.131
   Possession of firearm in liquor permit premises, felony offense, see R.C. §
2923.121
§ 678.03 POSSESSION OF DEADLY WEAPON WHILE UNDER DETENTION.
   (a)   DETENTION and DETENTION FACILITY have the same meanings as in R.C. §
2921.01.
   (b)   No person under detention at a detention facility shall possess a
deadly weapon.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession of a deadly
weapon while under detention.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2) of this section,
possession of a deadly weapon while under detention is a felony to be
prosecuted under state law.
      (2)   If the offender, at the time of the commission of the offense, was
under detention as an alleged or adjudicated delinquent child or unruly child
and if at the time the offender commits the act for which the offender was
under detention it would not be a felony if committed by an adult, possession
of a deadly weapon while under detention is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2923.131)
Statutory reference:
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offenses, see R.C.
§ 2923.131
§ 678.04 USING WEAPONS WHILE INTOXICATED.
   (a)   No person, while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse,
shall carry or use any firearm or dangerous ordnance.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using weapons while
intoxicated, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2923.15)
§ 678.05 IMPROPERLY HANDLING FIREARMS IN A MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly discharge a firearm while in or on a motor
vehicle.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded firearm in a
motor vehicle in such a manner that the firearm is accessible to the operator
or any passenger without leaving the vehicle.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a motor
vehicle, unless the person may lawfully possess that firearm under applicable
law of this state or the United States, the firearm is unloaded, and the
firearm is carried in one of the following ways:
      (1)   In a closed package, box or case.
      (2)   In a compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (3)   In plain sight and secured in a rack or holder made for the
purpose.
      (4)   If the firearm is at least 24 inches in overall length as measured
from the muzzle to the part of the stock furthest from the muzzle and if the
barrel is at least 18 inches in length, either in plain sight with the action
open or the weapon stripped, or, if the firearm is of a type on which the
action will not stay open or which cannot easily be stripped, in plain sight.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded handgun in a
motor vehicle if, at the time of that transportation or possession, any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them.
      (2)   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine
contains a concentration of alcohol, a listed controlled substance, or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance prohibited for persons operating a
vehicle, as specified in R.C. § 4511.19(A), regardless of whether the person at
the time of the transportation or possession as described in this division is
the operator of or a passenger in the motor vehicle.
   (e)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license or who is an
active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a
valid military identification card and documentation of successful completion
of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described
in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), who is the driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle
that is stopped as a result of a traffic stop or a stop for another law
enforcement purpose or is the driver or an occupant of a commercial motor
vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit
for the purposes defined in R.C. § 5503.34, and who is transporting or has a
loaded handgun in the motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle in any manner,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Before or at the time a law enforcement officer asks if the person
is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to disclose that the person
then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle, provided that it
is not a violation of this division if the person fails to disclose that fact
to an officer during the stop and the person already has notified another
officer of that fact during the same stop;
      (2)   Before or at the time an employee of the motor carrier enforcement
unit asks if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to
disclose that the person then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the
commercial motor vehicle, provided that it is not a violation of this division
if the person fails to disclose that fact to an employee of the unit during the
stop and the person already has notified another employee of the unit of that
fact during the same stop;
      (3)   Knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle while stopped, or
knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in plain sight at any time after any
law enforcement officer begins approaching the person while stopped and before
the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in
accordance with directions given by a law enforcement officer;
      (4)   Knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with
the person’s hands or fingers in the motor vehicle at any time after the law
enforcement officer begins approaching and before the law enforcement officer
leaves, unless the person has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to and
in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer.
      (5)   Knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful order of any
law enforcement officer given while the motor vehicle is stopped, including but
not limited to a specific order to the person to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight.
   (f)   (1)   Divisions (a), (b), (c) and (e) of this section do not apply to
any of the following:
         A.   An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, when authorized to carry or have
loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles and acting within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s or employee’s duties;
         B.   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles, and who is
subject to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless
the appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the
exemption provided in this division (f)(1)B. does not apply to the person.
      (2)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following circumstances apply:
         A.   The person discharges a firearm from a motor vehicle at a coyote
or groundhog, the discharge is not during the deer gun hunting season as set by
the Chief of the Division of Wildlife of the Department of Natural Resources,
and the discharge at the coyote or groundhog, but for the operation of this
section, is lawful.
         B.   The motor vehicle from which the person discharges the firearm is
on real property that is located in an unincorporated area of a township and
that is either zoned for agriculture or is used for agriculture.
         C.   The person owns the real property described in division (f)(2)B.
of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that real
property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is the
spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real property.
         D.   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the following
manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, highway or other public or
private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including but not
limited to a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (3)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following apply:
         A.   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         B.   The person discharges a firearm at a wild quadruped or game bird
as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 during the open hunting season for the applicable
wild quadruped or game bird.
         C.   The person discharges a firearm from a stationary all-purpose
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 from private or publicly owned lands or
from a motor vehicle that is parked on a road that is owned or administered by
the Division of Wildlife.
         D.   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the following
manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, a highway or other public or
private property that is used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including but not
limited to a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (4)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following circumstances apply:
         A.   At the time of the alleged violation of either of those
divisions, the person is the operator of or a passenger in a motor vehicle.
         B.   The motor vehicle is on real property that is located in an
unincorporated area of a township and that is either zoned for agriculture or
is used for agriculture.
         C.   The person owns the real property described in division (f)(4)B.
of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that real
property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is the
spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real property.
         D.   The person, prior to arriving at the real property described in
division (f)(4)B. of this section, did not transport or possess a firearm in
the motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (b) or (c) of this section
while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway or other public
or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking.
      (5)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to a person who
transports or possesses a handgun in a motor vehicle if, at the time of that
transportation or possession, both of the following apply:
         A.   The person transporting or possessing the handgun has been issued
a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question or the person
is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         B.   The person transporting or possessing the handgun is not
knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
      (6)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following apply:
         A.   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         B.   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 or a motor vehicle during the open hunting season for a wild
quadruped or game bird.
         C.   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 on private or publicly owned lands or on or in a motor vehicle that
is parked on a road that is owned or administered by the Division of Wildlife.
   (g)   (1)   The affirmative defenses authorized in R.C. § 2923.12(D)(1) and
(D)(2) are affirmative defenses to a charge under division (b) or (c) of this
section that involves a firearm other than a handgun.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b) or (c)
of this section of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle that the
actor transported or had the firearm in the motor vehicle for any lawful
purpose and while the motor vehicle was on the actor’s own property, provided
that this affirmative defense is not available unless the person, immediately
prior to arriving at the actor’s own property, did not transport or possess the
firearm in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (b) or (c) of
this section while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway or
other public or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic.
   (h)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of division (b), (c)
or (d) of this section shall be required to obtain a concealed handgun license
as a condition for the dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   A.   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty
to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (e) of this section as it
existed prior to September 30, 2011, and the conduct that was the basis of the
violation no longer would be a violation of division (e) of this section on or
after September 30, 2011, or if a person is convicted of, was convicted of,
pleads guilty to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (e)(1) or
(e)(2) of this section as it existed prior to June 13, 2022, the person may
file an application under R.C. § 2953.35 requesting the expungement of the
record of conviction.
         B.   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to,
or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (b) or (c) of this section as
the division existed prior to September 30, 2011 and if the conduct that was
the basis of the violation no longer would be a violation of division (b) or
(c) of this section on or after September 30, 2011 due to the application of
division (f)(5) of this section as it exists on and after September 30, 2011,
the person may file an application under R.C. § 2953.35 requesting the
expungement of the record of conviction.
   (i)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly handling
firearms in a motor vehicle. A violation of division (a) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division
(c) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of
division (d) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law and, if the loaded handgun is concealed on the person's person, it is
also a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of
division (e)(1) or (e)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (e)(4) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (e)(3) or (e)
(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(e)(3) or (e)(5) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of division (e)(3) or (e)(5) of this section, the offender’s concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2). A violation of
division (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (j)   If a law enforcement officer stops a motor vehicle for a traffic stop
or any other purpose, if any person in the motor vehicle surrenders a firearm
to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the
officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this
section or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise
prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not
contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the
termination of the stop. If a court orders a law enforcement officer to return
a firearm to a person pursuant to the requirement set forth in this division,
R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.
   (k)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   AGRICULTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 519.01.
      (2)   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.25
(A).
      (3)   MOTOR CARRIER ENFORCEMENT UNIT. The Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit
in the Department of Public Safety, Division of State Highway Patrol, that is
created by R.C. § 5503.34.
      (4)   MOTOR VEHICLE, STREET and HIGHWAY.. Have the same meaning as in
R.C. § 4511.01.
      (5)   OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.01.
      (6)   TENANT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.
      (7)   UNLOADED.
         A.   With respect to a firearm other than a firearm described in
division D. of this definition, means that no ammunition is in the firearm in
question, no magazine or speed loader containing ammunition is inserted into
the firearm, and one of the following applies:
            1.   There is no ammunition in a magazine or speed loader that is
in the vehicle in question and that may be used with the firearm in question.
            2.   Any magazine or speed loader that contains ammunition and that
may be used with the firearm in question is stored in a compartment within the
vehicle in question that cannot be accessed without leaving the vehicle or is
stored in a container that provides complete and separate enclosure.
         B.   For the purposes of division A.2. of this definition, a
“container that provides complete and separate enclosure” includes, but is not
limited to, any of the following:
            1.   A package, box, or case with multiple compartments, as long as
the loaded magazine or speed loader and the firearm in question either are in
separate compartments within the package, box, or case, or, if they are in the
same compartment, the magazine or speed loader is contained within a separate
enclosure in that compartment that does not contain the firearm and that closes
using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop closing mechanism, or other
fastener that must be opened to access the contents or the firearm is contained
within a separate enclosure of that nature in that compartment that does not
contain the magazine or speed loader;
            2.   A pocket or other enclosure on the person of the person in
question that closes using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop
closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be opened to access the
contents.
         C.   For the purposes of divisions A. and B. of this definition,
ammunition held in stripper-clips or in en-bloc clips is not considered
ammunition that is loaded into a magazine or speed loader.
         D.   “Unloaded” means, with respect to a firearm employing a
percussion cap, flintlock, or other obsolete ignition system, when the weapon
is uncapped or when the priming charge is removed from the pan.
   (l)   Divisions A. and B. of the definition of “unloaded” in division (k) of
this section do not affect the authority of a person who has been issued a
concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question to have one or
more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a vehicle,
without being transported as described in those divisions, as long as no
ammunition is in a firearm, other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as
permitted under any other provision of this chapter. A person who has been
issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question may
have one or more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a
vehicle without further restriction, as long as no ammunition is in a firearm,
other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as permitted under any
provision of this chapter.
(R.C. § 2923.16)
Statutory reference:
   Return of surrendered firearms by law enforcement, see R.C. § 2923.163
§ 678.06 LICENSE OR PERMIT TO POSSESS DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (a)   Upon application to the Sheriff of the county or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has the
applicant’s principal place of business, and upon payment of the fee specified
in division (b) of this section, a license or temporary permit shall be issued
to qualified applicants to acquire, possess, carry or use a dangerous ordnance
for the following purposes:
      (1)   Contractors, wreckers, quarriers, mine operators and other persons
regularly employing explosives in the course of a legitimate business, with
respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired, possessed, carried or
used in the course of the business.
      (2)   Farmers, with respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired,
possessed, carried or used for agricultural purposes on lands farmed by them.
      (3)   Scientists, engineers and instructors, with respect to a dangerous
ordnance acquired, possessed, carried or used in the course of bona fide
research or instruction.
      (4)   Financial institutions and armored car company guards, with respect
to automatic firearms lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or used by any such
person while acting within the scope of the person’s duties.
      (5)   In the discretion of the issuing authority, any responsible person,
with respect to a dangerous ordnance lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or
used for a legitimate research, scientific, educational, industrial or other
proper purpose.
   (b)   Application for a license or temporary permit under this section shall
be in writing under oath to the Sheriff of the county or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has the
applicant’s principal place of business. The application shall be accompanied
by an application fee of $50 when the application is for a license, and an
application fee of $5 when the application is for a temporary permit. The fees
shall be paid into the General Revenue Fund of the county or municipality. The
application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name, age, address, occupation and business address of the
applicant, if the applicant is a natural person, or the name, address and
principal place of business of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation.
      (2)   A description of the dangerous ordnance for which a permit is
requested.
      (3)   A description of the places where and the manner in which the
dangerous ordnance is to be kept, carried and used.
      (4)   A statement of the purposes for which the dangerous ordnance is to
be acquired, possessed, carried or used.
      (5)   Any other information as the issuing authority may require in
giving effect to this section.
   (c)   Upon investigation, the issuing authority shall issue a license or
temporary permit only if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The applicant is not otherwise prohibited by law from acquiring,
having, carrying or using a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   The applicant is 21 years of age or over, if the applicant is a
natural person.
      (3)   It appears that the applicant has sufficient competence to safely
acquire, possess, carry or use the dangerous ordnance, and that proper
precautions will be taken to protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and
ensure the safety of persons and property.
      (4)   It appears that the dangerous ordnance will be lawfully acquired,
possessed, carried and used by the applicant for a legitimate purpose.
   (d)   The license or temporary permit shall identify the person to whom it
is issued, identify the dangerous ordnance involved and state the purposes for
which the license or temporary permit is issued, state the expiration date, if
any, and list the restrictions on the acquisition, possession, carriage or use
of the dangerous ordnance as the issuing authority considers advisable to
protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and ensure the safety of persons
and property.
   (e)   A temporary permit shall be issued for the casual use of explosives
and explosive devices, and other consumable dangerous ordnance, and shall
expire within 30 days of its issuance. A license shall be issued for the
regular use of consumable dangerous ordnance, or for any non- consumable
dangerous ordnance, which license need not specify an expiration date, but the
issuing authority may specify such expiration date, not earlier than one year
from the date of issuance, as it considers advisable in view of the nature of
the dangerous ordnance and the purposes for which the license is issued.
   (f)   The dangerous ordnance specified in a license or temporary permit may
be obtained by the holder anywhere in the state. Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.18(F),
the holder of a license may use the dangerous ordnance anywhere in the state.
The holder of a temporary permit may use the dangerous ordnance only within the
territorial jurisdiction of the issuing authority.
   (g)   The issuing authority shall forward to the State Fire Marshal a copy
of each license or temporary permit issued pursuant to this section, and a copy
of each record of a transaction in a dangerous ordnance and of each report of a
lost or stolen dangerous ordnance, given to the local law enforcement authority
as required by R.C. § 2923.20(A)(6) and (A)(7) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. The State Fire Marshal will keep a permanent file of all
licenses and temporary permits issued pursuant to this section, and of all
records of transactions in, and losses or thefts of a dangerous ordnance
forwarded by local law enforcement authorities pursuant to this section.
(R.C. § 2923.18)
§ 678.07 FAILURE TO SECURE DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (a)   No person, in acquiring, possessing, carrying or using any dangerous
ordnance, shall negligently fail to take proper precautions:
      (1)   To secure the dangerous ordnance against theft, or against its
acquisition or use by any unauthorized or incompetent person.
      (2)   To ensure the safety of persons and property.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to a secure
dangerous ordnance, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2923.19)
§ 678.08 UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS IN WEAPONS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Recklessly sell, lend, give or furnish any firearm to any person
prohibited by R.C. § 2923.13 or 2923.15, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, from acquiring or using any firearm, or recklessly sell,
lend, give or furnish any dangerous ordnance to any person prohibited by R.C. §
2923.13, 2923.15 or 2923.17, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
from acquiring or using any dangerous ordnance;
      (2)   Possess any firearm or dangerous ordnance with purpose to dispose
of it in violation of division (a)(1) of this section;
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) of this section,
knowingly solicit, persuade, encourage, or entice a federally licensed firearms
dealer or private seller to transfer a firearm or ammunition to any person in a
manner prohibited by state or federal law;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) of this section, with
an intent to deceive, knowingly provide materially false information to a
federally licensed firearms dealer or private seller;
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) of this section,
knowingly procure, solicit, persuade, encourage, or entice a person to act in
violation of division (a)(3) or (a)(4) of this section;
      (6)   When transferring any dangerous ordnance to another, negligently
fail to require the transferee to exhibit the identification, license or permit
showing the transferee to be authorized to acquire dangerous ordnance pursuant
to R.C. § 2923.17, or negligently fail to take a complete record of the
transaction and forthwith forward a copy of the record to the Sheriff of the
county or Safety Director or Police Chief of the municipality where the
transaction takes place;
      (7)   Knowingly fail to report to law enforcement authorities forthwith
the loss or theft of any firearm or dangerous ordnance in the person’s
possession and under his or her control.
   (b)   Divisions (a)(3), (a)(4), and (a)(5) of this section do not apply to
any of the following:
      (1)   A law enforcement officer who is acting within the scope of the
officer’s duties;
      (2)   A person who is acting in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer described in division (b)(1) of this section.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful transactions in
weapons. A violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), or (a)(5) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A
violation of division (a)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (a)(7) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   AMMUNITION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.401.
      (2)   FEDERALLY LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 5502.63.
      (3)   MATERIALLY FALSE INFORMATION. Means information regarding the
transfer of a firearm or ammunition that portrays an illegal transaction as
legal or a legal transaction as illegal.
      (4)   PRIVATE SELLER. Means a person who sells, offers for sale, or
transfers a firearm or ammunition and who is not a federally licensed firearms
dealer.
(R.C. § 2923.20)
§ 678.09 UNDERAGE PURCHASE OF A FIREARM OR HANDGUN.
   (a)   No person under 18 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a firearm.
   (b)   No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a handgun; provided, that this division does not apply to the purchase or
attempted purchase of a handgun by a person 18 years of age or older and under
21 years of age, if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is a law enforcement officer and has received firearms
training approved by the Ohio Peace Officer Training Council or equivalent
firearms training.
      (2)   The person is an active or reserve member of the armed services of
the United States or the Ohio National Guard, or was honorably discharged from
military service in the active or reserve armed services of the United States
or the Ohio National Guard, and the person has received firearms training from
the armed services or the national guard or equivalent firearms training.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of underage
purchase of a firearm, a delinquent act that would be a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law if it could be committed by an adult. Whoever
violates division (b) of this section is guilty of underage purchase of a
handgun, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2923.211)
§ 678.10 POINTING AND DISCHARGING FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS.
   (a)   Except as provided in divisions (c) and (d) of this section, no person
shall discharge any air gun, rifle, shotgun, revolver, pistol or other firearm,
or make use of any sling or arrow, within the corporate limits of the
municipality.
   (b)   No person shall, intentionally and without malice, point or aim a
firearm at or toward another or discharge a firearm so pointed or aimed.
   (c)   This section does not extend to cases in which firearms, slings or
arrows are used in self- defense, in the discharge of official duty or in
justifiable homicide.
   (d)   This section does not extend to cases in which BB guns and other air
guns, or slings or arrows, are used in the confines of dwellings, provided the
use is under adult supervision and is approved by the Chief of Police.
   (e)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
§ 678.11 DISCHARGE OF A FIREARM ON OR NEAR PROHIBITED PREMISES.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Without permission from the proper officials and subject to
division (b)(1) of this section, discharge a firearm upon or over a cemetery or
within 100 yards of a cemetery;
      (2)   Subject to division (b)(2) of this section, discharge of a firearm
on a lawn, park, pleasure ground, orchard or other ground appurtenant to a
schoolhouse, church or inhabited dwelling, the property of another or a
charitable institution;
      (3)   Discharge a firearm upon or over a public road or highway.
   (b)   (1)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
while on the person’s own land, discharges a firearm.
      (2)   Division (a)(2) of this section does not apply to a person who owns
any type of property described in that division and who, while on the person’s
own enclosure, discharges a firearm.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of discharge
of a firearm on or near prohibited premises. A violation of division (a)(1) or
(a)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of
division (a)(3) of this section shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2) of this section, a
violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   If the violation created a substantial risk of physical harm to any
person, caused serious physical harm to property, caused physical harm to any
person, or caused serious physical harm to any person, a violation of division
(a)(3) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2923.162)
§ 678.12 FIREWORKS.
   (a)   Definitions. Unless otherwise provided, for the purpose of this
chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
      1.3G FIREWORKS. Display fireworks consistent with regulations of the
United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the designation
“Division 1.3" in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
      1.4G FIREWORKS. Consumer fireworks consistent with regulations of the
United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the designation
“Division 1.4” in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
      BEER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4301.01.
      BOOBY TRAP. A small tube that has a string protruding from both ends that
has a friction-sensitive composition and that is ignited by pulling the ends of
the string.
      CIGARETTE LOAD. A small wooden peg that is coated with a small quantity
of explosive composition and that is ignited in a cigarette.
      CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
      DISCHARGE SITE. An area immediately surrounding the mortars used to fire
aerial shells.
      FIREWORKS. Any composition or device prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or
detonation, except ordinary matches and except as provided in R.C. § 3743.80.
      FIREWORKS INCIDENT. Any action or omission that occurs at a fireworks
exhibition that results in injury or death, or a substantial risk of injury or
death, to any person, and that involves either of the following:
         A.   The handling or other use, or the results of the handling or
other use, of fireworks or associated equipment or other materials;
         B.   The failure of any person to comply with any applicable
requirement imposed by this chapter or R.C. Chapter 3743, or any applicable
rule adopted under this chapter or R.C. Chapter 3743.
      FIREWORKS INCIDENT SITE. A discharge site or other location at a
fireworks exhibition where a fireworks incident occurs, a location where an
injury or death associated with a fireworks incident occurs, or a location
where evidence of a fireworks incident or an injury or death associated with a
fireworks incident is found
      FIREWORKS PLANT. All buildings and other structures in which the
manufacturing of fireworks, or the storage or sale of manufactured fireworks by
a manufacturer, takes place.
      FOUNTAIN DEVICE. Means a specific type of 1.4G firework that meets all of
the following criteria:
         A.   It is nonaerial and nonreport producing.
         B.   It is recognized and manufactured in accordance with sections
3.1.1 and 3.5 of APA standard 87-1 (2001 edition).
         C.   It is a ground-based or hand-held sparkler with one or more tubes
containing a nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks
upon ignition, with or without additional effects that may include a colored
flame, audible crackling effect, audible whistle effect, or smoke.
         D.   It contains not more than 75 grams of the nonexplosive
pyrotechnic mixture in any individual tube and not more than 500 grams or less
for multiple tubes.
      HIGHWAY. Any public street, road, alley, way, lane or other public
thoroughfare.
      INTOXICATING LIQUOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4301.01.
      LICENSED BUILDING. A building on the licensed premises of a licensed
manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks that is approved for occupancy by the
building official having jurisdiction.
      LICENSED EXHIBITOR OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED EXHIBITOR. A person licensed
pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55.
      LICENSED FOUNTAIN DEVICE RETAILER or LICENSED RETAILER. Means a person
licensed pursuant to R.C. § 3743.26.
      LICENSED MANUFACTURER OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED MANUFACTURER. A person
licensed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.02 through 3743.08.
      LICENSED PREMISES. The real estate upon which a licensed manufacturer or
wholesaler of fireworks conducts business.
      LICENSED WHOLESALER OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED WHOLESALER. A person
licensed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.15 through 3743.21.
      LIST OF LICENSED EXHIBITORS. The list required by R.C. § 3743.51(C).
      LIST OF LICENSED MANUFACTURERS. The list required by R.C. § 3743.03(C).
      LIST OF LICENSED WHOLESALERS. The list required by R.C. § 3743.16(C).
      MANUFACTURING OF FIREWORKS. The making of fireworks from raw materials,
none of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, or the processing of
fireworks.
      NAVIGABLE WATERS. Any body of water susceptible of being used in its
ordinary condition as a highway of commerce over which trade and travel is or
may be conducted in the customary modes, but does not include a body of water
that is not capable of navigation by barges, tugboats, and other large vessels.
      NOVELTIES and TRICK NOISEMAKERS.
         A.   Devices that produce a small report intended to surprise the
user, including but not limited to booby traps, cigarette loads, party poppers,
and snappers;
         B.   Snakes or glow worms;
         C.   Smoke devices;
         D.   Trick matches.
      PARTY POPPER. A small plastic or paper item that contains not more than
16 milligrams of friction-sensitive explosive composition that is ignited by
pulling a string protruding from the item, and from which paper streamers are
expelled when the item is ignited.
      PROCESSING OF FIREWORKS. The making of fireworks from materials all or
part of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, but does not include
the mere packaging or repackaging of fireworks.
      RAILROAD. Any railway or railroad that carries freight or passengers for
hire, but does not include auxiliary tracks, spurs, and sidings installed and
primarily used in serving a mine, quarry or plant.
      RETAIL SALE or SELL AT RETAIL. A sale of fireworks to a purchaser who
intends to use the fireworks and not to resell them.
      SMOKE DEVICE. A tube or sphere that contains pyrotechnic composition
that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect.
      SNAKE or GLOW WORM. A device that consists of a pressed pellet of
pyrotechnic composition that produces a large snake-like ash upon burning,
which ash expands in length as the pellet burns.
      SNAPPER. A small paper-wrapped item that contains a minute quantity of
explosive composition coated on small bits of sand and that, when dropped,
implodes.
      STORAGE LOCATION. A single parcel or contiguous parcels of real estate
approved by the Ohio Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. § 3743.04(I) or R.C. §
3743.17(F) that are separate from a licensed premises containing a retail
showroom, and which parcel or parcels a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler of
fireworks may use only for the distribution, possession, and storage of
fireworks in accordance with this chapter.
      TRICK MATCH. A kitchen or book match that is coated with a small quantity
of explosive composition and that, upon ignition, produces a small report or a
shower of sparks.
      WHOLESALE SALE or SELL AT WHOLESALE. A sale of fireworks to a purchaser
who intends to resell the fireworks so purchased.
      WIRE SPARKLER. A sparkler consisting of a wire or stick coated with a
nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks upon ignition
and that contains no more than 100 grams of this mixture.
(R.C. § 3743.01)
   (b)   Manufacturing.
      (1)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall knowingly fail to
comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. §
3743.05 or the requirements of R.C. § 3743.06.
      (2)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to maintain
complete inventory, wholesale sale and retail records as required by R.C. §
3743.07, or to permit an inspection of these records or the premises of a
fireworks plant or the wholesaler pursuant to R.C. § 3743.08.
      (3)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C. § 3743.08(B)(1) within
the specified period of time.
      (4)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C. § 3743.08(B)(2) until
the nonconformities are eliminated, corrected or otherwise remedied or the 72-
hour period specified in those divisions has expired, whichever occurs first.
      (5)   No person shall smoke or shall carry a pipe, cigarette or cigar, or
a match, lighter, other flame-producing item or open flame on, or shall carry a
concealed source of ignition into, the premises of a fireworks plant, except as
smoking is authorized in specified lunchrooms or restrooms by a manufacturer
pursuant to R.C. § 3743.06(C).
      (6)   No person shall have possession or control of, or be under the
influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer or controlled substance while on
the premises of a fireworks plant.
      (7)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall negligently fail to
furnish a safety pamphlet to a purchaser of 1.4G fireworks as required by R.C.
§ 3743.47(A).
      (8)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall negligently fail to
have safety glasses available for sale as required by R.C. § 3743.47(B).
(R.C. § 3743.60(E) - (L))
   (c)   Wholesaling.
      (1)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall knowingly fail to comply
with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. § 3743.18 or
the requirements of R.C. § 3743.19.
      (2)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to maintain complete
inventory, wholesale sale and retail records as required by R.C. § 3743.20, or
to permit an inspection of these records or the premises of a fireworks plant
or the wholesaler pursuant to R.C. § 3743.21.
      (3)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C. § 3743.21(B)(1) within
the specified period of time.
      (4)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C. § 3743.21(B)(2) until
the nonconformities are eliminated, corrected or otherwise remedied or the 72-
hour period specified in those divisions has expired, whichever occurs first.
      (5)   No person shall smoke or shall carry a pipe, cigarette or cigar, or
a match, lighter, other flame-producing item or open flame on, or shall carry a
concealed source of ignition into, the premises of a wholesaler of fireworks,
except as smoking is authorized in specified lunchrooms or restrooms by a
wholesaler pursuant to R.C. § 3743.19(D).
      (6)   No person shall have possession or control of, or be under the
influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer or controlled substance while on
the premises of a wholesaler of fireworks.
      (7)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall negligently fail to
furnish a safety pamphlet to a purchaser of 1.4G fireworks as required by R.C.
§ 3743.47(A).
      (8)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall negligently fail to have
safety glasses available for sale as required by R.C. § 3743.47(B).
(R.C. § 3743.61(E) - (L))
   (d)   Purchasing and transporting.
      (1)   No person who purchases fireworks in this municipality shall obtain
possession of the fireworks in this municipality unless the person complies
with R.C. §§ 3743.44 to 3743.46.
      (2)   Except for the purchase of 1.4G fireworks made under R.C. §
3743.45, no person who resides in another state and who purchases fireworks in
this state shall obtain possession of fireworks in this state other than from a
licensed manufacturer or wholesaler, or fail, when transporting 1.3G fireworks,
to transport them directly out of this state within 72 hours after the time of
their purchase.
      (3)   No person who purchases fireworks in this state under R.C. §
3743.45 shall give or sell to any other person in this municipality fireworks
that the person has acquired in this state.
(R.C. § 3743.63)
   (e)   Prohibited activities by exhibitors.
      (1)   An exhibitor of fireworks licensed under R.C. §§ 3743.50 through
3743.55 who wishes to conduct a public fireworks exhibition shall apply for
approval to conduct the exhibition to the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer
and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
having jurisdiction over the premises.
      (2)   The approval required by division (e)(1) of this section shall be
evidenced by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief
or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, signing a permit for the
exhibition. Any exhibitor of fireworks who wishes to conduct a public fireworks
exhibition may obtain a copy of the form from the State Fire Marshal or, if
available, from the Fire Chief, a fire prevention officer, the Police Chief or
other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of the Police Chief
or other similar chief law enforcement officer.
      (3)   Before a permit is signed and issued to a licensed exhibitor of
fireworks, the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in consultation with the
Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of
the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall inspect
the premises on which the exhibition will take place and shall determine that,
in fact, the applicant for the permit is a licensed exhibitor of fireworks.
Each applicant shall show his or her license as an exhibitor of fireworks to
the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer.
      (4)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and the Police Chief or
other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall give approval to
conduct a public fireworks exhibition only if satisfied, based on the
inspection, that the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted allow
the exhibitor to comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal
pursuant to R.C. § 3743.53(B) and (E) and that the applicant is, in fact, a
licensed exhibitor of fireworks. The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in
consultation with the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer or with the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, may inspect the premises immediately prior to the
exhibition to determine if the exhibitor has complied with the rules, and may
revoke a permit for noncompliance with the rules.
      (5)   If the Council has prescribed a fee for the issuance of a permit
for a public fireworks exhibition, the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer
and Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or their
designee, shall not issue a permit until the exhibitor pays the requisite fee.
      (6)   Each exhibitor shall provide an indemnity bond in the amount of at
least $1,000,000 with surety satisfactory to the Fire Chief or fire prevention
officer and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer, conditioned for the payment of all final judgments that may be
rendered against the exhibitor on account of injury, death or loss to person or
property emanating from the fireworks exhibitor, or proof of insurance coverage
of at least $1,000,000 for liability arising from injury, death or loss of
persons or property emanating from the fireworks exhibition. The Council may
require the exhibitor to provide an indemnity bond or proof of insurance
coverage in amounts greater than those required by this division. The Fire
Chief or fire prevention officer and Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or their designee, shall not issue a permit until the
exhibitor provides the bond or proof of the insurance coverage required by this
division or by the Council.
      (7)   Each permit for a fireworks exhibition issued by the Fire Chief or
fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief
law enforcement officer, shall contain a distinct number, designate the
municipality, and identify the certified fire safety inspector, Fire Chief or
fire prevention officer who will be present before, during and after the
exhibition, where appropriate. A copy of each permit issued shall be forwarded
by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, issuing it to the State Fire Marshal. A
permit is not transferable or assignable.
      (8)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, shall keep a record of issued permits
for fireworks exhibitions. In this list, the Fire Chief, fire prevention
officer, Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
shall list the name of the exhibitor, his or her license number, the premises
on which the exhibition will be conducted, the date and time of the exhibition,
and the number and political subdivision designation of the permit issued to
the exhibitor for the exhibition.
      (9)   The Council shall require that a certified fire safety inspector,
Fire Chief or fire prevention officer be present before, during and after the
exhibition, and shall require the certified fire safety inspector, Fire Chief
or fire prevention officer to inspect the premises where the exhibition is to
take place and determine whether the exhibition is in compliance with this
section and R.C. Chapter 3743.
(R.C. § 3743.54)
      (10)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall fail to comply with the
applicable requirements of the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant
to R.C. § 3743.53(B) and (E) or to comply with R.C. § 3743.53(C) and (D).
      (11)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall conduct a fireworks
exhibition unless a permit has been secured for the exhibition pursuant to R.C.
§ 3743.54 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or if a permit so
secured is revoked by a Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in consultation
with a Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or with a
designee of a Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
pursuant to those sections.
      (12)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall acquire fireworks for use
at a fireworks exhibition other than in accordance with R.C. §§ 3743.54 and
3743.55, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (13)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks or other person associated with
the conduct of a fireworks exhibition shall have possession or control of, or
be under the influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer or controlled
substance while on the premises on which the exhibition is being conducted.
      (14)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall permit an employee to
assist the licensed exhibitor in conducting fireworks exhibitions unless the
employee is registered with the State Fire Marshal under R.C. § 3743.56.
(R.C. § 3743.64)
   (f)   Possession, sale, discharge and advertising; falsification.
      (1)   No person shall possess fireworks in this municipality or shall
possess for sale or sell fireworks in this municipality, except a licensed
manufacturer of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.02 to 3743.08, a
licensed wholesaler of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.15 to 3743.21, a
shipping permit holder as authorized by R.C. § 3743.40, a licensed fountain
device retailer as authorized by R.C. § 3743.27, a person as authorized by R.C.
§§ 3743.44 and 3743.45, or a licensed exhibitor of fireworks as authorized by
R.C. §§ 3743.50 to 3743.55, or as authorized by any municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any of these statutes, and except as provided in
R.C. § 3743.80 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (f)(8), R.C. §§ 3743.45 and 3743.80
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and except for licensed
exhibitors of fireworks authorized to conduct a fireworks exhibition pursuant
to R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, no person shall discharge, ignite, or explode any fireworks in this
municipality.
      (3)   No person shall use in a theater or public hall what is technically
known as fireworks showers, or a mixture containing potassium chlorate and
sulphur.
      (4)   No person shall sell fireworks of any kind to a person under 18
years of age. No person under 18 years of age shall enter a fireworks sales
showroom unless that person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or other
responsible adult. No person under 18 years of age shall touch or possess
fireworks on a licensed premises without the consent of the licensee. A
licensee may eject any person from a licensed premises that is in any way
disruptive to the safe operation of the premises.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 3743.44, no person, other
than a licensed manufacturer, licensed wholesaler, licensed exhibitor or
shipping permit holder shall possess 1.3G fireworks in this municipality.
      (6)   No person shall negligently discharge, ignite, or explode fireworks
while in possession or control of, or under the influence of, any intoxicating
liquor, beer, or controlled substance.
      (7)   No person shall negligently discharge, ignite, or explode fireworks
on the property of another person without that person’s permission to use
fireworks on that property.
(R.C. § 3743.65(A) - (E), (G), (H))
      (8)   Purchase, use, and local regulation of consumer-grade fireworks.
         A.   Any person who intends to obtain possession in this state of 1.4G
fireworks purchased in this state shall obtain possession of the 1.4G fireworks
only from a licensed retailer, licensed manufacturer, or licensed wholesaler
and shall be subject to this division (f)(8).
         B.   Any person authorized under this division (f)(8) to possess 1.4G
fireworks in this state may discharge, ignite, or explode those fireworks on
private property, with authorization from the property owner, on the following
days each year:
            1.   January 1st;
            2.   Chinese new year’s day;
            3.   May 5th;
            4.   The last Monday in May, and the Saturday and Sunday
immediately preceding that day;
            5.   June 19th;
            6.   July 3rd, 4th, and 5th;
            7.   The first Friday, Saturday, and Sunday before and after July
4th;
            8.   The first Monday of September, and the Saturday and Sunday
immediately preceding that day;
            9.   Diwali;
            10.   December 31st.
         C.   Fireworks discharged, ignited, or exploded pursuant to this
division (f)(8) shall not be considered a public exhibition.
         D.   The municipality may do either of the following:
            1.   Restrict the dates and times a person may discharge, ignite,
or explode fireworks purchased pursuant to this division (f)(8).
            2.   Ban the discharge, ignition, or explosion of fireworks
purchased pursuant to this division (f)(8).
         E.   This division (f)(8) does not limit the enforcement of any
ordinance, resolution, or statute that regulates noise, disturbance of the
peace, or disorderly conduct.
(R.C. § 3743.45)
   (g)   Transporting and shipping.
      (1)   No person shall transport fireworks in this municipality except in
accordance with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. §
3743.58.
      (2)   As used in this division, “fireworks” includes only 1.3G and 1.4G
fireworks. No person shall ship fireworks into this municipality by mail,
parcel post or common carrier unless the person possesses a valid shipping
permit issued under R.C. § 3743.40, and the fireworks are shipped directly to
the holder of a license issued under R.C. § 3743.03, 3743.16 or 3743.51.
      (3)   No person shall ship fireworks within this municipality by mail,
parcel post or common carrier unless the fireworks are shipped directly to the
holder of a license issued under R.C. § 3743.01, 3743.16 or 3743.51.
(R.C. § 3743.66)
   (h)   Exceptions. This section does not prohibit or apply to the following:
      (1)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
in emergency situations of pyrotechnic signaling devices and distress signals
for marine, aviation or highway use;
      (2)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of fusees, torpedoes or other signals necessary for the safe operation of
railroads;
      (3)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of blank cartridges in connection with theaters or shows, or in connection with
athletics as signals for ceremonial purposes;
      (4)   The manufacture for, the transportation, storage, possession or use
by, or the sale to the armed forces of the United States and the militia of
this state, as recognized by the Adjutant General of Ohio, of pyrotechnic
devices;
      (5)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper or plastic
caps containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive material are used, provided
that they are constructed so that a hand cannot come into contact with a cap
when it is in place for explosion, or apply to the manufacture, sale,
possession, transportation, storage or use of those caps;
      (6)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of novelties and trick noisemakers, auto burglar alarms or model rockets and
model rocket motors designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling
recoverable aero models;
      (7)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of wire sparklers;
      (8)   The conduct of radio-controlled special effect exhibitions that use
an explosive black powder charge of not more than one-quarter pound per charge,
and that are not connected in any manner to propellant charges; provided, that
the exhibition complies with all of the following:
         A.   No explosive aerial display is conducted in the exhibition;
         B.   The exhibition is separated from spectators by not less than 200
feet;
         C.   The person conducting the exhibition complies with regulations of
the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms of the United States Department of
the Treasury and the United States Department of Transportation with respect to
the storage and transport of the explosive black powder used in the exhibition.
(R.C. § 3743.80)
   (i)   Forfeiture and disposal. Fireworks manufactured, sold, possessed,
transported or used in violation of this section shall be forfeited by the
offender. The Fire Marshal’s office or certified fire safety inspector’s office
shall dispose of seized fireworks pursuant to the procedures specified in R.C.
§§ 2981.11 to 2981.13 for the disposal of forfeited property by law enforcement
agencies, and the Fire Marshal or that office is not liable for claims for the
loss of or damages to the seized fireworks.
(R.C. § 3743.68(B))
   (j)   Penalty.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (j)(2) or (j)(3) of this
section, whoever violates any provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of R.C. § 3743.60(I) or 3743.61(I), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, a violation of division (b)(5) of this section
or division (c)(5) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (e)(10) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to any other penalties that may be
imposed on a licensed exhibitor of fireworks under this division and unless the
third sentence of this division applies, the person’s license as an exhibitor
of fireworks or as an assistant exhibitor of fireworks shall be suspended. If
the violation of division (e)(10) of this section results in serious physical
harm to persons or serious physical harm to property, the person’s license as
an exhibitor of fireworks or as an assistant exhibitor of fireworks shall be
revoked.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (f)(6) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, a
person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation of
division (f)(6) and a violation of R.C. § 2917.11(B), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of the charge of the
violation of division (f)(6).
      (5)   Whoever violates division (b)(7), (b)(8), (c)(7), or (c)(8) is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (f)(7) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3743.99(C), (D), (F) - (H))
§ 678.13 ENDANGERING AIRCRAFT AND AIRPORT OPERATIONS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   AIR GUN. A hand pistol or rifle that propels its projectile by
means of releasing compressed air, carbon dioxide or other gas.
      (2)   AIRPORT OPERATIONAL SURFACE. Any surface of land or water that is
developed, posted or marked so as to give an observer reasonable notice that
the surface is designed and developed for the purpose of storing, parking,
taxiing or operating aircraft, or any surface of land or water that is actually
being used for any of those purposes.
      (3)   FIREARM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
      (4)   SPRING-OPERATED GUN. A hand pistol or rifle that propels a
projectile not less than four or more than five millimeters in diameter by
means of a spring.
   (b)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly throw an object at, or drop an object upon, any moving
aircraft.
      (2)   Knowingly shoot with a bow and arrow, or knowingly discharge a
firearm, air gun or spring-operated gun, at or toward any aircraft.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly or recklessly shoot with a bow and arrow, or
shall knowingly or recklessly discharge a firearm, air gun or spring-operated
gun, upon or over any airport operational surface. This division does not apply
to the following:
      (1)   An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or of the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, authorized to discharge firearms
and acting within the scope of his or her duties.
      (2)   A person who, with the consent of the owner or operator of the
airport operational surface or the authorized agent of either, is lawfully
engaged in any hunting or sporting activity or is otherwise lawfully
discharging a firearm.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of endangering
aircraft, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation creates any risk
of physical harm to any person, or if the aircraft that is the subject of the
violation is occupied, endangering aircraft is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of endangering
airport operations, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person or substantial risk of serious
harm to any person, endangering airport operations is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. In addition to any other penalty or sanction
imposed for the violation, the hunting license or permit of a person who
violates division (c) of this section while hunting shall be suspended or
revoked pursuant to R.C. § 1533.68.
(R.C. § 2909.08(A) - (E))
§ 678.14 POSSESSING CRIMINAL TOOLS.
   (a)   No person shall possess or have under his or her control any
substance, device, instrument or article, with purpose to use it criminally.
   (b)   Each of the following constitutes prima facie evidence of criminal
purpose:
      (1)   Possession or control of any dangerous ordnance, or the materials
or parts for making a dangerous ordnance, in the absence of circumstances
indicating the dangerous ordnance, materials or parts are intended for a
legitimate use.
      (2)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument or
article designed or specially adapted for criminal use.
      (3)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument or
article commonly used for criminal purposes, under circumstances indicating the
item is intended for criminal use.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing criminal tools.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, possessing criminal tools is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the circumstances indicate that the
substance, device, instrument or article involved in the offense was intended
for use in the commission of a felony, possessing criminal tools is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2923.24)
§ 678.15 POSSESSION OF AN OBJECT INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A FIREARM IN A SCHOOL
SAFETY ZONE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly possess an object in a school safety zone if
both of the following apply:
      (1)   The object is indistinguishable from a firearm, whether or not the
object is capable of being fired.
      (2)   The person indicates that the person possesses the object and that
it is a firearm, or the person knowingly displays or brandishes the object and
indicates that it is a firearm.
   (b)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         A.   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States who is authorized to carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance
and is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         B.   A law enforcement officer who is authorized to carry deadly
weapons or dangerous ordnance;
         C.   A security officer employed by a board of education or governing
body of a school during the time that the security officer is on duty pursuant
to that contract of employment;
         D.   1.   Any person not described in divisions (b)(1)A. to (b)(1)C.
of this section who has written authorization from the board of education or
governing body of a school to convey deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance into
a school safety zone or to possess a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance in a
school safety zone and who conveys or possesses the deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance in accordance with that authorization, provided both of the following
apply:
               a.   Either the person has successfully completed the
curriculum, instruction, and training established under R.C. § 5502.703, or the
person has received a certificate of having satisfactorily completed an
approved basic peace officer training program or is a law enforcement officer;
               b.   The board or governing body has notified the public, by
whatever means the affected school regularly communicates with the public, that
the board or governing body has authorized one or more persons to go armed
within a school operated by the board or governing authority.
            2.   A district board or school governing body that authorizes a
person under division (b)(1)D. of this section shall require that person to
submit to an annual criminal records check conducted in the same manner as R.C.
§ 3319.39 or R.C. § 3319.391.
         E.   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance, and who is subject to and in
compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless the appointing
authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption provided in
division (b)(1)E. of this section does not apply to the person.
      (2)   This section does not apply to premises upon which home schooling
is conducted. This section also does not apply to a school administrator,
teacher or employee who possesses an object that is indistinguishable from a
firearm for legitimate school purposes during the course of employment, a
student who uses an object that is indistinguishable from a firearm under the
direction of a school administrator, teacher or employee, or any other person
who, with the express prior approval of a school administrator, possesses an
object that is indistinguishable from a firearm for a legitimate purpose,
including the use of the object in a ceremonial activity, a play, re-enactment
or other dramatic presentation, school safety training, or a ROTC activity or
another similar use of the object.
      (3)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if, at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession of the
handgun, all of the following apply:
         A.   The person does not enter into a school building or onto school
premises and is not at a school activity.
         B.   The person has been issued a concealed handgun license that is
valid at the time of the conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         C.   The person is in the school safety zone in accordance with 18
U.S.C. § 922(q)(2)(B).
         D.   The person is not knowingly in a place described in R.C. §
2923.126(B)(1) or (B)(3) to (B)(8).
      (4)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession of the handgun
all of the following apply:
         A.   The person has been issued a concealed handgun license that is
valid at the time of the conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         B.   The person leaves the handgun in a motor vehicle.
         C.   The handgun does not leave the motor vehicle.
         D.   If the person exits the motor vehicle, the person locks the motor
vehicle.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal possession of an
object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, illegal possession of an object
indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of this section, illegal possession of an object indistinguishable from a
firearm in a school safety zone is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   (1)   In addition to any other penalty imposed upon a person who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section, and subject to
division (d)(2) of this section, if the offender has not attained 19 years of
age, regardless of whether the offender is attending or is enrolled in a school
operated by a board of education or for which the Director of Education and
Workforce prescribes minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07, the court shall
impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender’s probationary
driver’s license, restricted license, driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit or probationary commercial driver’s
license that then is in effect from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4)
and shall deny the offender the issuance of any permit or license of that type
during the period of the suspension. If the offender is not a resident of this
state, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the nonresident
operating privilege of the offender from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(4).
      (2)   If the offender shows good cause why the court should not suspend
one of the types of licenses, permits or privileges specified in division (d)
(1) of this section or deny the issuance of one of the temporary instruction
permits specified in division (d)(1) of this section, the court in its
discretion may choose not to impose the suspension, revocation or denial
required in division (d)(1) of this section, but the court, in its discretion,
instead may require the offender to perform community service for a number of
hours determined by the court.
   (e)   As used in this section, “object that is indistinguishable from a
firearm” means an object made, constructed or altered so that, to a reasonable
person without specialized training in firearms, the object appears to be a
firearm.
(R.C. § 2923.122(C) - (G))
Statutory reference:
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance in a school
safety zone, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122(A), (B)
§ 678.16 CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSES: POSSESSION OF A REVOKED OR SUSPENDED
LICENSE; ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS; POSTING OF SIGNS PROHIBITING POSSESSION.
   (a)   Possession of a revoked or suspended concealed handgun license.
      (1)   No person, except in the performance of official duties, shall
possess a concealed handgun license that was issued and that has been revoked
or suspended.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (a) is guilty of possessing a
revoked or suspended concealed handgun license, a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 2923.1211(B), (C))
   (b)   Additional restrictions. Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.126:
      (1)   A concealed handgun license that is issued under R.C. § 2923.125
shall expire five years after the date of issuance. A licensee who has been
issued a license under that section shall be granted a grace period of 30 days
after the licensee’s license expires during which the licensee’s license
remains valid. Except as provided in divisions (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this
section, a licensee who has been issued a concealed handgun license under R.C.
§ 2923.125 or 2923.1213 may carry a concealed handgun anywhere in this state if
the license is valid when the licensee is in actual possession of a concealed
handgun. The licensee shall give notice of any change in the licensee’s
residence address to the sheriff who issued the license within 45 days after
that change.
      (2)   A valid concealed handgun license does not authorize the licensee
to carry a concealed handgun in any manner prohibited under R.C. § 2923.12(B)
or in any manner prohibited under R.C. § 2923.16. A valid license does not
authorize the licensee to carry a concealed handgun into any of the following
places:
         A.   A police station, sheriff’s office, or state highway patrol
station, premises controlled by the bureau of criminal identification and
investigation; a state correctional institution, jail, workhouse, or other
detention facility; any area of an airport passenger terminal that is beyond a
passenger or property screening checkpoint or to which access is restricted
through security measures by the airport authority or a public agency; or an
institution that is maintained, operated, managed, and governed pursuant to
R.C. § 5119.14(A) or R.C. § 5123.03(A)(1);
         B.   A school safety zone if the licensee’s carrying the concealed
handgun is in violation of R.C. § 2923.122;
         C.   A courthouse or another building or structure in which a
courtroom is located if the licensee’s carrying the concealed handgun is in
violation of R.C. § 2923.123;
         D.   Any premises or open air arena for which a D permit has been
issued under R.C. Chapter 4303, if the licensee’s carrying the concealed
handgun is in violation of R.C. § 2923.121;
         E.   Any premises owned or leased by any public or private college,
university or other institution of higher education, unless the handgun is in a
locked motor vehicle or the licensee is in the immediate process of placing the
handgun in a locked motor vehicle or unless the licensee is carrying the
concealed handgun pursuant to a written policy, rule, or other authorization
that is adopted by the institution’s board of trustees or other governing body
and that authorizes specific individuals or classes of individuals to carry a
concealed handgun on the premises;
         F.   Any church, synagogue, mosque or other place of worship, unless
the church, synagogue, mosque or other place of worship posts or permits
otherwise;
         G.   Any building that is a government facility of this state or a
political subdivision of this state and that is not a building that is used
primarily as a shelter, restroom, parking facility for motor vehicles, or rest
facility and is not a courthouse or other building or structure in which a
courtroom is located that is subject to division (b)(2)C. of this section,
unless the governing body with authority over the building has enacted a
statute, ordinance, or policy that permits a licensee to carry a concealed
handgun into the building;
         H.   A place in which federal law prohibits the carrying of handguns.
      (3)   A.   Nothing in this division (b) shall negate or restrict a rule,
policy or practice of a private employer that is not a private college,
university, or other institution of higher education concerning or prohibiting
the presence of firearms on the private employer’s premises or property,
including motor vehicles owned by the private employer. Nothing in this
division (b) shall require a private employer of that nature to adopt a rule,
policy or practice concerning or prohibiting the presence of firearms on the
private employer’s premises or property, including motor vehicles owned by the
private employer.
         B.   1.   A private employer shall be immune from liability in a civil
action for any injury, death or loss to person or property that allegedly was
caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto the premises or
property of the private employer, including motor vehicles owned by the private
employer, unless the private employer acted with malicious purpose. A private
employer is immune from liability in a civil action for any injury, death or
loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to the
private employer’s decision to permit a licensee to bring, or prohibit a
licensee from bringing, a handgun onto the premises or property of the private
employer.
            2.   A political subdivision shall be immune from liability in a
civil action, to the extent and in the manner provided in R.C. Chapter 2744,
for any injury, death or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused
by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto any premises or property
owned, leased or otherwise under the control of the political subdivision. As
used in this division, POLITICAL SUBDIVISION has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2744.01.
            3.   An institution of higher education shall be immune from
liability in a civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or
property that allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a
handgun onto the premises of the institution, including motor vehicles owned by
the institution, unless the institution acted with malicious purpose. An
institution of higher education is immune from liability in a civil action for
any injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by
or related to the institution’s decision to permit a licensee or class of
licensees to bring a handgun onto the premises of the institution.
            4.   A nonprofit corporation shall be immune from liability in a
civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto the
premises of the nonprofit corporation, including any motor vehicle owned by the
nonprofit corporation, or to any event organized by the nonprofit corporation,
unless the nonprofit corporation acted with malicious purpose. A nonprofit
corporation is immune from liability in a civil action for any injury, death,
or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to the
nonprofit corporation’s decision to permit a licensee to bring a handgun onto
the premises of the nonprofit corporation or to any event organized by the
nonprofit corporation. The immunities described in this division apply to an
entity that leases its property to the nonprofit corporation or permits its
property to be used by the nonprofit corporation for any purpose.
         C.   1.   a.   Except as provided in division (b)(3)C.2. of this
section and R.C. § 2923.1214, the owner or person in control of private land or
premises, and a private person or entity leasing land or premises owned by the
state, the United States, or a political subdivision of the state or the United
States, may post a sign in a conspicuous location on that land or on those
premises prohibiting persons from carrying firearms or concealed firearms on or
onto that land or those premises. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, a person who knowingly violates a posted prohibition of that nature
is guilty of criminal trespass in violation of R.C. § 2911.21(A)(4) and is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If a person knowingly violates a
posted prohibition of that nature and the posted land or premises primarily was
a parking lot or other parking facility, the person is not guilty of criminal
trespass under R.C. § 2911.21 or under any other criminal law of this state or
criminal law, ordinance, or resolution of a political subdivision of this
state, and instead is subject only to a civil cause of action for trespass
based on the violation.
               b.   If a person knowingly violates a posted prohibition of the
nature described in this division and the posted land or premises is a child
care center, type A family child care home, or type B family child care home,
unless the person is a licensee who resides in a type A family child care home
or type B family child care home, the person is guilty of aggravated trespass
in violation of R.C. § 2911.211. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the person
previously has been convicted of a violation of this division or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is
dangerous ordnance, the offender is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
            2.   A landlord may not prohibit or restrict a tenant who is a
licensee and who on or after September 9, 2008 enters into a rental agreement
with the landlord for the use of residential premises, and the tenant’s guest
while the tenant is present, from lawfully carrying or possessing a handgun on
those residential premises.
            3.   As used in division (b)(3)C. of this section:
               a.   RESIDENTIAL PREMISES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5321.01, except “residential premises” does not include a dwelling unit that is
owned or operated by a college or university.
               b.   LANDLORD, TENANT, and RENTAL AGREEMENT. Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 5321.01.
      (4)   A person who holds a valid concealed handgun license issued by
another state that is recognized by the Attorney General pursuant to a
reciprocity agreement entered into pursuant to R.C. § 109.69 or a person who
holds a valid concealed handgun license under the circumstances described in
R.C. § 109.69(B) has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in this state
as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125
and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a person who has been
issued a license under that section that is valid at the time in question.
      (5)   A.   A peace officer has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125, provided that the officer when carrying a concealed
handgun under authority of this division is carrying validating identification.
For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a peace officer shall be
considered to be a licensee in this state.
         B.   An active duty member of the armed forces of the United States
who is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of
successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions as
specified in this division (b).
         C.   A tactical medical professional who is qualified to carry
firearms while on duty under R.C. § 109.771 has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under R.C. § 2923.125.
         D.   A fire investigator who is qualified to carry firearms while on
duty under R.C. § 109.774 has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in
this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license under R.C. §
2923.125.
      (6)   A.   A qualified retired peace officer who possesses a retired
peace officer identification card issued pursuant to division (b)(6)B. of this
section and a valid firearms requalification certification issued pursuant to
division (b)(6)C. of this section has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a
person who has been issued a license issued under that section that is valid at
the time in question. For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a
qualified retired peace officer who possesses a retired peace officer
identification card issued pursuant to division (b)(6)B. of this section and a
valid firearms requalification certification issued pursuant to division (b)
(6)C. of this section shall be considered to be a licensee in this state.
         B.   1.   Each public agency of this state or of a political
subdivision of this state that is served by one or more peace officers shall
issue a retired peace officer identification card to any person who retired
from service as a peace officer with that agency, if the issuance is in
accordance with the agency’s policies and procedures and if the person, with
respect to the person’s service with that agency, satisfies all of the
following:
               a.   The person retired in good standing from service as a peace
officer with the public agency, and the retirement was not for reasons of
mental instability.
               b.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was authorized to engage in or supervise the prevention,
detection, investigation or prosecution of, or the incarceration of any person
for, any violation of law and the person had statutory powers of arrest.
               c.   At the time of the person’s retirement as a peace officer
with that agency, the person was trained and qualified to carry firearms in the
performance of the peace officer’s duties.
               d.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was regularly employed as a peace officer for an aggregate
of 15 years or more, or, in the alternative, the person retired from service as
a peace officer with that agency, after completing any applicable probationary
period of that service, due to a service-connected disability, as determined by
the agency.
            2.   A retired peace officer identification card issued to a person
under division (b)(6)B.1. of this section shall identify the person by name,
contain a photograph of the person, identify the public agency of this state or
of the political subdivision of this state from which the person retired as a
peace officer and that is issuing the identification card, and specify that the
person retired in good standing from service as a peace officer with the
issuing public agency and satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)
(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section. In addition to the required content
specified in this division, a retired peace officer identification card issued
to a person under division (b)(6)B.1. of this section may include the firearms
requalification certification described in division (b)(6)C. of this section,
and if the identification card includes that certification, the identification
card shall serve as the firearms requalification certification for the retired
peace officer. If the issuing public agency issues credentials to active law
enforcement officers who serve the agency, the agency may comply with division
(b)(6)B.1. of this section by issuing the same credentials to persons who
retired from service as a peace officer with the agency and who satisfy the
criteria set forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section,
provided that the credentials so issued to retired peace officers are stamped
with the word “RETIRED.”
            3.   A public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of
this state may charge persons who retired from service as a peace officer with
the agency a reasonable fee for issuing to the person a retired peace officer
identification card pursuant to division (b)(6)B.1. of this section.
         C.   1.   If a person retired from service as a peace officer with a
public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of this state and the
person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)
(6)B.1.d. of this section, the public agency may provide the retired peace
officer with the opportunity to attend a firearms requalification program that
is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required under R.C. §
109.801. The retired peace officer may be required to pay the cost of the
course.
            2.   If a retired peace officer who satisfies the criteria set
forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section attends a
firearms requalification program that is approved for purposes of firearms
requalification required under R.C. § 109.801, the retired peace officer’s
successful completion of the firearms requalification program requalifies the
retired peace officer for purposes of division (b)(6) of this section for five
years from the date on which the program was successfully completed, and the
requalification is valid during that five-year period. If a retired peace
officer who satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)
(6)B.1.d. of this section satisfactorily completes such a firearms
requalification program, the retired peace officer shall be issued a firearms
requalification certification that identifies the retired peace officer by
name, identifies the entity that taught the program, specifies that the retired
peace officer successfully completed the program, specifies the date on which
the course was successfully completed, and specifies that the requalification
is valid for five years from that date of successful completion. The firearms
requalification certification for a retired peace officer may be included in
the retired peace officer identification card issued to the retired peace
officer under division (b)(6)B. of this section.
            3.   A retired peace officer who attends a firearms requalification
program that is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required
under R.C. § 109.801 may be required to pay the cost of the program.
      (7)   For the purpose of division (b) of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   FIRE INVESTIGATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 109.71.
         B.   GOVERNING BODY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 154.01.
         C.   GOVERNMENT FACILITY OF THIS STATE OR A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF
THIS STATE. Any of the following:
            1.   A building or part of a building that is owned or leased by
the government of this state or a political subdivision of this state and where
employees of the government of this state or the political subdivision
regularly are present for the purpose of performing their official duties as
employees of the state or political subdivision;
            2.   The office of a Deputy Registrar serving pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 4503 that is used to perform deputy registrar functions.
         D.   NONPROFIT CORPORATION. Means any private organization that is
exempt from federal income taxation pursuant to subsection 501(a) and described
in subsection 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         E.   QUALIFIED RETIRED PEACE OFFICER. A person who satisfies all of
the following:
            1.   The person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)
(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section.
            2.   The person is not under the influence of alcohol or another
intoxicating or hallucinatory drug or substance.
            3.   The person is not prohibited by federal law from receiving
firearms.
         F.   RETIRED PEACE OFFICER IDENTIFICATION CARD. An identification card
that is issued pursuant to division (b)(6)B. of this section to a person who is
a retired peace officer.
         G.   TACTICAL MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
109.71.
         H.   VALIDATING IDENTIFICATION. Means photographic identification
issued by the agency for which an individual serves as a peace officer that
identifies the individual as a peace officer of the agency.
(R.C. § 2923.126)
   (c)   Posting of signs prohibiting possession. Each person, board, or entity
that owns or controls any place or premises identified in R.C. § 2923.126(B) as
a place into which a valid license does not authorize the licensee to carry a
concealed handgun, or a designee of such a person, board, or entity, shall post
in the following one or more conspicuous locations in the premises a sign that
contains a statement in substantially the following form: “Unless otherwise
authorized by law, pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code, no person shall knowingly
possess, have under the person’s control, convey, or attempt to convey a deadly
weapon or dangerous ordnance onto these premises.”
(R.C. § 2923.1212)
§ 678.17 DEFACED FIREARMS.
   (a)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Change, alter, remove or obliterate the name of the manufacturer,
model, manufacturer’s serial number or other mark of identification on a
firearm.
      (2)   Possess a firearm knowing or having reasonable cause to believe
that the name of the manufacturer, model, manufacturer’s serial number or other
mark of identification on the firearm has been changed, altered, removed or
obliterated.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section is guilty of
defacing identification marks of a firearm. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (a)(1) of this section, defacing
identification marks of a firearm is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of
possessing a defaced firearm. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
possessing a defaced firearm is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (a)(2) of this section, possessing a defaced firearm is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any firearm on which no
manufacturer’s serial number was inscribed at the time of its manufacture.
(R.C. § 2923.201)
CHAPTER 698
Penalties and Sentencing
698.01   Definitions.
698.02   Penalties for misdemeanor.
698.03   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor.
698.04   Organizational penalties.
698.05   Multiple sentences.
698.06   Suspension of driver’s license.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Burden and degree of proof, see R.C. § 2901.05
   Criteria for probation; conditions for probation, see R.C. § 2951.02
   Definition of “imprisoned”, see R.C. § 1.05
   Degree of offense; charge and verdict; prior conviction, see R.C. § 2945.75
   Payment of costs and expenses on change of venue, see R.C. § 2931.31
   Procedure on change of venue, see R.C. § 2931.29
   Restitution, see R.C. § 2929.281
   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served, see R.C. § 2947.14
   Transfer of prisoner on change of venue, see R.C. § 2931.30
   Treatment of drug dependent persons in lieu of conviction, see R.C. §
2951.041
   Venue, see R.C. § 2901.12
   Administration, enforcement and public service, see Ch.
654
   Classification of offenses, see §
606.02
   Criminal law jurisdiction, see §
606.05
   Culpable mental states, see §
606.08
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Limitation on prosecutions, see §
606.06
   Obstructing justice, see §
654.07
   Offenses defined, see §
606.03
   Organizational criminal liability, see §
606.09
   Personal accountability for organizational conduct, see §
606.10
   Requirements for criminal liability, see §
606.07
   Rules of construction, see §
606.04
   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators; registration,
see §
666.99
§ 698.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   DANGEROUS OFFENDER. A person who has committed an offense, whose
history, character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she will
be a danger to others, and whose conduct has been characterized by a pattern of
repetitive, compulsive or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences.
   (b)   REPEAT OFFENDER. A person who has a history of persistent criminal
activity and whose character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or
she will commit another offense. It is prima facie evidence that a person is a
“repeat offender” if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Having been convicted of one or more offenses of violence, as
defined in R.C. § 2901.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent offense of
violence;
      (2)   Having been convicted of one or more sexually oriented offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2950.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent sexually
oriented offense;
      (3)   Having been convicted of one or more theft offenses, as defined in
R.C. § 2913.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for one or more
of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent theft offense;
      (4)   Having been convicted of one or more felony drug abuse offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2925.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent felony drug
abuse offense;
      (5)   Having been convicted of two or more felonies, and having been
imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense, the person commits a
subsequent offense;
      (6)   Having been convicted of three or more offenses of any type or
degree other than traffic offenses, alcoholic intoxication offenses, or minor
misdemeanors, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such
offense, the person commits a subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 2935.36(E))
§ 698.02 PENALTIES FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   (a)   Considerations in misdemeanor sentencing.
      (1)   A court that sentences an offender for a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, or of any
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised Code, shall be guided
by the overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing. The overriding purposes
of misdemeanor sentencing are to protect the public from future crime by the
offender and others and to punish the offender. To achieve those purposes, the
sentencing court shall consider the impact of the offense upon the victim and
the need for changing the offender’s behavior, rehabilitating the defender, and
making restitution to the victim of the offense, the public, or the victim and
the public.
      (2)   A sentence imposed for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation
of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a violation of a municipal ordinance
that is subject to division (a)(1) of this section shall be reasonably
calculated to achieve the two overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing set
forth in division (a)(1) of this section, commensurate with and not demeaning
to the seriousness of the offender’s conduct and its impact upon the victim,
and consistent with sentences imposed for similar offenses committed by similar
offenders.
      (3)   A court that imposes a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
or minor misdemeanor violation of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a
violation of a municipal ordinance that is subject to division (a)(1) of this
section shall not base the sentence upon the race, ethnic background, gender or
religion of the offender.
      (4)   Divisions (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section shall not apply to any
offense that is disposed of by a traffic violations bureau of any court
pursuant to Traffic Rule 13 and shall not apply to any violation of any
provision of the Ohio Revised Code that is a minor misdemeanor and that is
disposed of without a court appearance. Divisions (a)(1) to (a)(3) of this
section do not affect any penalties established by the municipality for a
violation of its ordinances that are not substantially equivalent to a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised
Code.
(R.C. § 2929.21)
   (b)   Misdemeanor jail terms.
      (1)   Except as provided in §
666.99 or
698.03 of this code or R.C. § 2929.22 or 2929.23 or division (b)(5) of this
section and unless another term is required or authorized pursuant to law, if
the sentencing court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
elects or is required to impose a jail term on the offender pursuant to this
chapter, the court shall impose a definite jail term that shall be one of the
following:
         A.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than 180 days;
         B.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than 90 days;
         C.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than 60 days;
         D.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than 30 days.
      (2)   A.   A court that sentences an offender to a jail term under
division (b) of this section may permit the offender to serve the sentence in
intermittent confinement or may authorize a limited release of the offender as
provided in division (d)(2) of this section. The court retains jurisdiction
over every offender sentenced to jail to modify the jail sentence imposed at
any time, but the court shall not reduce any mandatory jail term.
         B.   1.   If a prosecutor, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01, has filed a
notice with the court that the prosecutor wants to be notified about a
particular case and if the court is considering modifying the jail sentence of
the offender in that case, the court shall notify the prosecutor that the court
is considering modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case. The
prosecutor may request a hearing regarding the court’s consideration of
modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, and, if the
prosecutor requests a hearing, the court shall notify the eligible offender of
the hearing.
            2.   If the prosecutor requests a hearing regarding the court’s
consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, the
court shall hold the hearing before considering whether or not to release the
offender from the offender’s jail sentence.
      (3)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under division (b)
of this section and the court assigns the offender to a County Jail that has
established a County Jail Industry Program pursuant to R.C. § 5147.30, the
court shall specify, as part of the sentence, whether the offender may be
considered for participation in the program. During the offender’s term in the
County Jail, the court retains jurisdiction to modify its specification
regarding the offender’s participation in the County Jail Industry Program.
      (4)   If a person sentenced to a jail term pursuant to division (b) of
this section, the court may impose as part of the sentence pursuant to R.C. §
2929.28 a reimbursement sanction, and, if the local detention facility in which
the term is to be served is covered by a policy adopted pursuant to R.C. §
307.93, 341.14, 341.19, 341.21, 341.23, 753.02, 753.04, 753.16, 2301.56 or
2947.19 and 2929.37, both of the following apply:
         A.   The court shall specify both of the following as part of the
sentence:
            1.   If the person is presented with an itemized bill pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.37 for payment of the costs of confinement, the person is required
to pay the bill in accordance with that section.
            2.   If the person does not dispute the bill described in division
(b)(4)A.1. of this section and does not pay the bill by the times specified in
R.C. § 2929.37, the Clerk of the Court may issue a certificate of judgment
against the person as described in that section.
         B.   The sentence automatically includes any certificate of judgment
issued as described in division (b)(4)A.2. of this section.
      (5)   A.   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241 or 2907.25, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and to a specification of the
type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 and if the court imposes a jail term on the
offender for the misdemeanor violation, the court may impose upon the offender
an additional definite jail term as follows:
            1.   Subject to division (b)(5)A.2. of this section, an additional
definite jail term of not more than 60 days;
            2.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one or more misdemeanor or felony violations of R.C. § 2907.22,
2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241 or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and also was convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 regarding one or more
of those violations, an additional definite jail term of not more than 120
days.
         B.   In lieu of imposing an additional definite jail term under
division (b)(5)A. of this section, the court may directly impose on the
offender a sanction that requires the offender to wear a real-time processing,
continual tracking electronic monitoring device during the period of time
specified by the court. The period of time specified by the court shall equal
the duration of an additional jail term that the court could have imposed upon
the offender under division (b)(5)A. of this section. A sanction imposed under
this division shall commence on the date specified by the court, provided that
the sanction shall not commence until after the offender has served the jail
term imposed for the misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241
or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and any
residential sanction imposed for the violation under division (d) of this
section or R.C. § 2929.26. A sanction imposed under this division shall be
considered to be a community control sanction for purposes of division (c) of
this section or R.C. § 2929.25, and all provisions of this Code and the Ohio
Revised Code that pertain to community control sanctions shall apply to a
sanction imposed under this division, except to the extent that they would by
their nature be clearly inapplicable. The offender shall pay all costs
associated with a sanction imposed under this division, including the cost of
the use of the monitoring device.
      (6)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor
violation of R.C. § 2903.13 and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1423 that charges that the
victim of the violation was a woman whom the offender knew was pregnant at the
time of the violation, the court shall impose on the offender a mandatory jail
term that is a definite term of at least 30 days.
      (7)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under this division
(b), the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender and the jail
term. Upon motion of either party or upon the court’s own motion, the court, in
the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may substitute
one or more community control sanctions under division (d) or (e) of this
section for any jail days that are not mandatory jail days.
(R.C. § 2929.24)
   (c)   Misdemeanor community control sanctions.
      (1)   A.   Except as provided in §§
666.99 and
698.03 of this code or R.C. §§ 2929.22 and 2929.23 or when a jail term is
required by law, in sentencing an offender for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, the sentencing court may do either of the following:
            1.   Directly impose a sentence that consists of one or more
community control sanctions authorized by divisions (d), (e) or (f) of this
section. The court may impose any other conditions of release under a community
control sanction that the court considers appropriate. If the court imposes a
jail term upon the offender, the court may impose any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions in addition to the jail
term.
            2.   Impose a jail term under division (b) of this section from the
range of jail terms authorized under that division for the offense, suspend all
or a portion of the jail term imposed, and place the offender under a community
control sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
divisions (d), (e) or (f) of this section.
         B.   The duration of all community control sanctions imposed upon an
offender and in effect for an offender at any time shall not exceed five years.
         C.   At sentencing, if a court directly imposes a community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (c)
(1)A.1. of this section, the court shall state the duration of the community
control sanctions imposed and shall notify the offender that if any of the
conditions of the community control sanctions are violated the court may do any
of the following:
            1.   Impose a longer time under the same community control sanction
if the total time under all of the offender’s community control sanctions does
not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (c)(1)B. of this section;
            2.   Impose a more restrictive community control sanction under
division (d), (e) or (f) of this section, but the court is not required to
impose any particular sanction or sanctions;
            3.   Impose a definite jail term from the range of jail terms
authorized for the offense under division (b) of this section.
      (2)   If a court sentences an offender to any community control sanction
or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (c)(1)A.1.
of this section, the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender
and the period of community control for the duration of the period of community
control. Upon the motion of either party or on the court’s own motion, the
court, in the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may
modify the community control sanctions or conditions of release previously
imposed, substitute a community control sanction or condition of release for
another community control sanction or condition of release previously imposed,
or impose an additional community control sanction or condition of release.
      (3)   A.   If a court sentences an offender to any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
division (d), (e) or (f) of this section, the court shall place the offender
under the general control and supervision of the court or of a Department of
Probation in the jurisdiction that serves the court for purposes of reporting
to the court a violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. If
the offender resides in another jurisdiction and a department of probation has
been established to serve the municipal court or county court in that
jurisdiction, the sentencing court may request the municipal court or the
county court to receive the offender into the general control and supervision
of that department of probation for purposes of reporting to the sentencing
court a violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. The
sentencing court retains jurisdiction over any offender whom it sentences for
the duration of the sanction or sanctions imposed.
         B.   The sentencing court shall require as a condition of any
community control sanction that the offender abide by the law and not leave the
state without the permission of the court or the offender’s probation officer.
In the interests of doing justice, rehabilitating the offender, and ensuring
the offender’s good behavior, the court may impose additional requirements on
the offender. The offender’s compliance with the additional requirements also
shall be a condition of the community control sanction imposed upon the
offender.
      (4)   A.   If the court imposing sentence upon an offender sentences the
offender to any community control sanction or combination of community control
sanctions authorized under division (d), (e) or (f) of this section, and the
offender violates any of the conditions of the sanctions, the public or private
person or entity that supervises or administers the program or activity that
comprises the sanction shall report the violation directly to the sentencing
court or to the Department of Probation or probation officer with general
control and supervision over the offender. If the public or private person or
entity reports the violation to the Department of Probation or probation
officer, the department or officer shall report the violation to the sentencing
court.
         B.   Except as provided in division (c)(4)C. of this section, if an
offender violates any condition of a community control sanction, the sentencing
court may impose upon the violator one or more of the following penalties:
            1.   A longer time under the same community control sanction if the
total time under all of the community control sanctions imposed on the violator
does not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (c)(1)B. of this
section;
            2.   A more restrictive community control sanction;
            3.   A combination of community control sanctions, including a jail
term.
         C.   If an offender was acting pursuant to R.C. § 2925.11(B)(2)(b), or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a related provision under
R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14, or R.C. § 2925.141, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and in so doing violated the conditions of a
community control sanction based on a minor drug possession offense, as defined
in R.C. § 2925.11, or violated R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. §
2925.141, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the sentencing
court shall not impose any of the penalties described in division (c)(4)B. of
this section based on the violation.
         D.   If the court imposes a jail term upon a violator pursuant to
division (c)(4)B. of this section, the total time spent in jail for the
misdemeanor offense and the violation of a condition of the community control
sanction shall not exceed the maximum jail term available for the offense for
which the sanction that was violated was imposed. The court may reduce the
longer period of time that the violator is required to spend under the longer
sanction or the more restrictive sanction imposed under division (c)(4)B. of
this section by all or part of the time the violator successfully spent under
the sanction that was initially imposed.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if an offender, for
a significant period of time, fulfills the conditions of a community control
sanction imposed pursuant to division (d), (e) or (f) of this section in an
exemplary manner, the court may reduce the period of time under the community
control sanction or impose a less restrictive community control sanction.
Fulfilling the conditions of a community control sanction does not relieve the
offender of a duty to make restitution under division (f) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.25)
   (d)   Community residential sanction.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any community residential sanction or combination of
community residential sanctions under this division (d). Community residential
sanctions include but are not limited to the following:
         A.   A term of up to 180 days in a halfway house or a term in a
halfway house not to exceed the longest jail term available for the offense,
whichever is shorter, if the political subdivision that would have
responsibility for paying the costs of confining the offender in a jail has
entered into a contract with the halfway house for use of the facility for
misdemeanor offenders;
         B.   If the offender is an eligible offender, as defined in R.C. §
307.932, a term in a community alternative sentencing center or district
community alternative sentencing center established and operated in accordance
with that section, in the circumstances specified in that section, with one of
the conditions of the sanction being that the offender successfully complete
the portion of the sentence to be served in the center.
      (2)   A sentence to a community residential sanction under division (d)
(1)B. of this section shall be in accordance with R.C. § 307.932. In all other
cases, the court that sentences an offender to a community residential sanction
under this division (d) may do either or both of the following:
         A.   Permit the offender to serve the offender’s sentence in
intermittent confinement, overnight, on weekends or at any other time or times
that will allow the offender to continue at the offender’s occupation or care
for the offender’s family;
         B.   Authorize the offender to be released so that the offender may
seek or maintain employment, receive education or training, receive treatment,
perform community service, or otherwise fulfill an obligation imposed by law or
by the court. A release pursuant to this division shall be only for the
duration of time that is needed to fulfill the purpose of the release and for
travel that reasonably is necessary to fulfill the purposes of release.
      (3)   The court may order that a reasonable portion of the income earned
by the offender upon a release pursuant to division (d)(2) of this section be
applied to any financial sanction imposed under division (f) of this section.
      (4)   No court shall sentence any person to a prison term for a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor, or to a jail term for a minor misdemeanor.
      (5)   If a court sentences a person who has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a misdemeanor to a community residential sanction as described in
division (d)(1) of this section, at the time of reception and at other times
the person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community
alternative sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing
center, or other place at which the offender will serve the residential
sanction determines to be appropriate, the person in charge of the operation of
the halfway house, community alternative sentencing center, district community
alternative sentencing center, or other place may cause the convicted offender
to be examined and tested for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis, including
but not limited to hepatitis A, B and C, and other contagious diseases. The
person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community alternative
sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing center, or other
place at which the offender will serve the residential sanction may cause a
convicted offender in the halfway house, community alternative sentencing
center, district community alternative sentencing center, or other place who
refuses to be tested or treated for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis,
including but not limited to hepatitis A, B and C, or another contagious
disease to be tested and treated involuntarily.
      (6)   The municipality may enter into a contract with a halfway house for
use of the halfway house to house misdemeanor offenders under a sanction
imposed under division (d)(1)A. of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.26)
   (e)   Nonresidential sanction where jail term is not mandatory.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any nonresidential sanction or combination of
nonresidential sanctions authorized under this division. Nonresidential
sanctions include but are not limited to the following:
         A.   A term of day reporting;
         B.   A term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous
alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol
monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring
without house arrest, or a term of house arrest without electronic monitoring
or continuous alcohol monitoring;
         C.   A term of community service of up to 500 hours for misdemeanor of
the first degree or 200 hours for a misdemeanor of the second, third or fourth
degree;
         D.   A term in a drug treatment program with a level of security for
the offender as determined necessary by the court;
         E.   A term of intensive probation supervision;
         F.   A term of basic probation supervision;
         G.   A term of monitored time;
         H.   A term of drug and alcohol use monitoring, including random drug
testing;
         I.   A curfew term;
         J.   A requirement that the offender obtain employment;
         K.   A requirement that the offender obtain education or training;
         L.   Provided the court obtains the prior approval of the victim, a
requirement that the offender participate in victim-offender mediation;
         M.   If authorized by law, suspension of the offender’s privilege to
operate a motor vehicle, immobilization or forfeiture of the offender’s motor
vehicle, a requirement that the offender obtain a valid motor vehicle
operator’s license, or any other related sanction;
         N.   A requirement that the offender obtain counseling if the offense
is a violation of R.C. § 2919.25 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance or a violation of R.C. § 2903.13 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance involving a person who was a family or household member at
the time of the violation, if the offender committed the offense in the
vicinity of one or more children who are not victims of the offense, and if the
offender or the victim of the offense is a parent, guardian, custodian or
person in loco parentis of one or more of those children. This division does
not limit the court in requiring that the offender obtain counseling for any
offense or in any circumstance not specified in this division.
      (2)   If the court imposes a term of community service pursuant to
division (e)(1)C. of this section, the offender may request that the court
modify the sentence to authorize the offender to make a reasonable
contribution, as determined by the court, to the general fund of the county,
municipality, or other local entity that provides funding to the court. The
court may grant the request if the offender demonstrates a change in
circumstances from the date the court imposes the sentence or that the
modification would otherwise be in the interests of justice. If the court
grants the request, the offender shall make a reasonable contribution to the
court, and the clerk of the court shall deposit that contribution into the
general fund of the county, municipality, or other local entity that provides
funding to the court. If more than one entity provides funding to the court,
the clerk shall deposit a percentage of the reasonable contribution equal to
the percentage of funding the entity provides to the court in that entity’s
general fund.
      (3)   In addition to the sanctions authorized under division (e)(1) of
this section, the court imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, upon an offender who is not required to serve a mandatory
jail term may impose any other sanction that is intended to discourage the
offender or other persons from committing a similar offense if the sanction is
reasonably related to the overriding purposes and principles of misdemeanor
sentencing.
      (4)   The court imposing a sentence for a minor misdemeanor may impose a
term of community service in lieu of all or part of a fine. The term of
community service imposed for a minor misdemeanor shall not exceed 30 hours.
After imposing a term of community service, the court may modify the sentence
to authorize a reasonable contribution, as determined by the court, to the
appropriate general fund as provided in division (e)(2) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.27)
   (f)   Financial sanctions.
      (1)   In addition to imposing court costs pursuant to R.C. § 2947.23, the
court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor, including a minor
misdemeanor, may sentence the offender to any financial sanction or combination
of financial sanctions authorized under this division (f) and, if the offender
is being sentenced for a criminal offense as defined in R.C. § 2930.01, shall
sentence the offender to make restitution pursuant to this division (f) and
R.C. § 2929.281. If the court, in its discretion or as required by this
division (f), imposes one or more financial sanctions, the financial sanctions
that may be imposed pursuant to this division (f) include, but are not limited
to, the following:
         A.   Restitution.
            1.   Unless the misdemeanor offense could be disposed of by the
traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic Rule 13, restitution
by the offender to the victim of the offender’s crime or the victim’s estate,
in an amount based on the victim's economic loss. The court may not impose
restitution as a sanction pursuant to this division if the offense could be
disposed of by the traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic
Rule 13. If the court requires restitution, the court shall order that the
restitution be made to the victim in open court or to the adult probation
department that serves the jurisdiction or the clerk of the court on behalf of
the victim.
            2.   The court shall determine the amount of restitution to be paid
by the offender. The victim, victim’s representative, victim’s attorney, if
applicable, the prosecutor or the prosecutor’s designee, and the offender may
provide information relevant to the determination of the amount of restitution.
The amount the court orders as restitution shall not exceed the amount of the
economic loss suffered by the victim as a direct and proximate result of the
commission of the offense. If the court imposes restitution for the cost of
accounting or auditing done to determine the extent of economic loss, the court
may order restitution for any amount of the victim’s costs of accounting or
auditing provided that the amount of restitution is reasonable and does not
exceed the value of property or services stolen or damaged as a result of the
offense. If the court decides to or is required to impose restitution, the
court shall hold an evidentiary hearing on restitution if the offender, victim,
victim’s representative, victim’s attorney, if applicable, or victim’s estate
disputes the amount of restitution. The court shall determine the amount of
full restitution by a preponderance of the evidence.
            3.   All restitution payments shall be credited against any
recovery of economic loss in a civil action brought by the victim or the
victim’s estate against the offender. No person may introduce evidence of an
award of restitution under this division (f) in a civil action for purposes of
imposing liability against an insurer under R.C. § 3937.18.
            4.   The court may order that the offender pay a surcharge, of not
more than 5% of the amount of the restitution otherwise ordered, to the entity
responsible for collecting and processing restitution payments.
            5.   The victim, victim’s attorney, if applicable, or the attorney
for the victim’s estate may request that the prosecutor in the case file a
motion, or the offender may file a motion, for modification of the payment
terms of any restitution ordered. If the court grants the motion, it may modify
the payment terms as it determines appropriate but shall not reduce the amount
of restitution ordered, except as provided in R.C. § 2929.281(A).
         B.   Fines. A fine of the type described in divisions (f)(1)B.1. and
(f)(1)B.2. of this section payable to the appropriate entity as required by
law:
            1.   A fine in the following amount:
               a.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than
$1,000;
               b.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $750;
               c.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $500;
               d.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $250;
               e.   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $150.
            2.   A state fine or cost as defined in R.C. § 2949.111.
         C.   Reimbursement.
            1.   Reimbursement by the offender of any or all of the costs of
sanctions incurred by the government, including but not limited to the
following:
               a.   All or part of the costs of implementing any community
control sanction, including a supervision fee under R.C. § 2951.021 and the
costs of global positioning system device monitoring;
               b.   All or part of the costs of confinement in a jail or other
residential facility, including but not limited to a per diem fee for room and
board, the costs of medical and dental treatment, and the costs of repairing
property damaged by the offender while confined;
               c.   All or part of the cost of purchasing and using an
immobilizing or disabling device, including a certified ignition interlock
device, or a remote alcohol monitoring device that a court orders an offender
to use under R.C. § 4510.13.
            2.   The amount of reimbursement under division (f)(1)C.1. of this
section shall not exceed the total amount of reimbursement the offender is able
to pay and shall not exceed the actual cost of the sanctions. The court may
collect any amount of reimbursement the offender is required to pay under that
division. If the court does not order reimbursement under that division,
confinement costs may be assessed pursuant to a repayment policy adopted under
R.C. § 2929.37. In addition, the offender may be required to pay the fees
specified in R.C. § 2929.38 in accordance with that section.   
      (2)   A.   If the court determines a hearing is necessary, the court may
hold a hearing to determine whether the offender is able to pay the financial
sanction imposed pursuant to this division (f) or court costs or is likely in
the future to be able to pay the sanction or costs.
         B.   If the court determines that the offender is indigent and unable
to pay the financial sanction or court costs, the court shall consider imposing
and may impose a term of community service under division (e)(1) of this
section in lieu of imposing a financial sanction or court costs. If the court
does not determine that the offender is indigent, the court may impose a term
of community service under division (e)(1) of this section in lieu of or in
addition to imposing a financial sanction under this division (f) and in
addition to imposing court costs. The court may order community service for a
minor misdemeanor pursuant to division (e)(4) of this section in lieu of or in
addition to imposing a financial sanction under this section and in addition to
imposing court costs. If a person fails to pay a financial sanction or court
costs, the court may order community service in lieu of the financial sanction
or court costs.
      (3)   A.   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the
offender pursuant to division (f)(1)C. of this section to pay the costs
incurred by a county pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (d), (e)
or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this section to the County
Treasurer. The County Treasurer shall deposit the reimbursements in the
county’s General Fund. The county shall use the amounts deposited in the Fund
to pay the costs incurred by the county pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (d), (e) or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this
section.
         B.   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the offender
pursuant to division (f)(1)C. of this section to pay the costs incurred by a
municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (d), (e)
or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this section to the
Treasurer of the municipal corporation. The Treasurer shall deposit the
reimbursements in the municipal corporation’s General Fund. The municipal
corporation shall use the amounts deposited in the Fund to pay the costs
incurred by the municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (d), (e) or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this
section.
         C.   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed pursuant to
division (f)(1)C. of this section for the costs incurred by a private provider
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d), (e) or (f) of this section
to the provider.
      (4)   A.   In addition to any other fine that is or may be imposed under
this section, the court imposing sentence upon an offender for misdemeanor
domestic violence or menacing by stalking may impose a fine of not less than
$70 nor more than $500, which shall, except as provided in divisions (f)(4)B.
and (f)(4)C. of this section, be transmitted to the Treasurer of Ohio to be
credited to the address confidentiality program fund created by R.C. § 111.48.
         B.   A court that imposes a fine under division (f)(4)A. of this
section may retain up to 25% of amounts collected in satisfaction of the fine
to cover administrative costs.
         C.   A court that imposes a fine under division (f)(4)A. of this
section may assign up to 25% of amounts collected in satisfaction of the fine
to reimburse the prosecuting attorney for costs associated with prosecution of
the offense.
      (5)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this division (f)(5), a
financial sanction imposed under division (f)(1) of this section is a judgment
in favor of the state or the political subdivision that operates the court that
imposed the financial sanction, and the offender subject to the financial
sanction is the judgment debtor. A financial sanction of reimbursement imposed
pursuant to division (f)(1)C.1.a. of this section upon an offender is a
judgment in favor of the entity administering the community control sanction,
and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the judgment debtor. A
financial sanction of reimbursement imposed pursuant to division (f)(1)C.1.b.
of this section upon an offender confined in a jail or other residential
facility is a judgment in favor of the entity operating the jail or other
residential facility, and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the
judgment debtor. A financial sanction of restitution imposed pursuant to
division (f)(1)A. of this section is an order in favor of the victim of the
offender’s criminal act that can be collected through a certificate of judgment
as described in division (f)(5)B.1. of this section, through execution as
described in division (f)(5)B.2. of this section or through an order as
described in division (f)(5)B.3. of this section and the offender shall be
considered for purposes of the collection as a judgment debtor.
         B.   Once a financial sanction is imposed as a judgment or order under
this division, the victim, private provider, state or political subdivision may
do any of the following:
            1.   Obtain from the clerk of the court in which the judgment was
entered, at no charge, a certificate of judgment that shall be in the same
manner and form as a certificate of judgment issued in a civil action;
            2.   Obtain execution of the judgment or order through any
available procedure, including any of the procedures identified in R.C. §
2929.18(D)(1) and (D)(2) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
            3.   Obtain an order for the assignment of wages of the judgment
debtor under R.C. § 1321.33 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (6)   The civil remedies authorized under division (f)(5) of this section
for the collection of the financial sanction supplement, but do not preclude,
enforcement of the criminal sentence.
      (7)   Each court imposing a financial sanction upon an offender under
this division (f) may designate the Clerk of the Court or another person to
collect the financial sanction. The Clerk, or another person authorized by law
or the court to collect the financial sanction may do the following:
         A.   Enter into contracts with one or more public agencies or private
vendors for the collection of amounts due under the sanction. Before entering
into a contract for the collection of amounts due from an offender pursuant to
any financial sanction imposed pursuant to this division (f), a court shall
comply with R.C. §§ 307.86 to 307.92.
         B.   Permit payment of all or any portion of the sanction in
installments, by financial transaction device if the court is a county court or
a municipal court operated by a county, or by any other reasonable method, in
any time, and on any terms that the court considers just. If the court is a
county court or a municipal court operated by a county, the acceptance of
payments by any financial transaction device shall be governed by the policy
adopted by the Board of County Commissioners of the county pursuant to R.C. §
301.28. If the court is a municipal court not operated by a county, the Clerk
may pay any fee associated with processing an electronic transfer out of public
money or may charge the fee to the offender.
         C.   To defray administrative costs, charge a reasonable fee to an
offender who elects a payment plan rather than a lump sum payment of any
financial sanction.
      (8)   No financial sanction imposed under this division (f) shall
preclude a victim from bringing a civil action against the offender.
      (9)   If the court imposes restitution, fines, fees, or incarceration
costs on a business or corporation, it is the duty of the person authorized to
make disbursements from assets of the business or corporation to pay the
restitution, fines, fees, or incarceration costs from those assets.
(R.C. § 2929.28)
§ 698.03 IMPOSING SENTENCE FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   (a)   (1)   Unless a mandatory jail term is required to be imposed by R.C. §
1547.99(G), 4510.14(B) or 4511.19(G), or any other provision of the Revised
Code, or any municipal ordinance, a court that imposes a sentence under this
chapter upon an offender for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor has discretion
to determine the most effective way to achieve the purposes and principles of
sentencing set forth in §
698.02.
      (2)   Unless a specific sanction is required to be imposed or is
precluded from being imposed by the section setting forth an offense or the
penalty for an offense or by any provision of §
666.99 or
698.02 of this code or R.C. §§ 2929.23 to 2929.28, a court that imposes a
sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor may impose on the offender any
sanction or combination of sanctions under §
698.02(b) to (f). The court shall not impose a sentence that imposes an
unnecessary burden on local government resources.
   (b)   (1)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, the
court shall consider all of the following factors:
         A.   The nature and circumstances of the offense or offenses;
         B.   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender has a history of persistent criminal
activity and that the offender’s character and condition reveal a substantial
risk that the offender will commit another offense;
         C.   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender’s history, character and condition
reveal a substantial risk that the offender will be a danger to others and that
the offender’s conduct has been characterized by a pattern of repetitive,
compulsive or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences;
         D.   Whether the victim’s youth, age, disability or other factor made
the victim particularly vulnerable to the offense or made the impact of the
offense more serious;
         E.   Whether the offender is likely to commit future crimes in
general, in addition to the circumstances described in divisions (b)(1)B. and
(b)(1)C. of this section;
         F.   Whether the offender has an emotional, mental, or physical
condition that is traceable to the offender’s service in the armed forces of
the United States and that was a contributing factor in the offender’s
commission of the offense or offenses;
         G.   The offender’s military service record.
      (2)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, if the
offender enters an Alford plea, the sentencing court shall not consider whether
the offender showed genuine remorse for the offense.
      (3)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, in
addition to complying with division (b)(1) of this section, the court may
consider any other factors that are relevant to achieving the purposes and
principles of sentencing set forth in §
698.02(a).
   (c)   Before imposing a jail term as a sentence for a misdemeanor, a court
shall consider the appropriateness of imposing a community control sanction or
a combination of community control sanctions under §
698.02(c), (d), (e), and (f). A court may impose the longest jail term
authorized under §
698.02(b) only upon offenders who commit the worst forms of the offense or upon
offenders whose conduct and response to prior sanctions for prior offenses
demonstrate that the imposition of the longest jail term is necessary to deter
the offender from committing a future criminal offense.
   (d)   (1)   A sentencing court shall consider any relevant oral and written
statement made by the victim, the victim’s representative, the victim’s
attorney, if applicable, the defendant, the defense attorney, and the
prosecuting authority regarding sentencing for a misdemeanor. This division
does not create any rights to notice other than those rights authorized by R.C.
Chapter 2930.
      (2)   At the time of sentencing for a misdemeanor or as soon as possible
after sentencing, the court shall notify the victim of the offense of the
victim’s right to file an application for an award of reparations pursuant to
R.C. §§ 2743.51 to 2743.72.
(R.C. § 2929.22)
§ 698.04 ORGANIZATIONAL PENALTIES.
   (a)   Regardless of the other penalties provided in §
698.02, an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
606.09 shall be fined by the court as follows:
      (1)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than $5,000;
      (2)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $4,000;
      (3)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $3,000;
      (4)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $2,000;
      (5)   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $1,000;
      (6)   For a misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more than
$2,000;
      (7)   For a minor misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more than
$1,000.
   (b)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the section defining the offense or penalty plainly indicates a
purpose to impose the penalty provided for violation upon organizations, then
that penalty shall be imposed in lieu of the penalty provided in this section.
   (c)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the penalty provided includes a higher fine than that provided
in this section, then the penalty imposed shall be pursuant to the penalty
provided for violation of the section defining the offense.
   (d)   This section does not prevent the imposition of available civil
sanctions against an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
606.09, either in addition to or in lieu of a fine imposed pursuant to this
section.
(R.C. § 2929.31)
§ 698.05 MULTIPLE SENTENCES.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, R.C. § 2929.14(C)
or 2971.03(D) or (E), a prison term, jail term or sentence of imprisonment
shall be served concurrently with any other prison term, jail term or sentence
of imprisonment imposed by a court of this municipality, the state, another
state or the United States. Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this
section, a jail term or sentence of imprisonment for misdemeanor shall be
served concurrently with a prison term or sentence of imprisonment for felony
served in a state or federal correctional institution.
   (b)   (1)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment for a misdemeanor shall
be served consecutively to any other prison term, jail term or sentence of
imprisonment when the trial court specifies that it is to be served
consecutively or when it is imposed for a misdemeanor violation of R.C. §
2907.322, 2921.34 or 2923.131. When consecutive sentences are imposed for
misdemeanors under this division, the term to be served is the aggregate of the
consecutive terms imposed, except that the aggregate term to be served shall
not exceed 18 months.
      (2)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment imposed for a misdemeanor
violation of R.C. § 4510.14, 4510.16, 4510.21 or 4511.19, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be served consecutively to a prison term
that is imposed for a felony violation of R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.08 or 4511.19 or
a felony violation of R.C. § 2903.04 involving the operation of a vehicle by
the offender and that is served in a state correctional institution when the
trial court specifies that it is to be served consecutively. When consecutive
jail terms or sentences of imprisonment and prison terms are imposed for one or
more misdemeanors and one or more felonies under this division, the term to be
served is the aggregate of the consecutive terms imposed, and the offender
shall serve all terms imposed for a felony before serving any term imposed for
a misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2929.41)
§ 698.06 SUSPENSION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4510.07 or in any other provision of
the Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of any provision of this code of ordinances that is substantially
equivalent to a provision of the Revised Code, and a court is permitted or
required to suspend a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to any other
penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privileges for the period
of time the court determines appropriate, but the period of suspension imposed
for the violation of the provision of this code of ordinances shall not exceed
the period of suspension that is permitted or required to be imposed for the
violation of the provision of the Revised Code to which the provision of this
code of ordinances is substantially equivalent.
(R.C. § 4510.05)
PART EIGHT: BUSINESS REGULATION AND TAXATION
         TITLE TWO - Business Regulation
         
Chap. 804. Sale of Beer, Liquor or Intoxicating Beverages.
         
Chap. 806. Peddlers, Itinerant Merchants, and Solicitors.
         
Chap. 808. Garage and Yard Sales.
         
Chap. 810. Video Service Providers.
         TITLE FOUR - Taxation
         
Chap. 820. Income Tax.
         
Chap. 824. Residential Tax Increment Financing Incentive District.
TITLE TWO - Business Regulation
               
Chap. 804. Sale of Beer, Liquor or Intoxicating Beverages.
               
Chap. 806. Peddlers, Itinerant Merchants, and Solicitors.
               
Chap. 808. Garage and Yard Sales.
               
Chap. 810. Video Service Providers.
CHAPTER 804
Sale of Beer, Liquor or Intoxicating Beverages
804.01   Permit required.
804.02   Exemptions.
804.03   Permit fee.
804.04   Restrictions on sales of beer and intoxicating liquor.
804.05   Obstructing search of premises prohibited.
804.99   Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
   Liquor Control Law - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4301
   Suspension of alcohol sales during emergency - see Ohio R.C. 4301.251
   Liquor permits - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4303
   Local option - see Ohio R.C. 4303.29
§ 804.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to sell or permit to be sold
any beer, liquor or intoxicating beverages within the limits of the village
without a permit from the village.
(Ord. 1-11-72, passed 11-6-1972; Am. Ord. 1600.01, passed 10-10-1974)
§ 804.02 EXEMPTIONS.
   This chapter shall be exempt to existing valid permit holders at the
effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. 1-11-72, passed 11-6-1972; Am. Ord. 1600.01, passed 10-10-1974)
§ 804.03 PERMIT FEE.
   A permit for the sale of beer, liquor or intoxicating beverages shall be
issued by the Mayor or Fiscal Officer, upon approval by the Council of the
Village, for a sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
(Ord. 1-11-72, passed 11-6-1972; Am. Ord. 1600.01, passed 10-10-1974)
§ 804.04 RESTRICTIONS ON SALES OF BEER AND INTOXICATING LIQUOR.
   (a)   No beer shall be sold to any person under 18 years of age; and no
intoxicating liquor shall be sold to or handled by any person under 21 years of
age, except that a person 18 years of age or older employed by a permit holder,
may handle intoxicating liquor in sealed containers in connection with
wholesale or retail sales, manufacturing, storage, warehousing, placement or
delivery, and in open containers in connection with cleaning tables or handling
empty bottles or glasses.
   (b)   No sales shall be made to an intoxicated person.
   (c)   No sales of intoxicating liquor shall be made after 2:30 a.m. on
Sunday except that intoxicating liquor may be sold on Sunday under authority of
a permit which authorizes Sunday sale.
   (d)   (1)   No beer or intoxicating liquor shall be sold or consumed between
1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. on any day except on the premises of holders of D-3A or
D-5 permits. D-3A and D-5 permit holders may not sell or allow consumption of
beer or intoxicating liquor between 2:30 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. on any day.
      (2)   No individual shall purchase or consume beer or intoxicating
liquors on the premises of a D-3A or D5 permit holder between the hours of 2:30
a.m. and 5:30 a.m. on any day.
(Ord. 1600.02, passed 10-4-1976; Am. Ord. 1600.02B, passed 9-14-1987)
§ 804.05 OBSTRUCTING SEARCH OF PREMISES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall hinder or obstruct any agent or employee of the Department
of Liquor Control, or any officer of the law, from making inspection or search
of any place, other than bona-fide private residence, where beer or
intoxicating liquor is possessed, kept, sold, or given away.
(ORC 4301.66)
§ 804.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
202.99.
   (b)   Permit required; exemptions. Any person or persons violating any of
the provisions of §§
804.01 and
804.02 shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than two hundred dollars
($200.00) nor less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
(Ord. 1-11-72, passed 11-6-1972; Am. Ord. 1600.01, passed 10-10-1974)
   (c)   Restrictions on sales of beer and intoxicating liquor.
      (1)   A.   Whoever violates §
804.04(a) or (b) of this chapter shall be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
         B.   A violation of either §
804.04(a) or (b) of this chapter is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4301.22) (Ord. 1600.02, passed 10-4-1976)
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates §
804.04(c) or (d) of this chapter shall be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
         B.   A violation of either §
804.04(c) or (d) of this chapter is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. 1600.01, passed 10-10-1974)
   (c)   Obstructing search of premises prohibited. 
      (1)   Any person violating §
804.05 of this chapter shall be fined no more than five hundred dollars
($500.00).
      (2)   A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4301.99)
CHAPTER 806
Peddlers, Itinerant Merchants, and Solicitors
806.01   Definitions.
806.02   License requirement.
806.03   Application procedure.
806.04   Standards for issuance.
806.05   Revocation procedure.
806.06   Standards for revocation.
806.07   Appeal procedure.
806.08   Exhibition of identification.
806.09   Village policy on soliciting and peddling.
806.10   Notice regulating soliciting and peddling.
806.11   Duty of solicitors and peddlers to ascertain notice.
806.12   Prohibited solicitation and peddling.
806.13   Hours for solicitation and peddling.
806.99   Penalties.
CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to inspect food products - see Ohio R.C. 715.46
   Power to regulate - see Ohio R.C. 715.61 et seq.
   Home solicitation sales - see Ohio R.C. 1345.21 et seq.
   Sales of goods and services within right of way of Interstate and other
state highways - see Ohio R.C. 5515.07
§ 806.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GOODS. Merchandise of any description whatsoever, and includes, but is not
restricted to, wares and foodstuffs.
   ITINERANT MERCHANT. Any person, whether as owner, agent, or consignee, who
engages in a temporary business of selling goods within the village and who, in
the furtherance of such business, uses a building, structure, or vehicle within
the village. No itinerant merchant shall conduct business in a private
dwelling, yard, garage, driveway, or outbuilding in any residential district.
   PEDDLER. Any person, not an itinerant merchant, who:
      (1)   Travels from place to place by any means carrying goods for sale,
or making sales, or making deliveries; or
      (2)   Without traveling from place to place, sells or offers goods for
sale from any public place within the village. No peddler shall conduct
business in a private dwelling, yard, garage, driveway, or outbuilding in any
residential district.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who travels by any means from place to place, taking
or attempting to take orders for sale of goods to be delivered in the future or
for services to be performed in the future.
(Ord. 2020-13, passed 7-20-2020; Am. Ord. 2024-14, passed 11-4-2024)
§ 806.02 LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   (a)   Any person who is an itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor shall
obtain a license before engaging in such activity within the village.
   (b)   The fee for the license required by this chapter shall be $15 plus $5
for each individual who will be conducting business within the village under
such license. This fee shall be known as the license application fee, which may
be amended from time to time, as determined by resolution of the Village
Council.
   (c)   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable.
   (d)   All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire 90 days after the
date of issuance thereof.
   (e)   Only two licenses shall be issued to a business within a 12 month
period.
   (f)   No licenses outlined in this chapter are required for:
      (1)   Schools and/or school organizations;
      (2)   Churches and/or church organizations;
      (3)   Youth groups; and
      (4)   Non-profit organizations located within the village.
(Ord. 2020-13, passed 7-20-2020; Am. Ord. 2024-14, passed 11-4-2024) Penalty,
see §
806.99
§ 806.03 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (a)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall file an
application with the Village Mayor. This application shall be signed by the
applicant. The applicant may be requested to provide information concerning the
following items:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The name of each individual that will be conducting business under
the license within the village.
      (3)   The name and contact information of the individual having
management authority or supervision of the applicant's business during the time
that it is proposed to be carried on in the village;
      (4)   The name and address of the business, corporation, or person for
whose purpose the business will be carried on;
      (5)   The time period or periods during which it is proposed to carry on
applicant's business; or
      (6)   The nature, character, and quality of the goods or services to be
offered for sale or delivered.
   (b)   Applicants for peddler or solicitor licenses may be required to
provide further information concerning the following items, in addition to that
requested under division (a) above:
      (1)   A description of all individuals who will be conducting business
under the license within the village;
      (2)   A description of any vehicle proposed to be used in the business,
including its registration number, if any.
   (c)   Each applicant for a license shall attach credentials to the
application for each individual that will be conducting business under the
license within the village, authorizing the individual to act as a
representative of the applicant.
(Ord. 2020-13, passed 7-20-2020)
§ 806.04 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (a)   The applicant shall submit an application, all information requested
under §
806.03(a), license application fee, and background check obtained through the
Ohio Bureau of Criminal Investigation (BCI) for each individual that will be
conducting business within the village. Upon receipt of all of the foregoing,
the Mayor shall issue the applicant a license, unless the BCI background check
demonstrates the applicant or an individual named on the application as an
individual who will be conducting business under the license within the village
has been convicted of any of the following:
      (1)   A felony;
      (2)   An offense under R.C. Chapter 2907 or any similar municipal
ordinance;
      (3)   Attempt under R.C. § 2923.02 if the principal offense is an offense
listed under R.C. Chapter 2907;
      (4)   Complicity under R.C. § 2923.03 if the principal offense is an
offense listed under R.C. Chapter 2907;
      (5)   Any felony or misdemeanor involving a victim over the age of 60; or
      (6)   An offense under R.C. Chapter 2913 or any similar municipal
ordinance.
   (b)   No person shall engage in business under this chapter without
submitting a BCI background check to the Mayor. The cost of such background
check(s) shall be borne by the applicant.
   (c)   No person shall engage in business under this chapter without
obtaining a license.
(Ord. 2020-13, passed 7-20-2020)
§ 806.05 REVOCATION PROCEDURE.
   Any license or permit granted under this chapter may be revoked by the Mayor
after notice and hearing, pursuant to the standards in §
806.06. Notice of hearing for revocation shall be given in writing, setting
forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his or her last known
address, at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing.
(Ord. 2020-13, passed 7-20-2020)
§ 806.06 STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION.
   A license granted under this chapter may be revoked for any of the following
reasons:
   (a)   Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license application;
   (b)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in connection
with the business being conducted under the license;
   (c)   Any violation of this chapter;
   (d)   Conviction of the licensee of any offense listed in §
806.04(a); or
   (e)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in such a
way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the
public.
(Ord. 2020-13, passed 7-20-2020)
§ 806.07 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Any person aggrieved by a decision under §§
806.04 or
806.06 shall have the right to appeal to the Village Council. The appeal shall
be taken by filing with the Village Council, within 14 days after notice of the
decision has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written
statement setting forth the grounds for appeal. The Village Council shall set
the time and place for a hearing, and notice for such hearing shall be given to
such person in the same manner as provided in §
806.05.
   (b)   The order of the Village Council after the hearing shall be final.
(Ord. 2020-13, passed 7-20-2020)
§ 806.08 EXHIBITION OF IDENTIFICATION.
   (a)   Any license issued to an itinerant merchant under this chapter shall
be posted conspicuously in or at the place named therein. In the event more
than one place within the village shall be used to conduct the business
licensed, separate licenses shall be issued for each place.
   (b)   The Mayor shall issue a license to each peddler or solicitor licensed
under this chapter. The license shall contain the words "Licensed Peddler" or
"Licensed Solicitor," the expiration date of the license, and the number of the
license. The license shall be kept with the licensee during such time as he or
she is engaged in the business licensed and shall be displayed at all times in
a conspicuous manner.
(Ord. 2020-13, passed 7-20-2020) Penalty, see §
806.99
§ 806.09 VILLAGE POLICY ON SOLICITING AND PEDDLING.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the village that the occupants of
the residences in the village shall make the determination of whether
solicitors or peddlers shall be, or shall not be, invited to their respective
residences.
(Ord. 2020-13, passed 7-20-2020)
§ 806.10 NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING AND PEDDLING.
   (a)   Notice of the refusal of invitation to solicitors or peddlers, to any
residence, shall be stated on a weatherproof card, exhibited upon or near the
main entrance door to the residence, indicating the determination by the
occupant, containing the applicable words, as follows:
   "NO SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS INVITED"
   (b)   The letters shall be in legible typeface of at least 24 points.
   (c)   The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor or peddler of the determination by the occupant of the residence of
the information contained thereon.
(Ord. 2020-13, passed 7-20-2020)
§ 806.11 DUTY OF SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS TO ASCERTAIN NOTICE.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor or peddler upon going onto any
premises in the village upon which a residence is located to first examine the
notice provided for in §
806.10 if any is attached, and be governed by the statement contained on the
notice. If the notice states "NO SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS INVITED," then the
solicitor or peddler, whether licensed or not, shall immediately and peacefully
depart from the premises.
   (b)   Any solicitor or peddler who has gained entrance to any residence,
whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises when requested to do so by the occupant. Refusal to depart after a
request to do so by the occupant shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-13, passed 7-20-2020) Penalty, see §
806.99
§ 806.12 PROHIBITED SOLICITATION AND PEDDLING.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or
create any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in soliciting or peddling in defiance of the notice
exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of §
806.10.
§ 806.13 HOURS FOR SOLICITATION AND PEDDLING.
   Solicitation and peddling is permitted only between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m. Solicitation or peddling by a person or business outside those
hours, whether or not that person or business is licensed to do business under
this chapter, shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-13, passed 7-20-2020) Penalty, see §
806.99
§ 806.99 PENALTIES.
   Violations of this chapter shall be punished as follows:
   (a)   A first violation of this chapter shall be classified as a minor
misdemeanor and punishable by up to a $150 fine and, if the person or business
is licensed to do business as provided under this chapter, immediate revocation
of the license of such person or business.
   (b)   A second violation of this chapter shall be classified as a fourth-
degree misdemeanor and punishable by up to a $250 fine, and, if the person or
business is licensed to do business as provided under this chapter, immediate
revocation of the license of such person or business.
   (c)   A third violation of this chapter, if committed within one year of a
second violation, shall be classified as a third degree misdemeanor and
punishable by up to a $500 fine and 30 days in jail, and, if the person or
business is licensed to do business as provided under this chapter, immediate
revocation of the license of such person or business.
(Ord. 2020-13, passed 7-20-2020)
CHAPTER 808
Garage and Yard Sales
808.01   License required.
808.02   Application.
808.03   Signs restricted.
808.99   Penalty.
§ 808.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall sell, or offer for sale, two or more
articles of tangible personal property in a residence, yard, garage or
outbuilding of the residence in any Residential District in the municipality
without first having obtained a license from the Zoning Inspector.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 12-6-2010)
§ 808.02 APPLICATION.
   (a)   The application for a license shall contain the name of the applicant,
the applicant’s address, the address where the sale is to be conducted and the
dates on which the sale will be conducted.
   (b)   Applications for licenses shall be submitted to the Zoning Inspector.
Only three such licenses shall be issued for a single address in any 12-month
period, and shall be valid for not more than four consecutive days. The license
must be displayed on the premises during the sale.
   (c)   The Zoning Inspector may refuse a license for any sale which would be
detrimental to the residential nature of the neighborhood, it being the
intention of this section, to restrict such sales to casual sales of reasonably
limited amounts of tangible personal property.
   (d)   Application for such sales shall be made at least five business days
in advance of the sale, and no sales shall commence before the hour of 8:00
a.m. or extend later than 8:00 p.m.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 12-6-2010)
§ 808.03 SIGNS RESTRICTED.
   Signs announcing the sale shall be limited to one on-premises sign, and four
off-premises signs. The location of the four off-premises signs shall be at the
discretion of the person holding the sale. Signs may be put up three days
before the first day of the sale and must be taken down immediately after the
final day of the sale. The signs shall be no larger than two square feet in
area, and shall not be illuminated or animated.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 12-6-2010)
§ 808.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. Each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed
a separate offense.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 12-6-2010)
CHAPTER 810
Video Service Providers
810.01   Video service provider fee. (Repealed)
CROSS REFERENCES
   The “Video Law” - see Ohio R.C. 1332.21 through 1332.34
§ 810.01 VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE. (REPEALED)
TITLE FOUR - Taxation
               
Chap. 820. Income Tax.
               
Chap. 824. Residential Tax Increment Financing Incentive District.
CHAPTER 820
Income Tax
820.01   Authority to levy tax; purpose of tax.
820.02   Definitions.
820.03   Imposition of tax.
820.04   Collection at source.
820.05   Annual return; filing.
820.06   Credit for tax paid to other municipalities.
820.07   Estimated taxes.
820.08   Rounding of amounts.
820.09   Requests for refunds.
820.10   Second municipality imposing tax after time period allowed for refund.
820.11   Amended returns.
820.12   Limitations.
820.13   Audits.
820.14   Service of assessment.
820.15   Administration of claims.
820.16   Tax information confidential.
820.17   Fraud.
820.18   Interest and penalties.
820.19   Authority of Tax Administrator; verification of information.
820.20   Request for opinion of the Tax Administrator.
820.21   Board of Tax Review.
820.22   Authority to create rules and regulations.
820.23   Rental and leased property.
820.24   Savings clause.
820.25   Collection of tax after termination of chapter.
820.26   Adoption of RITA Rules and Regulations.
820.27   Election to be subject to R.C. §§ 718.80 to 718.95.
820.99   Violations; penalties.
§ 820.01 AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX; PURPOSE OF TAX.
   (a)   To provide funds for the purposes of general municipal operations,
maintenance, new equipment, extension and enlargement of municipal services and
facilities and capital improvements, the village hereby levies an annual
municipal income tax on income, qualifying wages, commissions and other
compensation, and on net profits as hereinafter provided.
   (b)   The annual tax is levied at a rate of .75%. The tax is levied at a
uniform rate on all persons residing in or earning or receiving income in the
village. The tax is levied on income, qualifying wages, commissions and other
compensation, and on net profits as hereinafter provided in §
820.03 and other sections as they may apply.
   (c)   The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this chapter
are authorized by Article XVIII, Section 3 of the Ohio Constitution. The tax is
levied in accordance with, and is intended to be consistent with, the
provisions and limitations of R.C. Chapter 718.
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 820.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Any term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this
chapter has the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in laws of
the United States relating to federal income taxation or in R.C. Title LVII,
unless a different meaning is clearly required. If a term used in this chapter
that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a comparable context
in both the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax and in
R.C. Title LVII and the use is not consistent, then the use of the term in the
laws of the United States relating to federal income tax shall control over the
use of the term in R.C. Title LVII.
   (b)   The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the gender-neutral.
   (c)   As used in this chapter:
      (1)   ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME, for a person required to file as a
C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C corporation
under division (c)(24)D. of this section, means a C corporation's federal
taxable income before net operating losses and special deductions as determined
under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows:
         A.   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal
taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the
intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held
for the production of income.
         B.   Add an amount equal to 5% of intangible income deducted under
division (c)(1)A. of this section, but excluding that portion of intangible
income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of property
described in section 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code.
         C.   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of
federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or
other disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
         D.   1.   Except as provided in division (c)(l)D.2. of this section,
deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the
income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of
an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code;
            2.   Division (c)(l)D.1. of this section does not apply to the
extent the income or gain is income or gain described in section 1245 or 1250
of the Internal Revenue Code.
         E.   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in
the computation of federal taxable income.
         F.   In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated
investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions
to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and
allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income.
         G.   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in
computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement
or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under R.C. § 4313.02.
         H.   1.   Except as limited by divisions (c)(l)H.2., 3., and 4. of
this section, deduct any net operating loss incurred by the person in a taxable
year beginning on or after January 1, 2017.
               The amount of such net operating loss shall be deducted from net
profit that is reduced by exempt income to the extent necessary to reduce
municipal taxable income to zero, with any remaining unused portion of the net
operating loss carried forward to not more than five consecutive taxable years
following the taxable year in which the loss was incurred, but in no case for
more years than necessary for the deduction to be fully utilized.
            2.   No person shall use the deduction allowed by division (c)(1)H.
of this section to offset qualifying wages.
            3.   a.   For taxable years beginning in 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, or
2022, a person may not deduct, for purposes of an income tax levied by a
municipal corporation that levies an income tax before January 1, 2016, more
than 50% of the amount of the deduction otherwise allowed by division (c)
(l)H.1. of this section.
               b.   For taxable years beginning in 2023 or thereafter, a person
may deduct, for purposes of an income tax levied by a municipal corporation
that levies an income tax before January 1, 2016, the full amount allowed by
division (c)(l)H.1. of this section.
            4.   Any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward deduction that is
available must be utilized before a taxpayer may deduct any amount pursuant to
division (c)(1)H. of this section.
            5.   Nothing in division (c)(l)H.3.a. of this section precludes a
person from carrying forward, use with respect to any return filed for a
taxable year beginning after 2018, any amount of net operating loss that was
not fully utilized by operation of division (c)(l)H.3.a. of this section. To
the extent that an amount of net operating loss that was not fully utilized in
one or more taxable years by operation of division (c)(l)H.3.a. of this section
is carried forward for use with respect to a return filed for a taxable year
beginning in 2019, 2020, 2021, or 2022, the limitation described in division
(c)(l)H.3.a. of this section shall apply to the amount carried forward.
         I.   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in
the group's federal taxable income in accordance with §
820.05(v)(3)B.
         J.   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in the
group's federal taxable income in accordance with §
820.05(v)(3)B.
            If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded entity
that has made an election described in division (c)(48)B. of this section, is
not a publicly traded partnership that has made the election described in
division (c)(24)D. of this section, and is not an individual, the taxpayer
shall compute adjusted federal taxable income under this section as if the
taxpayer were a C corporation, except guaranteed payments and other similar
amounts paid or accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former
shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible
expense unless such payments are in consideration for the use of capital and
treated as payment of interest under section 469 of the Internal Revenue Code
or United States Treasury regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified
self-employed retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member of the taxpayer,
amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member, and amounts
paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed
as a deduction.
            Nothing in division (c)(1) of this section shall be construed as
allowing the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be
construed as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for
purposes of federal self-employment tax.
      (2)   A.   ASSESSMENT means a written finding by the Tax Administrator
that a person has underpaid municipal income tax, or owes penalty and interest,
or any combination of tax, penalty, or interest, to the municipal corporation
that commences the person's time limitation for making an appeal to the Board
of Tax Review pursuant to §
820.21, and has "ASSESSMENT" written in all capital letters at the top of such
finding.
         B.   ASSESSMENT does not include a notice denying a request for refund
issued under §
820.09(c)(3), a billing statement notifying a taxpayer of current or past-due
balances owed to the municipal corporation, a Tax Administrator's request for
additional information, a notification to the taxpayer of mathematical errors,
or a Tax Administrator's other written correspondence to a person or taxpayer
that does not meet the criteria prescribed by division (c)(2)A. of this
section.
      (3)   AUDIT means the examination of a person or the inspection of the
books, records, memoranda, or accounts of a person, ordered to appear before
the Tax Administrator, for the purpose of determining liability for a municipal
income tax.
      (4)   BOARD OF TAX REVIEW or BOARD OF REVIEW or BOARD OF TAX APPEALS, or
other named local board constituted to hear appeals of municipal income tax
matters, means the entity created under § 820.21.
      (5)   CALENDAR QUARTER means the three-month period ending on the last
day of March, June, September, or December.
      (6)   CASINO OPERATOR and CASINO FACILITY have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 3772.01.
      (7)   CERTIFIED MAIL, EXPRESS MAIL, UNITED STATES MAIL, POSTAL SERVICE,
and similar terms include any delivery service authorized pursuant to R.C. §
5703.056.
      (8)   DISREGARDED ENTITY means a single member limited liability company,
a qualifying subchapter S subsidiary, or another entity if the company,
subsidiary, or entity is a disregarded entity for federal income tax purposes.
      (9)   DOMICILE means the true, fixed, and permanent home of a taxpayer
and to which, whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return. A taxpayer may
have more than one residence but not more than one domicile.
      (10)   EMPLOYEE means an individual who is an employee for federal income
tax purposes.
      (11)   EMPLOYER means a person that is an employer for federal income tax
purposes.
      (12)   EXEMPT INCOME means all of the following:
         A.   The military pay or allowances of members of the armed forces of
the United States or members of their reserve components, including the
national guard of any state.
         B.   Intangible income. However, a municipal corporation that taxed
any type of intangible income on March 29, 1988, pursuant to Section 3 of S.B.
238 of the 116th General Assembly, may continue to tax that type of income if a
majority of the electors of the municipal corporation voting on the question of
whether to permit the taxation of that type of intangible income after 1988
voted in favor thereof at an election held on November 8, 1988.
         C.   Social security benefits, railroad retirement benefits,
unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments, payments from
annuities, and similar payments made to an employee or to the beneficiary of an
employee under a retirement program or plan, disability payments received from
private industry or local, state, or federal governments or from charitable,
religious or educational organizations, and the proceeds of sickness, accident,
or liability insurance policies. As used in division (c)(12)C. of this section,
"unemployment compensation" does not include supplemental unemployment
compensation described in section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         D.   The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific,
literary, or educational institutions to the extent such income is derived from
tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible property, or tax-
exempt activities.
         E.   Compensation paid under R.C. § 3501.28 or 3501.36 to a person
serving as a precinct election official to the extent that such compensation
does not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000) for the taxable year. Such
compensation in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000) for the taxable year
may be subject to taxation by a municipal corporation. A municipal corporation
shall not require the payer of such compensation to withhold any tax from that
compensation.
         F.   Dues, contributions, and similar payments received by charitable,
religious, educational, or literary organizations or labor unions, lodges, and
similar organizations.
         G.   Alimony and child support received.
         H.   Compensation for personal injuries or for damages to property
from insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid for lost
salaries or wages or compensation from punitive damages.
         I.   Income of a public utility when that public utility is subject to
the tax levied under R.C. § 5727.24 or 5727.30. Division (c)(12)I. of this
section does not apply for purposes of R.C. Chapter 5745.
         J.   Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on federal
obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the state and that a
municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing, and income
of a decedent's estate during the period of administration except such income
from the operation of a trade or business.
         K.   Compensation or allowances excluded from federal gross income
under section 107 of the Internal Revenue Code.
         L.   Employee compensation that is not qualifying wages as defined in
division (c)(35) of this section.
         M.   Compensation paid to a person employed within the boundaries of a
United States Air Force base under the jurisdiction of the United States Air
Force that is used for the housing of members of the United States Air Force
and is a center for Air Force operations, unless the person is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile. If the compensation is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile, tax on such income shall be payable
only to the municipal corporation of residence or domicile.
         N.   An S corporation shareholder's share of net profits of the S
corporation, other than any part of the share of net profits that represents
wages as defined in section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code or net
earnings from self-employment as defined in section 1402(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
         O.   To the extent authorized under a resolution or ordinance adopted
by the village before January 1, 2016, all or a portion of the income of
individuals or a class of individuals under 18 years of age. For tax year 2024
and after, the income of individuals under 18 years of age.
         P.   1.   Except as provided in divisions (c)(12)P.2., 3., and 4. of
this section, qualifying wages described in § 820.04(c)(2) or (c)(5) to the
extent the qualifying wages are not subject to withholding for the village
under either of those divisions.
            2.   The exemption provided in division (c)(12)P.1. of this section
does not apply with respect to the municipal corporation in which the employee
resided at the time the employee earned the qualifying wages.
            3.   The exemption provided in division (c)(12)P.1. of this section
does not apply to qualifying wages that an employer elects to withhold under §
820.04(c)(4)B.
            4.   The exemption provided in division (c)(12)P.1. of this section
does not apply to qualifying wages if both of the following conditions apply:
               a.   For qualifying wages described in § 820.04(c)(2), the
employee's employer withholds and remits tax on the qualifying wages to the
municipal corporation in which the employee's principal place of work is
situated, or, for qualifying wages described in § 820.04(c)(5), the employee's
employer withholds and remits tax on the qualifying wages to the municipal
corporation in which the employer's fixed location is located;
               b.   The employee receives a refund of the tax described in
division (c)(12)P.4.a. of this section on the basis of the employee not
performing services in that municipal corporation.
         Q.   1.   Except as provided in division (c)(12)Q.2. or 3. of this
section, compensation that is not qualifying wages paid to a nonresident
individual for personal services performed in the village on not more than 20
days in a taxable year.
            2.   The exemption provided in division (c)(12)Q.2. of this section
does not apply under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual's base of operation is located in the
municipal corporation.
               b.   The individual is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure, and the compensation is paid for the performance
of services in the individual's capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure. For purposes of division (c)
(12)Q.2.b. of this section, PROFESSIONAL ATHLETE, PROFESSIONAL ENTERTAINER, and
PUBLIC FIGURE have the same meanings as in § 820.04(c).
            3.   Compensation to which division (c)(12)Q. of this section
applies shall be treated as earned or received at the individual's base of
operation. If the individual does not have a base of operation, the
compensation shall be treated as earned or received where the individual is
domiciled.
            4.   For purposes of division (c)(12)Q. of this section, BASE OF
OPERATION means the location where an individual owns or rents an office,
storefront, or similar facility to which the individual regularly reports and
at which the individual regularly performs personal services for compensation.
         R.   Compensation paid to a person for personal services performed for
a political subdivision on property owned by the political subdivision,
regardless of whether the compensation is received by an employee of the
subdivision or another person performing services for the subdivision under a
contract with the subdivision, if the property on which services are performed
is annexed to a municipal corporation pursuant to R.C. § 709.023 on or after
March 27, 2013, unless the person is subject to such taxation because of
residence. If the compensation is subject to taxation because of residence,
municipal income tax shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of
residence.
         S.   Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the constitution or
laws of the United States.
            Any item of income that is exempt income of a pass-through entity
under division (c) of this section is exempt income of each owner of the pass-
through entity to the extent of that owner's distributive or proportionate
share of that item of the entity's income.
      (13)   FORM 2106 means Internal Revenue Service form 2106 filed by a
taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (14)   GENERIC FORM means an electronic or paper form that is not
prescribed by a particular municipal corporation and that is designed for
reporting taxes withheld by an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer,
estimated municipal income taxes, or annual municipal income tax liability or
for filing a refund claim.
      (15)   GROSS RECEIPTS means the total revenue derived from sales, work
done, or service rendered.
      (16)   INCOME means the following:
         A.   1.   For residents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages,
commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by
the resident, including the resident's distributive share of the net profit of
pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the resident and any net
profit of the resident except as provided in division (c)(24)D. of this
section.
            2.   For the purposes of division (c)(16)A.1. of this section:
               a.   Any net operating loss of the resident incurred in the
taxable year and the resident's distributive share of any net operating loss
generated in the same taxable year and attributable to the resident's ownership
interest in a pass-through entity shall be allowed as a deduction, for that
taxable year and the following five taxable years, against any other net profit
of the resident or the resident's distributive share of any net profit
attributable to the resident's ownership interest in a pass-through entity
until fully utilized, subject to division (c)(16)A.4. of this section;
               b.   The resident's distributive share of the net profit of each
pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the resident shall be
calculated without regard to any net operating loss that is carried forward by
that entity from a prior taxable year and applied to reduce the entity's net
profit for the current taxable year.
            3.   Division (c)(16)A.2. of this section does not apply with
respect to any net profit or net operating loss attributable to an ownership
interest in an S corporation unless shareholders' shares of net profits from S
corporations are subject to tax in the municipal corporation as provided in
division (c)(12)N. or (c)(16)E. of this section.
            4.   Any amount of a net operating loss used to reduce a taxpayer's
net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount of net operating loss
that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for use by that taxpayer. In
no event shall the cumulative deductions for all taxable years with respect to
a taxpayer's net operating loss exceed the original amount of that net
operating loss available to that taxpayer.
         B.   In the case of nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying
wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or
received by the nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or
activities conducted in the municipal corporation, including any net profit of
the nonresident, but excluding the nonresident's distributive share of the net
profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by
the nonresident.
         C.   For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit of the
taxpayer.
         D.   Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports winnings, winnings from
games of chance, and prizes and awards. If the taxpayer is a professional
gambler for federal income tax purposes, the taxpayer may deduct related
wagering losses and expenses to the extent authorized under the Internal
Revenue Code and claimed against such winnings.
         E.   Intentionally left blank.
      (17)   INTANGIBLE INCOME means income of any of the following types:
income yield, interest, capital gains, dividends, or other income arising from
the ownership, sale, exchange, or other disposition of intangible property
including, but not limited to, investments, deposits, money, or credits as
those terms are defined in R.C. Chapter 5701, and patents, copyrights,
trademarks, tradenames, investments in real estate investment trusts,
investments in regulated investment companies, and appreciation on deferred
compensation. INTANGIBLE INCOME does not include prizes, awards, or other
income associated with any lottery winnings, gambling winnings, or other
similar games of chance.
      (18)   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5747.01.
      (19)   LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY means a limited liability company formed
under R.C. Chapter 1705 or under the laws of another state.
      (20)   MUNICIPAL CORPORATION includes a joint economic development
district or joint economic development zone that levies an income tax under
R.C. § 715.691, 715.70, 715.71, or 715.74.
      (21)   A.   MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME means the following:
            1.   For a person other than an individual, income reduced by
exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then, as
applicable, apportioned or sitused to the village under § 820.03, and further
reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the person
for the village.
            2.   a.   For an individual who is a resident of the village,
income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income,
then reduced as provided in division (c)(21)B. of this section, and further
reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the
individual for the municipal corporation.
               b.   For an individual who is a nonresident of the village,
income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and
then, as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the municipal corporation under
§ 820.03, then reduced as provided in division (c)(21)B. of this section, and
further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to
the individual for the village.
         B.   In computing the municipal taxable income of a taxpayer who is an
individual, the taxpayer may subtract, as provided in division (c)(21)A.2.a. or
(c)(21)B. of this section, the amount of the individual's employee business
expenses reported on the individual's form 2106 that the individual deducted
for federal income tax purposes for the taxable year, subject to the limitation
imposed by section 67 of the Internal Revenue Code. For the municipal
corporation in which the taxpayer is a resident, the taxpayer may deduct all
such expenses allowed for federal income tax purposes, but to the extent the
expenses do not relate to exempt income. For a municipal corporation in which
the taxpayer is not a resident, the taxpayer may deduct such expenses only to
the extent the expenses are related to the taxpayer's performance of personal
services in that nonresident municipal corporation and are not related to
exempt income.
      (22)   MUNICIPALITY means the same as the Village of Commercial Point. If
the terms are capitalized in the ordinance they are referring to Commercial
Point. If not capitalized they refer to a municipal corporation other than
Commercial Point.
      (23)   NET OPERATING LOSS means a loss incurred by a person in the
operation of a trade or business. NET OPERATING LOSS does not include
unutilized losses resulting from basis limitations, at-risk limitations, or
passive activity loss limitations.
      (24)   A.   NET PROFIT for a person other than an individual means
adjusted federal taxable income.
         B.   NET PROFIT for a person who is an individual means the
individual's net profit required to be reported on schedule C, schedule E, or
schedule F taken before any passive activity or at-risk limitations, reduced by
any net operating loss carried forward. For the purposes of division (c)(24)B.
of this section, the net operating loss carried forward shall be calculated and
deducted in the same manner as provided in division (c)(1)H. of this section.
         C.   For the purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding division
(c)(24)A. of this section, net profit of a disregarded entity shall not be
taxable as against that disregarded entity, but shall instead be included in
the net profit of the owner of the disregarded entity.
         D.   A publicly traded partnership that is treated as a partnership
for federal income tax purposes, and that is subject to tax on its net profits
by the village, may elect to be treated as a C corporation for the village. The
election shall be made on the annual return for the village. The village will
treat the publicly traded partnership as a C corporation if the election is so
made.
      (25)   NONRESIDENT means an individual that is not a resident.
      (26)   OHIO BUSINESS GATEWAY means the online computer network system,
created under R.C. § 125.30, that allows persons to electronically file
business reply forms with state agencies and includes any successor electronic
filing and payment system.
      (27)   OTHER PAYER means any person, other than an individual's employer
or the employer's agent, that pays an individual any amount included in the
federal gross income of the individual. OTHER PAYER includes casino operators
and video lottery terminal sales agents.
      (28)   PASS-THROUGH ENTITY means a partnership not treated as an
association taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, a
limited liability company not treated as an association taxable as a C
corporation for federal income tax purposes, an S corporation, or any other
class of entity from which the income or profits of the entity are given pass-
through treatment for federal income tax purposes. PASS-THROUGH ENTITY does not
include a trust, estate, grantor of a grantor trust, or disregarded entity.
      (29)   A.   From January 1, 2016 to December 31, 2019, PENSION means any
amount paid to an employee or former employee that is reported to the recipient
on an IRS form 1099-R, or successor form. Pension does not include deferred
compensation, or amounts attributable to nonqualified deferred compensation
plans, reported as FICA/Medicare wages on an IRS form W-2, Wage and Tax
Statement, or successor form.
         B.   Effective January 1, 2020, PENSION means a retirement benefit
plan, regardless whether the plan satisfies the qualifications described under
section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, including amounts that are taxable
under the “Federal Insurance Contributions Act”, Chapter 21 of the Internal
Revenue Code, excluding employee contributions and elective deferrals and
regardless of whether such amounts are paid in the same taxable year in which
the amounts are included in the employee’s wages, as defined by section 312(a)
of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (30)   PERSON includes individuals, firms, companies, joint stock
companies, business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited liability
partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, C corporations, S
corporations, governmental entities, and any other entity.
      (31)   POSTAL SERVICE means the United States Postal Service.
      (32)   POSTMARK DATE, DATE OF POSTMARK, and similar terms include the
date recorded and marked in the manner described in division (B)(3) of R.C. §
5703.056.
      (33)   A.   PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD means any net
operating loss incurred in a taxable year beginning before January 1, 2017, to
the extent such loss was permitted, by a resolution or ordinance of the
municipal corporation that was adopted by the municipal corporation before
January 1, 2016, to be carried forward and utilized to offset income or net
profit generated in such municipal corporation in future taxable years.
         B.   For the purpose of calculating municipal taxable income, any pre-
2017 net operating loss carryforward may be carried forward to any taxable
year, including taxable years beginning in 2017 or thereafter, for the number
of taxable years provided in the resolution or ordinance or until fully
utilized, whichever is earlier.
      (34)   PUBLICLY TRADED PARTNERSHIP means any partnership, an interest in
which is regularly traded on an established securities market. A "publicly
traded partnership" may have any number of partners.
      (35)   QUALIFYING WAGES means wages, as defined in section 3121(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations, adjusted as
follows:
         A.   Deduct the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes
compensation attributable to a plan or program described in section 125 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
            2.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes payment
on account of a disability related to sickness or an accident paid by a party
unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer.
            3.   Intentionally left blank.
            4.   Intentionally left blank.
            5.   Any amount included in wages that is exempt income.
         B.   Add the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount not included in wages solely because the employee
was employed by the employer before April 1, 1986.
            2.   Any amount not included in wages because the amount arises
from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of a stock option, the exercise
of a stock option, or the sale, exchange, or other disposition of stock
purchased under a stock option and the municipal corporation has not, by
resolution or ordinance, exempted the amount from withholding and tax adopted
before January 1, 2016. Division (c)(35)B.2. of this section applies only to
those amounts constituting ordinary income.
            3.   Any amount not included in wages if the amount is an amount
described in section 401(k), 403(b), or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code.
Division (c)(35)B.2. of this section applies only to employee contributions and
employee deferrals.
            4.   Any amount that is supplemental unemployment compensation
benefits described in section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and not
included in wages.
            5.   Any amount received that is treated as self-employment income
for federal tax purposes in accordance with section 1402(a)(8) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
            6.   Any amount not included in wages if all of the following
apply:
               a.   For the taxable year the amount is employee compensation
that is earned outside the United States and that either is included in the
taxpayer's gross income for federal income tax purposes or would have been
included in the taxpayer's gross income for such purposes if the taxpayer did
not elect to exclude the income under section 911 of the Internal Revenue Code;
               b.   For no preceding taxable year did the amount constitute
wages as defined in section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code;
               c.   For no succeeding taxable year will the amount constitute
wages; and
               d.   For any taxable year the amount has not otherwise been
added to wages pursuant to either division (c)(35)B. of this section or §
820.04, as that section existed before the effective date of H.B. 5 of the
130th General Assembly, March 23, 2015.
      (36)   RELATED ENTITY means any of the following:
         A.   An individual stockholder, or a member of the stockholder's
family enumerated in section 318 of the Internal Revenue Code, if the
stockholder and the members of the stockholder's family own directly,
indirectly, beneficially, or constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of
the value of the taxpayer's outstanding stock;
         B.   A stockholder, or a stockholder's partnership, estate, trust, or
corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder's partnerships, estates,
trusts, or corporations own directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the taxpayer's
outstanding stock;
         C.   A corporation, or a party related to the corporation in a manner
that would require an attribution of stock from the corporation to the party or
from the party to the corporation under division (c)(36)D. of this section,
provided the taxpayer owns directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, at least 50% of the value of the corporation's outstanding
stock;
         D.   The attribution rules described in section 318 of the Internal
Revenue Code apply for the purpose of determining whether the ownership
requirements in divisions (c)(36)A. to C. of this section have been met.
      (37)   RELATED MEMBER means a person that, with respect to the taxpayer
during all or any portion of the taxable year, is either a related entity, a
component member as defined in section 1563(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or
a person to or from whom there is attribution of stock ownership in accordance
with section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code except, for purposes of
determining whether a person is a related member under this division, "twenty
percent (20%)" shall be substituted for "five percent (5%)" wherever "five
percent (5%)" appears in section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (38)   RESIDENT means an individual who is domiciled in the municipal
corporation as determined under § 820.03(e).
      (39)   S CORPORATION means a person that has made an election under
subchapter S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code for its
taxable year.
      (40)   SCHEDULE C means Internal Revenue Service schedule C (form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (41)   SCHEDULE E means Internal Revenue Service schedule E (form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (42)   SCHEDULE F means Internal Revenue Service schedule F (form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (43)   SINGLE MEMBER LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY means a limited liability
company that has one direct member.
      (44)   SMALL EMPLOYER means any employer that had total revenue of less
than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) during the preceding taxable
year. For purposes of this division, "total revenue" means receipts of any type
or kind, including, but not limited to, sales receipts; payments; rents;
profits; gains, dividends, and other investment income; compensation;
commissions; premiums; money; property; grants; contributions; donations;
gifts; program service revenue; patient service revenue; premiums; fees,
including premium fees and service fees; tuition payments; unrelated business
revenue; reimbursements; any type of payment from a governmental unit,
including grants and other allocations; and any other similar receipts reported
for federal income tax purposes or under generally accepted accounting
principles. "Small employer" does not include the federal government; any state
government, including any state agency or instrumentality; any political
subdivision; or any entity treated as a government for financial accounting and
reporting purposes.
      (45)   TAX ADMINISTRATOR means the individual charged with direct
responsibility for administration of an income tax levied by the village in
accordance with this chapter.
      (46)   TAX RETURN PREPARER means any individual described in section 7701
(a)(36) of the Internal Revenue Code and 26 C.F.R. 301.7701-15.
      (47)   TAXABLE YEAR means the corresponding tax reporting period as
prescribed for the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.
      (48)   A.   TAXPAYER means a person subject to a tax levied on income by
a municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter. TAXPAYER does not
include a grantor trust or, except as provided in division (c)(48)B.1. of this
section, a disregarded entity.
         B.   1.   A single member limited liability company that is a
disregarded entity for federal tax purposes may be a separate taxpayer from its
single member in all Ohio municipal corporations in which it either filed as a
separate taxpayer or did not file for its taxable year ending in 2003, if all
of the following conditions are met:
               a.   The limited liability company's single member is also a
limited liability company.
               b.   The limited liability company and its single member were
formed and doing business in one or more Ohio municipal corporations for at
least five years before January 1, 2004.
               c.   Not later than December 31, 2004, the limited liability
company and its single member each made an election to be treated as a separate
taxpayer under division (c)(38) of this section as this section existed on
December 31, 2004.
               d.   The limited liability company was not formed for the
purpose of evading or reducing Ohio municipal corporation income tax liability
of the limited liability company or its single member.
               e.   The Ohio municipal corporation that was the primary place
of business of the sole member of the limited liability company consented to
the election.
            2.   For purposes of division (c)(48)B.2. of this section, a
municipal corporation was the primary place of business of a limited liability
company if, for the limited liability company's taxable year ending in 2003,
its income tax liability was greater in that municipal corporation than in any
other municipal corporation in Ohio, and that tax liability to that municipal
corporation for its taxable year ending in 2003 was at least four hundred
thousand dollars ($400,000).
      (49)   TAXPAYERS' RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES means the rights provided
to taxpayers in §§ 820.09, 820.12, 820.13, 820.19(b), 820.20, 820.21, and R.C.
§§ 5717.011 and 5717.03, and the responsibilities of taxpayers to file, report,
withhold, remit, and pay municipal income tax and otherwise comply with R.C.
Chapter 718 and resolutions, ordinances, and rules and regulations adopted by
the village for the imposition and administration of a municipal income tax.
      (50)   VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3770.21.
      (51)   VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL SALES AGENT means a lottery sales agent
licensed under R.C. Chapter 3770 to conduct video lottery terminals on behalf
of the state pursuant to R.C. § 3770.21.
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015; Am. Ord. 2023-15, passed 12-4-2023)
§ 820.03 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   The income tax levied by the village at a rate of .75% is levied on the
municipal taxable income of every person residing in and/or earning and/or
receiving income in the village.
Individuals.
   (a)   For residents of the village, the income tax levied herein shall be on
all income, salaries, qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation
from whatever source earned or received by the resident, including the
resident's distributive share of the net profit of pass-through entities owned
directly or indirectly by the resident and any net profit of the resident. This
is further detailed in the definition of income (§
820.02(c)(16)).
   (b)   For nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages, commissions,
and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by the
nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or activities
conducted in the municipal corporation, including any net profit of the
nonresident, but excluding the nonresident's distributive share of the net
profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by
the nonresident.
   (c)   For residents and nonresidents, income can be reduced to municipal
taxable income as defined in §
820.02(c)(21). Exemptions which may apply are specified in §
820.02(c)(12).
Refundable Credit for Nonqualified Deferred Compensation Plan.
   (d)   (1)   As used in this division:
         A.   NONQUALIFIED DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN means a compensation plan
described in section 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         B.   QUALIFYING LOSS means the amount of compensation attributable to
a taxpayer's nonqualified deferred compensation plan, less the receipt of money
and property attributable to distributions from the nonqualified deferred
compensation plan. Full loss is sustained if no distribution of money and
property is made by the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. The taxpayer
sustains a qualifying loss only in the taxable year in which the taxpayer
receives the final distribution of money and property pursuant to that
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         C.   1.   QUALIFYING TAX RATE means the applicable tax rate for the
taxable year for the which the taxpayer paid income tax to the village with
respect to any portion of the total amount of compensation the payment of which
is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
            2.   If different tax rates applied for different taxable years,
then the qualifying tax rate is a weighted average of those different tax
rates. The weighted average shall be based upon the tax paid to the village
each year with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         D.   REFUNDABLE CREDIT means the amount of the village income tax that
was paid on the non-distributed portion, if any, of a nonqualified deferred
compensation plan.
      (2)   If, in addition to the village, a taxpayer has paid tax to other
municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation
plan, the amount of the credit that a taxpayer may claim from each municipal
corporation shall be calculated on the basis of each municipal corporation's
proportionate share of the total municipal corporation income tax paid by the
taxpayer to all municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified
deferred compensation plan.
      (3)   In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed under this
section exceed the cumulative income tax that a taxpayer has paid to the
village for all taxable years with respect to the nonqualified deferred
compensation plan.
      (4)   The credit allowed under this division is allowed only to the
extent the taxpayer's qualifying loss is attributable to:
         A.   The insolvency or bankruptcy of the employer who had established
the nonqualified deferred compensation plan; or
         B.   The employee's failure or inability to satisfy all of the
employer's terms and conditions necessary to receive the nonqualified deferred
compensation.
Domicile.
   (e)   (1)   A.   An individual is presumed to be domiciled in the village
for all or part of a taxable year if the individual was domiciled in the
village on the last day of the immediately preceding taxable year or if the Tax
Administrator reasonably concludes that the individual is domiciled in the
village for all or part of the taxable year.
         B.   An individual may rebut the presumption of domicile described in
division (e)(1)A. of this section if the individual establishes by a
preponderance of the evidence that the individual was not domiciled in the
village for all or part of the taxable year.
      (2)   For the purpose of determining whether an individual is domiciled
in the village for all or part of a taxable year, factors that may be
considered include, but are not limited to, the following:
         A.   The individual's domicile in other taxable years;
         B.   The location at which the individual is registered to vote;
         C.   The address on the individual's driver's license;
         D.   The location of real estate for which the individual claimed a
property tax exemption or reduction allowed on the basis of the individual's
residence or domicile;
         E.   The location and value of abodes owned or leased by the
individual;
         F.   Declarations, written or oral, made by the individual regarding
the individual's residency;
         G.   The primary location at which the individual is employed;
         H.   The location of educational institutions attended by the
individual's dependents as defined in section 152 of the Internal Revenue Code,
to the extent that tuition paid to such educational institution is based on the
residency of the individual or the individual's spouse in the municipal
corporation where the educational institution is located;
         I.   The number of contact periods the individual has with the
village. For the purposes of this division, an individual has one "contact
period" with the village if the individual is away overnight from the
individual's abode located outside of the village and while away overnight from
that abode spends at least some portion, however minimal, of each of two
consecutive days in the village.
      (3)   All additional applicable factors are provided in the Rules and
Regulations.
Businesses.
   (f)   This division applies to any taxpayer engaged in a business or
profession in the village, unless the taxpayer is an individual who resides in
the village or the taxpayer is an electric company, combined company, or
telephone company that is subject to and required to file reports under R.C.
Chapter 5745.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (f)(2) of this section,
net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and without the
boundaries of the village shall be considered as having a taxable situs in the
village for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same proportion as the
average ratio of the following:
         A.   The average original cost of the real property and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
in the village during the taxable period to the average original cost of all of
the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the
business or profession during the same period, wherever situated.
            As used in the preceding paragraph, tangible personal or real
property shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value
of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon
by eight;
         B.   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services
performed in the village to wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during
the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession, wherever
the individual's services are performed, excluding compensation from which
taxes are not required to be withheld under §
820.04(c);
         C.   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales and
rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in the village to
total gross receipts of the business or profession during the same period from
sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed.
      (2)   A.   If the apportionment factors described in division (f)(1) of
this section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer's business
activity in the village, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Administrator of
the village, may require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any
portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method
involving one or more of the following:
            1.   Separate accounting;
            2.   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;
            3.   The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would
provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the
municipal corporation;
            4.   A modification of one or more of the factors.
         B.   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method
shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an
assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the
requested alternative method unless the Tax Administrator denies the request in
an assessment issued within the period prescribed by §
820.12(a).
         C.   The Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer to use an
alternative apportionment method as described in division (f)(2)A. of this
section, but only by issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period
prescribed by §
820.12(a).
         D.   Nothing in division (f)(2) of this section nullifies or otherwise
affects any alternative apportionment arrangement approved by the Tax
Administrator or otherwise agreed upon by both the Tax Administrator and
taxpayer before January 1, 2016.
      (3)   As used in division (f)(1)B. of this section, "wages, salaries, and
other compensation" includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation paid
to an employee for services performed at any of the following locations:
         A.   A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented to, or
under the possession of one of the following:
            1.   The employer;
            2.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the employer, or a
related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient;
            3.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person described
in division (f)(3)A.2. of this section, or a related member of such a vendor,
customer, client, or patient.
         B.   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation,
inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative, judicial, or
legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the
compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer
or that the employee's presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits
the employer;
         C.   Any other location, if the Tax Administrator determines that the
employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in
lieu of a location described in division (f)(3)A. or B. of this section solely
in order to avoid or reduce the employer's municipal income tax liability. If
the Tax Administrator makes such a determination, the employer may dispute the
determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Tax
Administrator's determination was unreasonable.
      (4)   For the purposes of division (f)(1)C. of this section, receipts
from sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to a
municipal corporation as follows:
         A.   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall
be sitused to the municipal corporation in which the sale originated. For the
purposes of this division, a sale of property originates in the village if,
regardless of where title passes, the property meets any of the following
criteria:
            1.   The property is shipped to or delivered within the village
from a stock of goods located within the village.
            2.   The property is delivered within the village from a location
outside the village, provided the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own
employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales within the village and the
sales result from such solicitation or promotion.
            3.   The property is shipped from a place within the village to
purchasers outside the municipal corporation, provided that the taxpayer is
not, through its own employees, regularly engaged in the solicitation or
promotion of sales at the place where delivery is made.
         B.   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to the
village to the extent that such services are performed in the village.
         C.   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale of
real property located in shall be sitused to the village.
         D.   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and
royalties from real property located in the village shall be sitused to the
village.
         E.   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal
property shall be sitused to the village based upon the extent to which the
tangible personal property is used in the village.
      (5)   The net profit received by an individual taxpayer from the rental
of real estate owned directly by the individual, or by a disregarded entity
owned by the individual, shall be subject to the village's tax only if the
property generating the net profit is located in the village or if the
individual taxpayer that receives the net profit is a resident of the village,
shall allow such taxpayers to elect to use separate accounting for the purpose
of calculating net profit sitused under this division to the municipal
corporation in which the property is located.
      (6)   A.   Commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating
to the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported
by the real estate agent or broker shall be allocated to the village, if
applicable, based upon the ratio of the commissions the agent or broker
received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate located in the
village to the commissions received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real
estate everywhere in the taxable year.
         B.   An individual who is a resident of the village shall report the
individual's net profit from all real estate activity on the individual's
annual tax return for the village. The individual may claim a credit for taxes
the individual paid on such net profit to another municipal corporation to the
extent that such a credit is allowed under the village's income tax ordinance.
      (7)   When calculating the ratios described in division (f)(1) of this
section for the purposes of that division or division (f)(2) of this section,
the owner of a disregarded entity shall include in the owner's ratios the
property, payroll, and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.
      (8)   Left intentionally blank.
      (9)   Intentionally left blank.
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 820.04 COLLECTION AT SOURCE.
Withholding provisions.
   (a)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer located or doing
business in the village shall withhold an income tax from the qualifying wages
earned and/or received by each employee in the village. Except for qualifying
wages for which withholding is not required under §
820.03 or division (b)(4) or (b)(6) of this section, the tax shall be withheld
at the rate, specified in §
820.10, of .75%. An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall deduct
and withhold the tax from qualifying wages on the date that the employer,
agent, or other payer directly, indirectly, or constructively pays the
qualifying wages to, or credits the qualifying wages to the benefit of, the
employee.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, an
employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall remit to the Tax
Administrator of the village the greater of the income taxes
deducted and withheld or the income taxes required to be deducted and withheld
by the employer, agent, or other payer according to the following schedule:
         A.   Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall be remitted
monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and withheld or
required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or other payer on
behalf of the village in the preceding calendar year exceeded two thousand
three hundred ninety-nine dollars ($2,399), or if the total amount of taxes
deducted and withheld or required to be deducted and withheld on behalf of the
village in any month of the preceding calendar quarter exceeded two hundred
dollars ($200.00).
            Payment under division (b)(1)A. of this section shall be made so
that the payment is received by the Tax Administrator not later than 15 days
after the last day of each month for which the tax was withheld.
         B.   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer not required
to make payments under division (b)(1)A. of this section of taxes required to
be deducted and withheld shall make quarterly payments to the Tax Administrator
not later than the 15th day of the month following the end of each calendar
quarter.
         C.   Intentionally left blank.
      (2)   If the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is required
to make payments electronically for the purpose of paying federal taxes
withheld on payments to employees under section 6302 of the Internal Revenue
Code, 26 C.F.R. 31.6302-1, or any other federal statute or regulation, the
payment shall be made by electronic funds transfer to the Tax Administrator of
all taxes deducted and withheld on behalf of the village. The payment of tax by
electronic funds transfer under this division does not affect an employer's,
agent's, or other payer's obligation to file any return as required under this
section.
      (3)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall make and
file a return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer, agent, or
other payer from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted to the Tax
Administrator. A return filed by an employer, agent, or other payer under this
division shall be accepted by Tax Administrator and the village as the return
required of a non-resident employee whose sole income subject to the tax under
this chapter is the qualifying wages reported by the employee's employer, agent
of an employer, or other payer.
      (4)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is not required
to withhold the village income tax with respect to an individual's
disqualifying disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the
disqualifying disposition, the individual is not an employee of either the
corporation with respect to whose stock the option has been issued or of such
corporation's successor entity.
      (5)   A.   An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax by the
failure of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to withhold the
tax as required under this chapter or by the employer's, agent's, or other
payer's exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax.
         B.   The failure of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer
to remit to the village the tax withheld relieves the employee from liability
for that tax unless the employee colluded with the employer, agent, or other
payer in connection with the failure to remit the tax withheld.
      (6)   Compensation deferred before June 26, 2003, is not subject to the
village income tax or income tax withholding requirement to the extent the
deferred compensation does not constitute qualifying wages at the time the
deferred compensation is paid or distributed,
      (7)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer required to
withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required to be
withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount shall
be deemed to be held in trust for the village until such time as the withheld
amount is remitted to the Tax Administrator.
      (8)   On or before the last day of February of each year, an employer
shall file a withholding reconciliation return with the Tax Administrator
listing:
         A.   The names, addresses, and social security numbers of all
employees from whose qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have been
withheld for the village during the preceding calendar year;
         B.   The amount of tax withheld, if any, from each such employee, the
total amount of qualifying wages paid to such employee during the preceding
calendar year;
         C.   The name of every other municipal corporation for which tax was
withheld or should have been withheld from such employee during the preceding
calendar year;
         D.   Any other information required for federal income tax reporting
purposes on Internal Revenue Service form W-2 or its equivalent form with
respect to such employee;
         E.   Other information as may be required by the Tax Administrator.
      (9)   The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an employer,
or other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged with the
responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and making
payments as required by this section, shall be personally liable for a failure
to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The
dissolution of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer does not
discharge the officer's or employee's liability for a failure of the employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer to file returns or pay any tax due.
      (10)   An employer is required to deduct and withhold the village income
tax on tips and gratuities received by the employer's employees and
constituting qualifying wages, but only to the extent that the tips and
gratuities are under the employer's control. For the purposes of this division,
a tip or gratuity is under the employer's control if the tip or gratuity is
paid by the customer to the employer for subsequent remittance to the employee,
or if the customer pays the tip or gratuity by credit card, debit card, or
other electronic means.
      (11)   The Tax Administrator shall consider any tax withheld by an
employer at the request of an employee, when such tax is not otherwise required
to be withheld by this chapter to be tax required to be withheld and remitted
for the purposes of this section.
      (12)   In addition to the wage reporting requirement of this section, any
person required by the Internal Revenue Service to report on Form 1099-Misc.
payments to individuals not treated as employees for services performed, shall
also report such payments to the municipality when the services were performed
in the municipality. The information may be submitted on a listing, and shall
include the name, address and social security number (or federal identification
number) and the amount of the payments made, federal from(s) 1099 may be
submitted in lieu of such listing. The information shall be filed annually on
or before February 28 following the end of such calendar year.
Occasional Entrant - Withholding.
   (c)   (1)   As used in this division:
         A.   EMPLOYER includes a person that is a related member to or of an
employer.
         B.   FIXED LOCATION means a permanent place of doing business in this
state, such as an office, warehouse, storefront, or similar location owned or
controlled by an employer.
         C.   PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means the fixed location to which an
employee is required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary
basis. If the employee is not required to report for employment duties on a
regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location, PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means
the worksite location in this state to which the employee is required to report
for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not
required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a
fixed location or worksite location, PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means the location
in this state at which the employee spends the greatest number of days in a
calendar year performing services for or on behalf of the employee's employer.
      If there is not a single municipal corporation in which the employee
spent the greatest number of days in a calendar year performing services for or
on behalf of the employer, but instead there are two or more municipal
corporations in which the employee spent an identical number of days that is
greater than the number of days the employee spent in any other municipal
corporation, the employer shall allocate any of the employee's qualifying wages
subject to division (c)(2)A.1. of this section among those two or more
municipal corporations. The allocation shall be made using any fair and
reasonable method, including, but not limited to, an equal allocation among
such municipal corporations or an allocation based upon the time spent or sales
made by the employee in each such municipal corporation. A municipal
corporation to which qualifying wages are allocated under this division shall
be the employee's principal place of work with respect to those qualifying
wages for the purposes of this section.
      For the purposes of this division, the location at which an employee
spends a particular day shall be determined in accordance with division (c)
(2)B. of this section, except that "location" shall be substituted for
"municipal corporation" wherever "municipal corporation" appears in that
division.
         D.   PROFESSIONAL ATHLETE means an athlete who performs services in a
professional athletic event for wages or other remuneration.
         E.   PROFESSIONAL ENTERTAINER means a person who performs services in
the professional performing arts for wages or other remuneration on a per-event
basis.
         F.   PUBLIC FIGURE means a person of prominence who performs services
at discrete events, such as speeches, public appearances, or similar events,
for wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis.
         G.   WORKSITE LOCATION means a construction site or other temporary
worksite in this state at which the employer provides services for more than 20
days during the calendar year. WORKSITE LOCATION does not include the home of
an employee.
      (2)   A.   Subject to divisions (c)(3), (c)(5), (c)(6), and (c)(7) of
this section, an employer is not required to withhold the village income tax on
qualifying wages paid to an employee for the performance of personal services
in the village if the employee performed such services in the village on 20 or
fewer days in a calendar year, unless one of the following conditions applies:
            1.   The employee's principal place of work is located in the
village.
            2.   The employee performed services at one or more presumed
worksite locations in the village. For the purposes of this division, PRESUMED
WORKSITE LOCATION means a construction site or other temporary worksite in the
village at which the employer provides or provided services that can reasonably
be, or would have been, expected by the employer to last more than 20 days in a
calendar year. Services can reasonably be expected by the employer to last more
than 20 days if either of the following applies at the time the services
commence:
               a.   The nature of the services are such that it will require
more than 20 days of the services to complete the services;
               b.   The agreement between the employer and its customer to
perform services at a location requires the employer to perform the services at
the location for more than 20 days.
            3.   The employee is a resident of the village and has requested
that the employer withhold tax from the employee's qualifying wages as provided
in §
820.04.
            4.   The employee is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid for the
performance of services in the employee's capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure.
         B.   For the purposes of division (c)(2)A. of this section, an
employee shall be considered to have spent a day performing services in the
village only if the employee spent more time performing
services for or on behalf of the employer in the village than in any other
municipal corporation on that day. For the purposes of determining the amount
of time an employee spent in a particular location, the time spent performing
one or more of the following activities shall be considered to have been spent
at the employee's principal place of work:
            1.   Traveling to the location at which the employee will first
perform services for the employer for the day;
            2.   Traveling from a location at which the employee was performing
services for the employer to any other location;
            3.   Traveling from any location to another location in order to
pick up or load, for the purpose of transportation or delivery, property that
has been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated, repaired, refurbished,
processed, remanufactured, or improved by the employee's employer;
            4.   Transporting or delivering property described in division (c)
(2)B.3. of this section, provided that, upon delivery of the property, the
employee does not temporarily or permanently affix the property to real estate
owned, used, or controlled by a person other than the employee's employer;
            5.   Traveling from the location at which the employee makes the
employee's final delivery or pick-up for the day to either the employee's
principal place of work or a location at which the employee will not perform
services for the employer.
      (3)   If the principal place of work of an employee is located in another
Ohio municipal corporation that imposes an income tax, the exception from
withholding requirements described in division (c)(2)A. of this section shall
apply only if, with respect to the employee's qualifying wages described in
that division, the employer withholds and remits tax on such qualifying wages
to that municipal corporation.
      (4)   A.   Except as provided in division (c)(4)B. of this section, if,
during a calendar year, the number of days an employee spends performing
personal services in the village exceeds the 20-day threshold, the employer
shall withhold and remit tax to the village for any subsequent days in that
calendar year on which the employer pays qualifying wages to the employee for
personal services performed in the village.
         B.   An employer required to begin withholding tax for the village
under division (c)(4)A. of this section may elect to withhold tax for the
village for the first 20 days on which the employer paid qualifying wages to
the employee for personal services performed in the village.
      (5)   If an employer's fixed location is the village and the employer
qualifies as a small employer as defined in §
820.02, the employer shall withhold municipal income tax on all of the
employee's qualifying wages for a taxable year and remit that tax only to the
village, regardless of the number of days which the employee worked outside the
corporate boundaries of the village.
         To determine whether an employer qualifies as a small employer for a
taxable year, the employer will be required to provide the Tax Administrator
with the employer's federal income tax return for the preceding taxable year.
      (6)   Divisions (c)(2)A. and (c)(4) of this section shall not apply to
the extent that a Tax Administrator and an employer enter into an agreement
regarding the manner in which the employer shall comply with the requirements
of §
820.04.
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015; Am. Ord. 2023-15, passed 12-4-2023)
§ 820.05 ANNUAL RETURN; FILING.
   (a)   An annual village income tax return shall be completed and filed by
every individual taxpayer 18 years of age or older and any taxpayer that is not
an individual for each taxable year for which the taxpayer is subject to the
tax, whether or not a tax is due thereon.
      (1)   The Tax Administrator may accept on behalf of all nonresident
individual taxpayers a return filed by an employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer under §
820.05 when the nonresident individual taxpayer's sole income subject to the
tax is the qualifying wages reported by the employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer, and no additional tax is due the village.
      (2)   Retirees having no municipal taxable income for the village income
tax purposes may file with the Tax Administrator a written exemption from these
filing requirements on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator. The written
exemption shall indicate the date of retirement and the entity from which
retired. The exemption shall be in effect until such time as the retiree
receives municipal taxable income taxable to the village, at which time the
retiree shall be required to comply with all applicable provisions of this
chapter.
   (b)   If an individual is deceased, any return or notice required of that
individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent's executor,
administrator, or other person charged with the property of that decedent.
   (c)   If an individual is unable to complete and file a return or notice
required by the village, the return or notice required of that individual shall
be completed and filed by the individual's duly authorized agent, guardian,
conservator, fiduciary, or other person charged with the care of the person or
property of that individual.
   (d)   Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust shall be completed
and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust.
   (e)   The village shall permit spouses to file a joint return.
   (f)   (1)   Each return required to be filed under this division shall
contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly authorized agent
and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer. The return shall
include the taxpayer's social security number or taxpayer identification
number. Each return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of
perjury.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator shall require a taxpayer who is an individual
to include, with each annual return and amended return, copies of the following
documents: all of the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service form W-2, "Wage and
Tax Statements," including all information reported on the taxpayer's federal
W-2, as well as taxable wages reported or withheld for any municipal
corporation; the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service form 1040; and, with
respect to an amended tax return, any other documentation necessary to support
the adjustments made in the amended return. An individual taxpayer who files
the annual return required by this section electronically is not required to
provide paper copies of any of the foregoing to the Tax Administrator unless
the Tax Administrator requests such copies after the return has been filed.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer that is not an
individual to include, with each annual net profit return, amended net profit
return, or request for refund required under this section, copies of only the
following documents: the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service form 1041, form
1065, form 1120, form 1120-REIT, form 1120F, or form 1120S, and, with respect
to an amended tax return or refund request, any other documentation necessary
to support the refund request or the adjustments made in the amended return.
         A taxpayer that is not an individual and that files an annual net
profit return electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or in some other
manner shall either mail the documents required under this division to the Tax
Administrator at the time of filing or, if electronic submission is available,
submit the documents electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (4)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Administrator may
request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements, or
documents required by the village to determine and verify the taxpayer's
municipal income tax liability. The requirements imposed under division (f) of
this section apply regardless of whether the taxpayer files on a generic form
or on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each return
required to be filed under this section shall be completed and filed as
required by the Tax Administrator on or before the date prescribed for the
filing of state individual income tax returns under division (G) of R.C. §
5747.08. The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on forms
prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms, together with
remittance made payable to the village. No remittance is required if the net
amount s due is ten dollars ($10.00) or less.
      (2)   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of the village's income tax
return. The extended due date of the village's income tax return shall be the
15th day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to which the
return relates. For tax years ending in or after January 1, 2023, for a
taxpayer that is not an individual shall be the fifteenth day of the eleventh
month after the last day of the taxable year to which the return relates. An
extension of time to file under this division is not an extension of the time
to pay any tax due unless the Tax Administrator grants an extension of that
date.
         A.   A copy of the federal extension request shall be included with
the filing of the village's income tax return.
         B.   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return may request that
the Tax Administrator grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the date for
filing the taxpayer's the village income tax return. If the request is received
by the Tax Administrator on or before the date the village income tax return is
due, the Tax Administrator shall grant the taxpayer's requested extension.
      (3)   For tax years ending on or after January 1, 2023, with respect to
return other than estimated income tax returns, the village may impose a
penalty not exceeding $25 for each failure to timely file each return,
regardless of the liability shown thereon, except that the village shall abate
or refund the penalty assessed on a taxpayer’s first failure to timely file a
return after the taxpayer files that return.
      (4)   With respect to failure to file a mandatory registration form, the
village shall impose a penalty of $5 per day for each day over 30 the form
remains outstanding. The penalty shall not exceed a total of $100 in assessed
penalty.
      (5)   To the extent that any provision in this division (g) of this
section conflicts with any provision in divisions (n), (o), (p), or (q) of this
section, the provisions in divisions (n), (o), (p), or (q) prevail.
   (h)   (1)   For taxable years beginning after 2015, the village shall not
require a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net profits if the net amount
due is ten dollars ($10.00) or less.
      (2)   Any taxpayer not required to remit tax to the village for a taxable
year pursuant to division (h)(1) of this section shall file with the village an
annual net profit return under division (f)(3) of this section.
   (i)   If a payment is required to be made by electronic funds transfer, the
payment is considered to be made when the payment is credited to an account
designated by the Tax Administrator for the receipt of tax payments, except
that, when a payment made by electronic funds transfer is delayed due to
circumstances not under the control of the taxpayer, the payment is considered
to be made when the taxpayer submitted the payment. This division shall not
apply to payments required to be made under § 820.04(b)(1)A. or provisions for
semi-monthly withholding.
   (j)   Taxes withheld for the village by an employer, the agent of an
employer, or other payer as described in § 820.04 shall be allowed to the
taxpayer as credits against payment of the tax imposed on the taxpayer by the
village, unless the amounts withheld were not remitted to the village and the
recipient colluded with the employer, agent, or other payer in connection with
the failure to remit the amounts withheld,
   (k)   Each return required by the village to be filed in accordance with
this division shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize
another person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to
communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to the return.
   (l)   The Tax Administrator shall accept for filing a generic form of any
income tax return, report, or document required by the village, provided that
the generic form, once completed and filed, contains all of the information
required by ordinance, resolution, or rules and regulations adopted by the
village or the Tax Administrator, and provided that the taxpayer or tax return
preparer filing the generic form otherwise complies with the provisions of this
chapter and of the village's ordinance, resolution, or rules and regulations
governing the filing of returns, reports, or documents.
Filing via Ohio Business Gateway.
   (m)   (1)   Any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with respect
to the taxpayer's net profit from a business or profession may file the
village's income tax return, estimated municipal income tax return, or
extension for filing a municipal income tax return, and may make payment of
amounts shown to be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (2)   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may report the
amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages, and may make
remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (3)   Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing employer
withholding tax returns.
Extension for Service in or for the Armed Forces.
   (n)   Each member of the national guard of any state and each member of a
reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called to active
duty pursuant to an executive order issued by the President of the United
States or an act of the Congress of the United States, and each civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the armed forces, may apply to the Tax Administrator of the village
for both an extension of time for filing of the return and an extension of time
for payment of taxes required by the village during the period of the member's
or civilian's duty service, and for 180 days thereafter. The application shall
be filed on or before the 180th day after the member's or civilian's duty
terminates. An applicant shall provide such evidence as the Tax Administrator
considers necessary to demonstrate eligibility for the extension.
   (o)   (1)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the Tax Administrator shall
enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment of the tax in
installments that begin on the 181st day after the applicant's active duty or
service terminates. The Tax Administrator may prescribe such contract terms as
the Tax Administrator considers appropriate. However, taxes pursuant to a
contract entered into under this division are not delinquent, and the Tax
Administrator shall not require any payments of penalties or interest in
connection with those taxes for the extension period.
      (2)   If the Tax Administrator determines that an applicant is qualified
for an extension under this section, the applicant shall neither be required to
file any return, report, or other tax document nor be required to pay any tax
otherwise due to the municipal corporation before the 181st day after the
applicant's active duty or service terminates.
      (3)   Taxes paid pursuant to a contract entered into under division (o)
(1) of this section are not delinquent. The Tax Administrator shall not require
any payments of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the
extension period.
   (p)   (1)   Nothing in this division denies to any person described in this
division the application of divisions (n) and (o) of this section.
      (2)   A.   A qualifying taxpayer who is eligible for an extension under
the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an extension of time in which to
file any return, report, or other tax document and an extension of time in
which to make any payment of taxes required by a municipal corporation in
accordance with this chapter. The length of any extension granted under
division (p)(2)A. of this section shall be equal to the length of the
corresponding extension that the taxpayer receives under the Internal Revenue
Code. As used in this division, QUALIFYING TAXPAYER means a member of the
national guard or a member of a reserve component of the armed forces of the
United States called to active duty pursuant to either an executive order
issued by the President of the United States or an act of the Congress of the
United States, or a civilian serving as support personnel in a combat zone or
contingency operation in support of the armed forces.
         B.   Taxes whose payment is extended in accordance with division (p)
(2)A. of this section are not delinquent during the extension period. Such
taxes become delinquent on the first day after the expiration of the extension
period if the taxes are not paid prior to that date. The Tax Administrator
shall not require any payment of penalties or interest in connection with those
taxes for the extension period. The Tax Administrator shall not include any
period of extension granted under division (c)(2)A. of this section in
calculating the penalty or interest due on any unpaid tax.
   (q)   For each taxable year to which division (n), (o), or (p) of this
section applies to a taxpayer, the provisions of divisions (o)(2) and (o)(3) of
this section, as applicable, apply to the spouse of that taxpayer if the
filing, status of the spouse and the taxpayer is married filing jointly for
that year.
Consolidated Municipal Income Tax Return.
   (r)   As used in this section:
      (1)   AFFILIATED GROUP OF CORPORATIONS means an affiliated group as
defined in section 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a
group includes at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily
engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone service in this
state, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange
carrier that would otherwise be included in the group.
      (2)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN means a consolidated return
filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to section 1501 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
      (3)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME means the consolidated taxable
income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the purposes of
filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before consideration of net
operating losses or special deductions. CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME
does not include income or loss of an incumbent local exchange carrier that is
excluded from the affiliated group under division (r)(1) of this section.
      (4)   INCUMBENT LOCAL EXCHANGE CARRIER has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4927.01.
      (5)   LOCAL EXCHANGE TELEPHONE SERVICE has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5727.01.
   (s)   (1)   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016, a
taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may elect to
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year if at least
one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to the village's
income tax in that taxable year, and if the affiliated group of corporations
filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to that taxable
year. The election is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first
taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the reporting method is
required under federal law. The election continues to be binding for each
subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing
consolidated municipal income tax returns under division (s)(2) of this section
or a taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Administrator. The Tax
Administrator shall approve such a request for good cause shown.
      (2)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated municipal income tax
returns under this section must be made in the first year following the last
year of a five-year consolidated municipal income tax return election period in
effect under division (s)(1) of this section. The election to discontinue
filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is binding for a five-year
period beginning with the first taxable year of the election.
      (3)   An election made under division (s)(1) or (s)(2) of this section is
binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a
municipal income tax,
   (t)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall
file a consolidated village income tax return for that taxable year if the Tax
Administrator determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that intercompany
transactions have not been conducted at arm's length and that there has been a
distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to allocation of net
profits to the village. A taxpayer that is required to file a consolidated
village income tax return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated village
income tax return for all subsequent taxable years, unless the taxpayer
requests and receives written permission from the Tax Administrator to file a
separate return or a taxpayer has experienced a change in circumstances.
   (u)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated village income tax return in
the same manner as is required under the United States Department of Treasury
regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated
federal income tax return required to be filed by the common parent of the
affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.
   (v)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (v)(2), (v)(3), and
(v)(4) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated municipal income
tax return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in §
820.02, by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income" for "federal
taxable income" wherever "federal taxable income" appears in that division and
by substituting "an affiliated group of corporation's" for "a C corporation's"
wherever "a C corporation's" appears in that division.
      (2)   No corporation filing a consolidated village income tax return
shall make any adjustment otherwise required under §
820.02(c)(1) to the extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise
subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the
computation of consolidated federal taxable Income.
      (3)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at least
80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the
corporation filing a consolidated village income tax return shall do one of the
following with respect to that pass-through entity's net profit or loss for
that taxable year:
         A.   Exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in divisions (r) through (y) of
this section, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-
through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused
to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so excluded,
the entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of
the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
         B.   Include the pass-through entity's net profit or loss in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in divisions (r) through (y) of
this section, include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-
through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused
to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so included,
the entity shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis
of the entity's net profits that are included in the consolidated federal
taxable income of the affiliated group.
      (4)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less than
80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, all
of the following shall apply:
         A.   The corporation filing the consolidated municipal income tax
return shall exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purposes of making the computations required in divisions (r) through (y) of
this section, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-
through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused
to the village;
         B.   The pass-through entity shall be subject to the village income
taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with this chapter on the basis of
the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
   (w)   Corporations filing a consolidated village income tax return shall
make the computations required under divisions (r) through (y) of this section
by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income attributable to" for "net
profit from" wherever "net profit from" appears in that section and by
substituting "affiliated group of corporations" for "taxpayer" wherever
"taxpayer" appears in that section.
   (x)   Each corporation filing a consolidated village income tax return is
jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges,
or other amounts imposed by the village in accordance with this chapter on the
corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a member for any
portion of the taxable year, or any one or more members of such an affiliated
group.
   (y)   Corporations and their affiliates that made an election or entered
into an agreement with the village before January 1, 2016, to file a
consolidated or combined tax return with the village may continue to file
consolidated or combined tax returns in accordance with such election or
agreement for taxable years beginning on and after January 1, 2016.
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015; Am. Ord. 2023-15, passed 12-4-2023)
§ 820.06 CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO OTHER MUNICIPALITIES.
   (a)   The village shall grant a credit against its tax on income to a
resident of the village who works in a joint economic development zone created
under R.C. § 715.691 or a joint economic development district created under
R.C. § 715.70, 715.71, or 715.72 to the same extent that it grants a credit
against its tax on income to its residents who are employed in another
municipal corporation.
   (b)   If the amount of tax withheld or paid to the other municipality is
less than the amount of tax required to be withheld or paid to the other
municipality, then for purposes of division (a) of this section, the income,
qualifying wages, commissions, net profits or other compensation subject to tax
in the other municipality shall be limited to the amount computed by dividing
the tax withheld or paid to the other municipality by the tax rate for that
municipality.
   (c)   Intentionally left blank.
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 820.07 ESTIMATED TAXES.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   ESTIMATED TAXES means the amount that the taxpayer reasonably
estimates to be the taxpayer's tax liability for the village's income tax for
the current taxable year.
      (2)   TAX LIABILITY means the total taxes due to the village for the
taxable year, after allowing any credit to which the taxpayer is entitled, and
after applying any estimated tax payment, withholding payment, or credit from
another taxable year.
   (b)   (1)   Every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for
the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Administrator, if
the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least two hundred dollars
($200.00). For the purposes of this section:
         A.   Taxes withheld for the village from qualifying wages shall be
considered as paid to the village in equal amounts on each payment date unless
the taxpayer establishes the dates on which all amounts were actually withheld,
in which case they shall be considered as paid on the dates on which the
amounts were actually withheld.
         B.   An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a subsequent taxable
year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark stamped on the cover in
which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is made by electronic funds
transfer, the date the payment is submitted. As used in this division, DATE OF
THE POSTMARK means, in the event there is more than one date on the cover, the
earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service.
      (2)   Taxpayers filing joint returns shall file joint declarations of
estimated taxes. A taxpayer may amend a declaration under rules prescribed by
the Tax Administrator. A taxpayer having a taxable year of less than 12 months
shall make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the
date prescribed for the filing of municipal income tax returns under §
820.05(g) or on or before the 15th day of the fourth month after the taxpayer
becomes subject to tax for the first time.
      (4)   Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a declaration
on or before the 15th day of the fourth month after the beginning of each
fiscal year or period.
      (5)   The original declaration or any subsequent amendment may be
increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day as
provided in this section.
   (c)   (1)   The required portion of the tax liability for the taxable year
that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to the village,
including the application of tax refunds to estimated taxes and withholding on
or before the applicable payment date, shall be as follows:
         A.   On or before the 15th day of the fourth month after the beginning
of the taxable year, 22.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         B.   On or before the 15th day of the sixth month after the beginning
of the taxable year, 45% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         C.   On or before the 15th day of the ninth month after the beginning
of the taxable year, 67.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         D.   On or before the 15th day of the 12th month of the taxable year,
90% of the tax liability for the taxable year.
      (2)   When an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid balance
shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid in equal installments on or
before the remaining payment dates.
      (3)   On or before the 15th day of the fourth month of the year following
that for which the declaration or amended declaration was filed, an annual
return shall be filed and any balance which may be due shall be paid with the
return in accordance with R.C. § 718.05.
   (d)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of any portion of a tax
liability, penalty and interest may be imposed pursuant to §
820.18 upon the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment, unless
the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in division (e) of
this section. The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows:
         A.   For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, 22.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         B.   For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, 45% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         C.   For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, 67.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         D.   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, 90% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment.
      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated
payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For
purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment
date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the
extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment
presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty.
   (e)   An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined under
division (d) of this section shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty
imposed by this section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if
any of the following apply:
      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 90% of
the tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by annualizing the
income received during the year up to the end of the month immediately
preceding the month in which the payment is due.
      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 100%
of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the preceding
taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year reflected a
period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a return with the village under §
820.05 for that year.
      (3)   The taxpayer is an individual who resides in the village but was
not domiciled there on the first day of January of the calendar year that
includes the first day of the taxable year.
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 820.08 ROUNDING OF AMOUNTS.
   A person may round to the nearest whole dollar all amounts the person is
required to enter on any return, report, voucher, or other document required
under this chapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or exceeds
fifty cents ($.50) shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any
fractional part  of a dollar that is less than fifty cents ($.50) shall be
dropped. If a person chooses to round amounts entered on a document, the person
shall round all amounts entered on the document.
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 820.09 REQUESTS FOR REFUNDS.
   (a)   As used in this section, WITHHOLDING TAX has the same meaning as in §
820.18.
   (b)   Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the Tax Administrator, in
accordance with this section, shall refund to employers, agents of employers,
other payers, or taxpayers, with respect to any income or withholding tax
levied by the municipal corporation:
      (1)   Overpayments of more than ten dollars ($10.00) or more;
      (2)   Amounts paid erroneously if the refund requested exceeds ten
dollars ($10.00) or more.
   (c)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, requests for
refund shall be filed with the Tax Administrator, on the form prescribed by the
Tax Administrator within three years after the tax was due or paid, whichever
is later. The Tax Administrator may require the requestor to file with the
request any documentation that substantiates the requestor's claim for a
refund.
      (2)   On filing of the refund request, the Tax Administrator shall
determine the amount of refund due and certify such amount to the appropriate
municipal corporation official for payment. Except as provided in division (c)
(3) of this section, the Administrator shall issue an assessment to any
taxpayer whose request for refund is fully or partially denied. The assessment
shall state the amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the
denial, and instructions for appealing the assessment.
      (3)   If a Tax Administrator denies in whole or in part a refund request
included within the taxpayer's originally filed annual income tax return, the
Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the amount of the
refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial, and instructions for
requesting an assessment that may be appealed under §
820.21.
   (d)   A request for a refund that is received after the last day for filing
specified in division (c) of this section shall be considered to have been
filed in a timely manner if any of the following situations exist:
      (1)   The request is delivered by the postal service, and the earliest
postal service postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed is not
later than the last day for filing the request.
      (2)   The request is delivered by the postal service, the only postmark
on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed by a private postal
meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the last day for filing the
request, and the request is received within seven days of such last day.
      (3)   The request is delivered by the postal service, no postmark date
was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or the date of the
postmark so affixed is not legible, and the request is received within seven
days of the last day for making the request.
   (e)   Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a taxpayer of
any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the overpayment until the
date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if any overpayment is
refunded within 90 days after the final filing date of the annual return or 90
days after the completed return is filed, whichever is later, no interest shall
be allowed on the refund. For the purpose of computing the payment of interest
on amounts overpaid, no amount of tax for any taxable year shall be considered
to have been paid before the date on which the return on which the tax is
reported is due, without regard to any extension of time for filing that
return. Interest shall be paid at the interest rate described in §
820.18(a)(4).
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 820.10 SECOND MUNICIPALITY IMPOSING TAX AFTER TIME PERIOD ALLOWED FOR REFUND.
   (a)   Income tax that has been deposited with the village, but should have
been deposited with another municipality, is allowable by the village as a
refund but is subject to the three-year limitation on refunds.
   (b)   Income tax that was deposited with another municipality but should
have been deposited with the village is subject to recovery by the village. If
the village's tax on that income is imposed after the time period allowed for a
refund of the tax or withholding paid to the other municipality, the village
shall allow a nonrefundable credit against the tax or withholding the village
claims is due with respect to such income or wages, equal to the tax or
withholding paid to the first municipality with respect to such income or
wages.
   (c)   If the village's tax rate is less than the tax rate in the other
municipality, then the nonrefundable credit shall be calculated using the
village's tax rate. However, if the village's tax rate is greater than the tax
rate in the other municipality, the tax due in excess of the nonrefundable
credit is to be paid to the village, along with any penalty and interest that
accrued during the period of nonpayment.
   (d)   Nothing in this section permits any credit carryforward.
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 820.11 AMENDED RETURNS.
   (a)   (1)   If a taxpayer's tax liability shown on the annual tax return for
the village changes as a result of an adjustment to the taxpayer's federal or
state income tax return, the taxpayer shall file an amended return with the
village. The amended return shall be filed on a form required by the Tax
Administrator.
      (2)   If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal
income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a
consolidated return, based on the taxpayer's consolidated federal income tax
return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax Administrator before filing the
amended return.
   (b)   (1)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due, together with any
penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to be due is ten
dollars ($10.00) or less, no payment need be made. The amended return shall
reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments from a previously
filed return that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the
adjustment to the taxpayer's federal or state income tax return only:
         A.   To determine the amount of tax that would be due if all facts,
figures, computations, and attachments were reopened; or,
         B.   If the applicable statute of limitations for civil actions or
prosecutions under §
820.12 has not expired for a previously filed return.
      (2)   The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the amount of tax
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened; i.e., the payment shall be the lesser of the two amounts.
   (c)   (1)   In the case of an overpayment, a request for refund may be filed
under this division within the period prescribed by §
820.12(e) for filing the amended return, even if it is filed beyond the period
prescribed in that division if it otherwise conforms to the requirements of
that division. If the amount of the refund is less than ten dollars ($10.00),
no refund need be paid by the village. A request filed under this division
shall claim refund of overpayments resulting from alterations only to those
facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's annual
return that are affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to
the taxpayer's federal or state income tax return, unless it is also filed
within the time prescribed in §
820.09.
      (2)   The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount of refund
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened. All facts, figures, computations, and attachments may be reopened to
determine the refund amount due by inclusion of all facts, figures,
computations, and attachments.
   (d)   Within 60 days after the final determination of any federal or state
tax liability affecting the taxpayer's village tax liability, that taxpayer
shall make and file an amended village return showing income subject to the
village income tax based upon such final determination of federal or state tax
liability. The taxpayer shall pay any additional village income tax shown due
thereon or make a claim for refund of any overpayment, unless the tax or
overpayment is less than ten dollars ($10.00).
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 820.12 LIMITATIONS.
   (a)   (1)   A.   Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and
penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within the
later of:
            1.   Three years after the tax was due or the return was filed,
whichever is later; or
            2.   One year after the conclusion of the qualifying deferral
period, if any.
         B.   The time limit described in division (a)(1)A. of this section may
be extended at any time if both the Tax Administrator and the employer, agent
of the employer, other payer, or taxpayer consent in writing to the extension.
Any extension shall also extend for the same period of time the time limit
described in division (c) of this section.
      (2)   As used in this section, QUALIFYING DEFERRAL PERIOD means a period
of time beginning and ending as follows:
         A.   Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved by an assessment
files with the Board of Tax Review the request described in §
820.21. That date shall not be affected by any subsequent decision, finding, or
holding by any administrative body or court that the Board of Tax Review did
not have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or modify the assessment or any part
of that assessment.
         B.   Ending the later of the 60th day after the date on which the
final determination of the Board of Tax Review becomes final or, if any party
appeals from the determination of the Board of Tax Review, the 60th day after
the date on which the final determination of the Board of Tax Review is either
ultimately affirmed in whole or in part or ultimately reversed and no further
appeal of either that affirmation, in whole or in part, or that reversal is
available or taken.
   (b)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a resolution or
ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within three years after
the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud, failure to
file a return, or the omission of 25% or more of income required to be
reported, prosecutions may be commenced within six years after the commission
of the offense.
   (c)   A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be brought within
the time limitation provided in §
820.09.
   (d)   (1)   Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is pending, the
petitioner may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of
the appeal. The acceptance of a payment by the village does not prejudice any
claim for refund upon final determination of the appeal.
      (2)   If upon final determination of the appeal an error in the
assessment is corrected by the Tax Administrator, upon an appeal so filed or
pursuant to a final determination of the Board of Tax Review, of the Ohio Board
of Tax Appeals, or any court to which the decision of the Ohio Board of Tax
Appeals has been appealed, so that the resultant amount due is less than the
amount paid, a refund will be paid in the amount of the overpayment as provided
by §
820.09, with interest on that amount as provided by division §
820.09(e).
   (e)   No civil action to recover the village income tax or related penalties
or interest shall be brought during either of the following time periods:
      (1)   The period during which a taxpayer has a right to appeal the
imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties;
      (2)   The period during which an appeal related to the imposition of that
tax or interest or those penalties is pending.
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 820.13 AUDITS.
   (a)   At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall
provide to the taxpayer a written description of the roles of the Tax
Administrator and of the taxpayer during the audit and a statement of the
taxpayer's rights, including any right to obtain a refund of an overpayment of
a tax. At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall
inform the taxpayer when the audit is considered to have commenced.
   (b)   Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the Tax
Administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular business
hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A taxpayer who is
unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the grounds that the
proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must offer reasonable
alternative dates for the audit.
   (c)   At all stages of an audit by the Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is
entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper,
or other tax practitioner. The Tax Administrator shall prescribe a form by
which a taxpayer may designate such a person to assist or represent the
taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting from actions by the Tax
Administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted such a form, the Tax
Administrator may accept other evidence, as the Tax Administrator considers
appropriate, that a person is the authorized representative of a taxpayer.
      A taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by the person
conducting an audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to consult with the
taxpayer's attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner.
      This division does not authorize the practice of law by a person who is
not an attorney.
   (d)   A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit
examination.
   (e)   The failure of the Tax Administrator to comply with a provision of
this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any taxes owed by
the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer's case.
   (f)   If the Tax Administrator fails to substantially comply with the
provisions of this section, the Tax Administrator, upon application by the
taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest.
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 820.14 SERVICE OF ASSESSMENT.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   LAST KNOWN ADDRESS means the address the Tax Administrator has at
the time a document is originally sent by certified mail, or any address the
Tax Administrator can ascertain using reasonable means such as the use of a
change of address service offered by the postal service or an authorized
delivery service under R.C. § 5703.056.
      (2)   UNDELIVERABLE ADDRESS means an address to which the postal service
or an authorized delivery service under R.C. § 5703.056 is not able to deliver
an assessment of the Tax Administrator, except when the reason for non-delivery
is because the addressee fails to acknowledge or accept the assessment.
   (b)   Subject to division (c) of this section, a copy of each assessment
shall be served upon the person affected thereby either by personal service, by
certified mail, or by a delivery service authorized under R.C. § 5703.056. With
the permission of the person affected by an assessment, the Tax Administrator
may deliver the assessment through alternative means as provided in this
section, including, but not limited to, delivery by secure electronic mail.
   (c)   (1)   A.   If certified mail is returned because of an undeliverable
address, a Tax Administrator shall utilize reasonable means to ascertain a new
last known address, including the use of a change of address service offered by
the postal service or an authorized delivery service under R.C. § 5703.056. If
the Tax Administrator is unable to ascertain a new last known address, the
assessment shall be sent by ordinary mail and considered served. If the
ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an undeliverable address, the
assessment remains appealable within 60 days after the assessment's postmark.
         B.   Once the Tax Administrator or other village official, or the
designee of either, serves an assessment on the person to whom the assessment
is directed, the person may protest the ruling of that assessment by filing an
appeal with the local board of tax review within 60 days after the receipt of
service. The delivery of an assessment of the Tax Administrator under division
(c)(1)A. of this section is prima facie evidence that delivery is complete and
that the assessment is served.
      (2)   If mailing of an assessment by a Tax Administrator by certified
mail is returned for some cause other than an undeliverable address, the Tax
Administrator shall resend the assessment by ordinary mail. The assessment
shall show the date the Tax Administrator sends the assessment and include the
following statement:
         "This assessment is deemed to be served on the addressee under
applicable law ten days from the date this assessment was mailed by the Tax
Administrator as shown on the assessment, and all periods within which an
appeal may be filed apply from and after that date."
         Unless the mailing is returned because of an undeliverable address,
the mailing of that information is prima facie evidence that delivery of the
assessment was completed ten days after the Tax Administrator sent the
assessment by ordinary mail and that the assessment was served.
         If the ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an
undeliverable address, the Tax Administrator shall proceed under division (c)
(1)A. of this section. A person may challenge the presumption of delivery and
service under this division in accordance with division (d) of this section.
   (d)   (1)   A person disputing the presumption of delivery and service under
division (c) of this section bears the burden of proving by a preponderance of
the evidence that the address to which the assessment was sent by certified
mail was not an address with which the person was associated at the time the
Tax Administrator originally mailed the assessment. For the purposes of this
section, a person is associated with an address at the time the Tax
Administrator originally mailed the assessment if, at that time, the person was
residing, receiving legal documents, or conducting business at the address; or
if, before that time, the person had conducted business at the address and,
when the assessment was mailed, the person's agent or the person's affiliate
was conducting business at the address. For the purposes of this section, a
person's affiliate is any other person that, at the time the assessment was
mailed, owned or controlled at least 20%, as determined by voting rights, of
the addressee's business.
      (2)   If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the basis described
in division (d)(1) of this section, and if that assessment is subject to
collection and is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so within 60
days after the initial contact by the Tax Administrator or other village
official, or the designee of either, with the person. Nothing in this division
prevents the Tax Administrator or other official from entering into a
compromise with the person if the person does not actually file such an appeal
with the local board of tax review.
   (e)   Nothing in this section prohibits the Tax Administrator or the Tax
Administrator's designee from delivering an assessment by a Tax Administrator
by personal service.
   (f)   Collection actions taken upon any assessment being appealed under
division (c)(1)B. of this section, including those on which a claim has been
delivered for collection, shall be stayed upon the pendency of an appeal under
this section.
   (g)   Additional regulations as detailed in the Rules and Regulations shall
apply.
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 820.15 ADMINISTRATION OF CLAIMS.
   (a)   As used in this section, CLAIM means a claim for an amount payable to
the village that arises pursuant to the village's income tax imposed in
accordance with this chapter.
   (b)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a Tax Administrator from doing
either of the following if such action is in the best interests of the
municipal corporation:
      (1)   Compromise a claim;
      (2)   Extend for a reasonable period the time for payment of a claim by
agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments.
   (c)   The Tax Administrator's rejection of a compromise or payment-over-time
agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim shall not be appealable.
   (d)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be binding upon and shall be to the benefit of only the parties to the
compromise or agreement, and shall not eliminate or otherwise affect the
liability of any other person,
   (e)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the compromise or agreement or if
the compromise or agreement was obtained by fraud or by misrepresentation of a
material fact. Any amount that was due before the compromise or agreement and
that is unpaid shall remain due, and any penalties or interest that would have
accrued in the absence of the compromise or agreement shall continue to accrue
and be due.
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 820.16 TAX INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL.
   (a)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings, or verifications required or authorized by this chapter is
confidential, and no person shall access or disclose such information except in
accordance with a proper judicial order or in connection with the performance
of that person's official duties or the official business of the village as
authorized by this chapter. The Tax Administrator or a designee thereof may
furnish copies of returns filed or otherwise received under this chapter and
other related tax information to the Internal Revenue Service, the Tax
Commissioner, and tax administrators of other municipal corporations.
   (b)   This section does not prohibit the village from publishing or
disclosing statistics in a form that does not disclose information with respect
to particular taxpayers.
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 820.17 FRAUD.
   No person shall knowingly make, present, aid, or assist in the preparation
or presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return, schedule, statement,
claim, or document authorized or required by village ordinance or state law to
be filed with the Tax Administrator, or knowingly procure, counsel, or advise
the preparation or presentation of such report, return, schedule, statement,
claim, or document, or knowingly change, alter, or amend, or knowingly procure,
counsel or advise such change, alteration, or amendment of the records upon
which such report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or document is based
with intent to defraud the village or the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 820.18 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   APPLICABLE LAW means this chapter, the resolutions, ordinances,
codes, directives, instructions, and rules adopted by the village provided they
impose or directly or indirectly address the levy, payment, remittance, or
filing requirements of the village.
      (2)   FEDERAL SHORT-TERM RATE means the rate of the average market yield
on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with remaining
periods to maturity of three years or less, as determined under section 1274 of
the Internal Revenue Code, for July of the current year.
      (3)   INCOME TAX, ESTIMATED INCOME TAX, and WITHHOLDING TAX means any
income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax imposed by the village
pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      (4)   INTEREST RATE AS DESCRIBED IN DIVISION (A) OF THIS SECTION means
the federal short-term rate, rounded to the nearest whole number percent, plus
5%. The rate shall apply for the calendar year next following the July of the
year in which the federal short-term rate is determined in accordance with
division (a)(2) of this section.
      (5)   RETURN includes any tax return, report, reconciliation, schedule,
and other document required to be filed with the Tax Administrator or the
village by a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, or any other payer
pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      (6)   UNPAID ESTIMATED INCOME TAX means estimated income tax due but not
paid by the date the tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (7)   UNPAID INCOME TAX means income tax due but not paid by the date the
income tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (8)   UNPAID WITHHOLDING TAX means withholding tax due but not paid by
the date the withholding tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (9)   WITHHOLDING TAX includes amounts an employer, any agent of an
employer, or any other payer did not withhold in whole or in part from an
employee's qualifying wages, but that, under applicable law, the employer,
agent, or other payer is required to withhold from an employee's qualifying
wages.
   (b)   (1)   This section applies to the following:
         A.   Any return required to be filed under applicable law for taxable
years beginning on or after January 1, 2016;
         B.   Income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax required to
be paid or remitted to the village on or after January 1, 2016.
      (2)   This section does not apply to returns required to be filed or
payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, regardless of the filing
or payment date. Returns required to be filed or payments required to be made
before January 1, 2016, but filed or paid after that date shall be subject to
the ordinances or rules and regulations, as adopted before January 1, 2016, of
the village to which the return is to be filed or the payment is to be made.
   (c)   Should any taxpayer, employer, agent of the employer, or other payer
for any reason fails, in whole or in part, to make timely and full payment or
remittance of income tax, estimated income tax, or withholding tax or to file
timely with the village any return required to be filed, the following
penalties and interest shall apply:
      (1)   Interest shall be imposed at the rate described in division (a) of
this section, per annum, on all unpaid income tax, unpaid estimated income tax,
and unpaid withholding tax.
      (2)   A.   With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated income
tax, the village may impose a penalty equal to 15% of the amount not timely
paid.
         B.   With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, the village may
impose a penalty equal to 50% of the amount not timely paid.
      (3)   For tax years ending on or before December 31, 2022, with respect
to returns other than estimated income tax returns, the village may impose a
penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each failure to timely file each
return, regardless of the liability shown thereon for each month, or any
fraction thereof, during which the return remains unfiled regardless of the
liability shown thereon. The penalty shall not exceed one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for each failure.
      (4)   For tax years ending on or after January 1, 2023, with respect to
return, other than estimated income tax returns, the village may impose a
penalty not exceeding $25 for each failure to timely file each return,
regardless of the liability shown thereon, except that the village shall abate
or refund the penalty assessed on a taxpayer’s first failure to timely file a
return after the taxpayer files that return.
      (5)   With respect to failure to file a mandatory registration form, the
village shall impose a penalty of $5 per day for each day over 30 the form
remains outstanding. The penalty shall not exceed a total of $100 in assessed
penalty.
   (d)   Nothing in this section requires the village to refund or credit any
penalty, amount of interest, charges, or additional fees that the village has
properly imposed or collected before January 1, 2016.
   (e)   Nothing in this section limits the authority of the village to abate
or partially abate penalties or interest imposed under this section when the
Tax Administrator determines, in the Tax Administrator's sole discretion, that
such abatement is appropriate.
   (f)   By the 31st day of October of each year the village shall publish the
rate described in division (a) of this section applicable to the next
succeeding calendar year.
   (g)   The village may impose on the taxpayer, employer, any agent of the
employer, or any other payer the village's post-judgment collection costs and
fees, including attorney's fees.
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015; Am. Ord. 2023-15, passed 12-4-2023)
§ 820.19 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; VERIFICATION OF INFORMATION.
Authority.
   (a)   Nothing in this chapter shall limit the authority of the Tax
Administrator to perform any of the following duties or functions, unless the
performance of such duties or functions is expressly limited by a provision of
the Ohio Revised Code:
      (1)   A.   Exercise all powers whatsoever of an query nature as provided
by law, including, the right to inspect books, accounts, records, memorandums,
and federal and state income tax returns, to examine persons under oath, to
issue orders or subpoenas for the production of books, accounts, papers,
records, documents, and testimony, to take depositions, to apply to a court for
attachment proceedings as for contempt, to approve vouchers for the fees of
officers and witnesses, and to administer oaths.
         B.   The powers referred to in this division of this section shall be
exercised by the Tax Administrator only in connection with the performance of
the duties respectively assigned to the Tax Administrator under the village's
income tax ordinance;
      (2)   Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties;
      (3)   Confer and meet with officers of other municipal corporations and
states and officers of the United States on any matters pertaining to their
respective official duties as provided by law;
      (4)   Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders from
bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including
penalties and interest thereon, for any reason overpaid. In addition, the Tax
Administrator may investigate any claim of overpayment and, if the Tax
Administrator finds that there has been an overpayment, make a written
statement of the Tax Administrator's findings, and approve and issue a refund
payable to the taxpayer, the taxpayer's assigns, or legal representative as
provided in this chapter;
      (5)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to consenting to
the compromise and settlement of tax claims;
      (6)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the use of
alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers in accordance with §
820.03;
      (7)   A.   Make all tax findings, determinations, computations, and
orders the Tax Administrator is by law authorized and required to make and,
pursuant to time limitations provided by law, on the Tax Administrator's own
motion, review, re-determine, or correct any tax findings, determinations,
computations, or orders the Tax Administrator has made.
         B.   If an appeal has been filed with the Board of Tax Review or other
appropriate tribunal, the Tax Administrator shall not review, re-determine, or
correct any tax finding, determination, computation, or order which the Tax
Administrator has made, unless such appeal or application is withdrawn by the
appellant or applicant, is dismissed, or is otherwise final;
      (8)   Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in the manner
authorized by law;
      (9)   Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the withholding
obligations described in §
820.04.
Verification of Accuracy of Returns and Determination of Liability.
   (b)   (1)   A Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent or employee thereof
may examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax
returns of any employer, taxpayer, or other person that is subject to, or that
the Tax Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter
for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no return
was filed, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter. Upon written request by
the Tax Administrator or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every
employer, taxpayer, or other person subject to this section is required to
furnish the opportunity for the Tax Administrator, authorized agent, or
employee to investigate and examine such books, papers, records, and federal
and state income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the
request.
      (2)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer, employer, or other
person that is subject to, or that a Tax Administrator believes is subject to,
the provisions of this chapter shall be open to the Tax Administrator's
inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six
years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents
relate, unless the Tax Administrator, in writing, consents to their destruction
within that period, or by order requires that they
be kept longer. The Tax Administrator may require any person, by notice served
on that person, to keep such records as the Tax Administrator determines
necessary to show whether or not that person is liable, and the extent of such
liability, for the income tax levied by the village or for the withholding of
such tax.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator may examine under oath any person that the
Tax Administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that
was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to
affect such income. The Tax Administrator may, for this purpose, compel any
such person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books,
papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns in such person's
possession or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an
attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner at any such hearing
or examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law by a
person who is not an attorney.
      (4)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Administrator compelling
attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers,
records, or federal or state income tax returns under this section shall fail
to comply.
Identification Information.
   (c)   (1)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from
requiring any person filing a tax document with the Tax Administrator to
provide identifying information, which may include the person's social security
number, federal employer identification number, or other identification number
requested by the Tax Administrator. A person required by the Tax Administrator
to provide identifying information that has experienced any change with respect
to that information shall notify the Tax Administrator of the change before, or
upon, filing the next tax document requiring the identifying information.
      (2)   A.   If the Tax Administrator makes a request for identifying
information and the Tax Administrator does not receive valid identifying
information within 30 days of making the request, nothing in this chapter
prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty upon the person to whom
the request was directed pursuant to §
820.18, in addition to any applicable penalty described in §
820.99.
         B.   If a person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information does not notify the Tax Administrator of a change with
respect to that information as required under division (c) of this section
within 30 days after filing the next tax document requiring such identifying
information, nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from
imposing a penalty pursuant to §
820.18.
         C.   The penalties provided for under divisions (c)(2)A. and B. of
this section may be billed and imposed in the same manner as the tax or fee
with respect to which the identifying information is sought and are in addition
to any applicable criminal penalties described in §
820.99 for a violation of §
820.17 and any other penalties that may be imposed by the Tax Administrator by
law.
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 820.20 REQUEST FOR OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (a)   An OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR means an opinion issued under this
section with respect to prospective municipal income tax liability. It does not
include ordinary correspondence of the Tax Administrator.
   (b)   A taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of the Tax
Administrator in accordance with the Rules and Regulations.
   (c)   A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for any activity or
transaction related to a request for an opinion that contained any
misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts.
   (d)   A Tax Administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any request
received under this section. Such refusal is not subject to appeal.
   (e)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator binds the Tax Administrator only
with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and does not
bind the Tax Administrator of any other municipal corporation.
   (f)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator issued under this section is not
subject to appeal.
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 820.21 BOARD OF TAX REVIEW.
   (a)   (1)   The Board of Tax Review shall consist of three members. Two
members shall be appointed by the legislative authority of the village, but
such appointees may not be employees, elected officials, or contractors with
the village at any time during their term or in the five years immediately
preceding the date of appointment. One member shall be appointed by the
village. This member may be an employee of the village, but may not be the
director of finance or equivalent officer, or the Tax Administrator or other
similar official or an employee directly involved in municipal tax matters, or
any direct subordinate thereof.
      (2)   The term for members of the Board of Tax Review of the village
shall be two years. There is no limit on the number of terms that a member may
serve if the member is reappointed by the legislative authority. The board
member appointed by the village shall serve at the discretion of the
administrative official.
      (3)   Members of the Board of Tax Review appointed by the legislative
authority may be removed by the legislative authority by majority vote for
malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance in office. To remove such a member,
the legislative authority must give the member a copy of the charges against
the member and afford the member an opportunity to be publicly heard in person
or by counsel in the member's own defense upon not less than ten days' notice.
The decision by the legislative authority on the charges is final and not
appealable.
      (4)   A member of the Board of Tax Review who, for any reason, ceases to
meet the qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall
resign immediately by operation of law.
      (5)   A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in the same manner
as the original appointment within 60 days of when the vacancy was created. Any
member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the
term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall hold office for the
remainder of such term. No vacancy on the Board of Tax Review shall impair the
power and authority of the remaining members to exercise all the powers of the
Board of Tax Review.
      (6)   If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the Board of Tax
Review due to a conflict of interest, illness, absence, or similar reason, the
legislative authority or top administrative official that appointed the member
shall appoint another individual to temporarily serve on the Board of Tax
Review in the member's place. The appointment of such an individual shall be
subject to the same requirements and limitations as are applicable to the
appointment of the member temporarily unable to serve.
   (b)   Whenever a Tax Administrator issues an assessment, the Tax
Administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the
taxpayer's right to appeal the assessment, the manner in which the taxpayer may
appeal the assessment, and the address to which the appeal should be directed.
   (c)   Any person who has been issued an assessment may appeal the assessment
to the Board of Tax Review by filing a request with the Board of Tax Review.
The request shall be in writing, shall specify the reason or reasons why the
assessment should be deemed incorrect or unlawful, and shall be filed within 60
days after the taxpayer receives the assessment.
   (d)   The Board of Tax Review shall schedule a hearing to be held within 60
days after receiving an appeal of an assessment under division (c) of this
section, unless the taxpayer requests additional time to prepare or waives a
hearing. If the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer may appear
before the Board of Tax Review and may be represented by an attorney at law,
certified public accountant, or other representative. The Board of Tax Review
may allow a hearing to be continued as jointly agreed to by the parties. In
such a case, the hearing must be completed within 120 days after the first day
of the hearing unless the parties agree otherwise.
   (e)   The Board of Tax Review may affirm, reverse, or modify the Tax
Administrator's assessment or any part of that assessment. The Board of Tax
Review shall issue a final determination on the appeal within 90 days after the
Board of Tax Review's final hearing on the appeal, and send a copy of its final
determination by ordinary mail to all of the parties to the appeal within 15
days after issuing the final determination. The taxpayer or the Tax
Administrator may appeal the Board of Tax Review's final determination as
provided in R.C. § 5717.011.
   (f)   The Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section shall adopt
rules governing its procedures and shall keep a record of its transactions.
Such records are not public records available for inspection under R.C. §
149.43. Hearings requested by a taxpayer before a Board of Tax Review created
pursuant to this section are not meetings of a public body subject to R.C. §
121.22.
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 820.22 AUTHORITY TO CREATE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the legislative authority of the
village, or a Tax Administrator pursuant to authority granted to the
administrator by resolution or ordinance, to adopt rules to administer an
income tax imposed by the village in accordance with this chapter. Such rules
shall not conflict with or be inconsistent with any provision of this chapter.
Taxpayers are hereby required to comply not only with the requirements of this
chapter, but also to comply with the Rules and Regulations.
   (b)   All rules adopted under this section shall be published and posted on
the internet.
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 820.23 RENTAL AND LEASED PROPERTY.
   (a)   All property owners of real property located in the village, who rent
or otherwise lease the same, or any part thereof, to any person for residential
dwelling purposes, including apartments, rooms and other rental accommodations,
during any calendar year, or part thereof, commencing with the effective date
of this section, shall file with the Tax Administrator on or before the January
31 first following such calendar year a written report disclosing the name,
address and also telephone number, if available, of each tenant known to have
occupied on December 31 during such calendar year such apartment, room or other
residential dwelling rental property.
   (b)   The Tax Administrator may order the appearance before him, or his duly
authorized agent, of any person whom he believes to have any knowledge of the
name, address and telephone number of any tenant of residential rental real
property in the village. The Tax Administrator, or his duly authorized agent,
is authorized to examine any person, under oath, concerning the name, address
and telephone number of any tenant of residential real property located in the
village. The Tax Administrator, or his duly authorized agent, may compel the
production of papers and records and the attendance of all personnel before
him, whether as parties or witnesses, whenever he believes such person has
knowledge of the name, address and telephone number of any tenant of
residential real property in the the village.
   (c)   Any property owner or person that violates one or more of the
following shall be subject to §
820.99 of this chapter:
      (1)   Fails, refuses or neglects to timely file a written report required
by division (a) of this section;
      (2)   Makes an incomplete or intentionally false written report required
by division (a) of this section;
      (3)   Fails to appear before the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized
agent and to produce and disclose any tenant information pursuant to any order
or subpoena of the Tax Administrator as authorized in this section; or
      (4)   Fails to comply with the provisions of this section or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 820.24 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   This chapter shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation, or to any
property as to whom or which it is beyond the power of Council to impose the
tax herein provided for. Any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter
or any tax against or exception granted any individual or any of the several
groups of persons, or forms of income specified herein if found to be
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or
invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section or part of this
chapter and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this chapter. It is hereby
declared to be the intention of Council that this chapter would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, or part hereof,
not been included therein.
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 820.25 COLLECTION OF TAX AFTER TERMINATION OF CHAPTER.
   (a)   This chapter shall continue effective insofar as the levy of taxes is
concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of taxes levied
hereunder and actions or proceedings for collecting any tax so levied or
enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall continue
effective until all of said taxes levied hereunder in the aforesaid periods are
fully paid and any and all suits and prosecutions for the collection of said
taxes or for the punishment of violations of this chapter shall have been fully
terminated, subject to the limitations contained in §
820.12 and §
820.99.
   (b)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of
this chapter shall be due on the date provided in §§
820.04 and
820.05 as though the same were continuing.
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 820.26 ADOPTION OF RITA RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The village hereby adopts the Regional Income Tax Agency (RITA) Rules &
Regulations, including amendments that may be made from time to time, for use
as the village's Income Tax Rules and Regulations. In the event of a conflict
with any provision(s) of the village Income Tax Ordinance and the RITA Rules &
Regulations, the ordinance will supersede. Until and if the contractual
relationship between the village and RITA ceases, this section will supersede
all other provisions within this chapter regarding promulgation of rules and
regulations by the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 820.27 ELECTION TO BE SUBJECT TO R.C. §§ 718.80 TO 718.95.
   (a)   The village hereby adopts and incorporates herein by reference R.C. §§
718.80 to 718.95.
   (b)   A taxpayer, as defined in division (c) of this section, may elect to
be subject to R.C. §§ 718.80 to 718.95 in lieu of the provisions of this
chapter.
   (c)   TAXPAYER has the same meaning as in R.C. § 718.01, except that
TAXPAYER does not include natural persons or entities subject to the tax
imposed under R.C. Chapter 5745. TAXPAYER may include receivers, assignees, or
trustees in bankruptcy when such persons are required to assume the role of a
taxpayer.
(Ord. 2023-15, passed 12-4-2023)
§ 820.99 VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
   (a)   Whoever violates §
820.14,
820.16(A), or
820.17 by failing to remit the village income taxes deducted and withheld from
an employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be
subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or
imprisonment for a term of up to six months, or both. If the individual that
commits the violation is an employee, or official, of the village, the
individual is subject to discharge from employment or dismissal from office.
   (b)   Any person who discloses information received from the Internal
Revenue Service in violation of §
820.16(a) shall be guilty of a felony of the fifth degree and shall be subject
to a fine of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000) plus the costs of
prosecution, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, or both. If
the individual that commits the violation is an employee, or official, of the
village, the individual is subject to discharge from employment or dismissal
from office.
   (c)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of §
820.16(a) constitutes a separate offense.
   (d)   If not otherwise specified herein, no person shall:
      (1)   Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or declaration required
by this chapter;
      (2)   File any incomplete or false return;
      (3)   Fail, neglect or refuse to pay the tax, penalties or interest
imposed by this chapter;
      (4)   Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized agent
or employee to examine his books, records, papers and federal and state income
tax returns relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (5)   Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to produce his
books, records, papers or federal and state income tax returns relating to the
income or net profits of a taxpayer upon order or subpoena of the Tax
Administrator;
      (6)   Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any information with
respect to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (7)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator authorized hereby;
      (8)   Give to an employer false information as to his true name, correct
social security number, and residence address, or fail to promptly notify an
employer of any change in residence address and date thereof;
      (9)   Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the whole
or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter.
   (e)   Any person who violates any of the provisions in division (d) of this
section shall be subject to the penalties provided for in division (a) of this
section.
(Ord. 2015-09, passed 10-5-2015)
CHAPTER 824
Residential Tax Increment Financing Incentive District
824.01   Incentive district projects; creation of incentive district.
824.02   Public infrastructure improvements.
824.03   Authorization of tax exemption; life of incentive district.
824.04   Service payments and property tax rollback payments.
824.05   Tax Increment Equivalent Fund.
824.06   Distribution of funds.
824.07   Tax increment financing agreement.
824.08   Further authorizations.
824.09   Open meetings.
§ 824.01 INCENTIVE DISTRICT PROJECTS; CREATION OF INCENTIVE DISTRICT.
   Village Council finds and determines that the Commercial Point Residential
Incentive District will place additional demand on the public infrastructure
improvements. Pursuant to the TIF Statutes, Village Council creates the
Incentive District, the boundaries of which are coextensive with the boundaries
of, and include, the parcels specifically identified and depicted in Exhibit A,
attached to Ordinance 2016-12.
(Ord. 2016-12, passed 11-7-2016)
§ 824.02 PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS.
   Village Council designates the public infrastructure improvements described
in Exhibit B attached to Ordinance 2016-12, and any other public infrastructure
improvements hereafter designated by ordinance as public infrastructure
improvements, as public infrastructure improvements made, to be made or in the
process of being made by the village that directly benefit or serve, or that
once made will benefit or serve, parcels in the Incentive District.
(Ord. 2016-12, passed 11-7-2016)
§ 824.03 AUTHORIZATION OF TAX EXEMPTION; LIFE OF INCENTIVE DISTRICT.
   Pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of R.C. § 5709.40(C),
Village Council declares that 100% of the increase in assessed value of each
parcel subsequent to the effective date of this chapter (which increase in
assessed value is hereinafter referred to as the "Improvement," as defined in
R.C. § 5709.40(A)) is a public purpose and exempt from taxation for a period
coextensive with the life of the Incentive District, which life commences with
the first tax year that begins after the effective date of this chapter and in
which an improvement attributable to a new structure would first appear on the
tax list and duplicate of real and public utility property for any parcel
within the Incentive District were it not for the exemption granted in this
chapter and ends on the earlier of 30 years after such commencement  or the
date on which the village can no longer require service payments in lieu of
taxes, all in accordance with the requirements of the TIF Statutes.
(Ord. 2016-12, passed 11-7-2016)
§ 824.04 SERVICE PAYMENTS AND PROPERTY TAX ROLLBACK PAYMENTS.
   Pursuant to R.C. § 5709.42, Village Council directs and requires the owner
of each parcel to make annual service payments in lieu of taxes with respect to
the improvement allocable thereto to the Pickaway County Treasurer (the "County
Treasurer") on or before the final dates for payment of real property taxes.
Each service payment in lieu of taxes, including any penalties and interest at
the then current rate established under R.C. §§ 323.121 and 5703.47
(collectively, the "service payments"), will be charged and collected in the
same manner and in the same amount as the real property taxes that would have
been charged and payable against the improvement if it were not subject to the
exemption granted in this chapter. The service payments, and any other payments
with respect to each improvement that are received by the County Treasurer in
connection with the reduction required by R.C. §§ 319.302, 321.24, 323.152 and
323.156, as the same may be amended from time to time, or any successor
provisions thereto as the same may be amended from time to time (the "property
tax rollback payments"), will be allocated and distributed in accordance with §
824.06.
(Ord. 2016-12, passed 11-7-2016)
§ 824.05 TAX INCREMENT EQUIVALENT FUND.
   Village Council establishes, pursuant to and in accordance with the
provisions of R.C. § 5709.43, the Commercial Point Municipal Public Improvement
Tax Increment Equivalent Fund (the "TIF Fund"), into which the County Treasurer
will deposit the service payments and property tax rollback payments collected
with respect to the parcels and not required to be distributed to the Teays
Valley Local School District pursuant to §
824.06. The TIF Fund will be maintained in the custody of the village. The
village may use amounts deposited into the TIF Fund only for the purposes
authorized in the TIF Statutes and this chapter. The TIF Fund will exist so
long as such service payments and property tax rollback payments are collected
and used for the aforesaid purposes, after which time the TIF Fund will be
dissolved and any surplus funds remaining therein transferred to the village's
General Fund, all in accordance with R.C. § 5709.43.
(Ord. 2016-12, passed 11-7-2016)
§ 824.06 DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS.
   Pursuant to the TIF Statutes, the County Treasurer is requested to
distribute the service payments and the property tax rollback payments as
follows:
   (a)   To each of the Teays Valley Local School District and the Eastland
Joint Vocational School District, an amount equal to the amount the Teays
Valley Local School District and the Eastland Joint Vocational School District
would otherwise have received as real property tax payments (including the
applicable portion of any property tax rollback payments) derived from the
improvement to the property located within each such school district's
boundaries if the improvement had not been exempt from taxation pursuant to
this chapter; and
   (b)   To the village, all remaining amounts for further deposit into TIF
Fund for payment of costs of the public infrastructure improvements, including
debt service on any securities issued to finance those costs.
(Ord. 2016-12, passed 11-7-2016)
§ 824.07 TAX INCREMENT FINANCING AGREEMENT.
   The form of Tax Increment Financing Agreement (the "TIF Agreement")
presently on file with the Clerk of Council is hereby approved and authorized
with changes and completions thereto that are not inconsistent with this
chapter, not substantially adverse to the village and approved by the Mayor and
the Village Solicitor. The Mayor, for and in the name of the village, is hereby
authorized to execute and deliver the TIF Agreement in substantially that form
along with any changes or completions thereto, provided that the approval of
such changes and completions thereto by the Mayor, and the character of those
changes and completions as not being substantially adverse to the village, will
be evidenced conclusively by the Mayor's execution thereof.
(Ord. 2016-12, passed 11-7-2016)
§ 824.08 FURTHER AUTHORIZATIONS.
   Village Council authorizes and directs the Mayor, the Fiscal Officer, the
Village Solicitor, the Clerk of Council or other appropriate officers of the
village to make such arrangements as are necessary and proper for collection of
the service payments from the owner of each parcel. Village Council further
authorizes and directs those officers or other appropriate officers of the
village to prepare and sign all agreements and instruments and to take any
other actions as may be appropriate to implement this chapter and the TIF
Agreement.
(Ord. 2016-12, passed 11-7-2016)
§ 824.09 OPEN MEETINGS.
   Village Council finds and determines that all formal actions of this Council
and any of its committees concerning and relating to the passage of this
chapter were taken in an open meeting of this Council and any of its
committees, and that all deliberations of this Council and any of its
committees that resulted in those formal actions were in meetings open to the
public, all in compliance with the law including R.C. § 121.22.
(Ord. 2016-12, passed 11-7-2016)
PART TEN: STREETS, UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES CODE
                  TITLE FOUR - Utilities
         
Chap. 1040. Sanitary Regulations.
         
Chap. 1042. Sewers.
         
Chap. 1044. Water Connections, Fees, Permits and Billings.
         
Chap. 1046. Water System Use.
         
Chap. 1048. Backflow; Cross-Connection Control.
         
Chap. 1050. Property Owners.
         
Chap. 1052. Meters.
         
Chap. 1054. Dry Water and Sewer Taps.
         
Chap. 1056. Water Availability During Emergencies.
                  TITLE SIX - Other Public Services
         
Chap. 1080. Solid Waste.
         
Chap. 1082. Street Lighting.
TITLE FOUR - Utilities
               
Chap. 1040. Sanitary Regulations.
               
Chap. 1042. Sewers.
               
Chap. 1044. Water Connections, Fees, Permits and Billings.
               
Chap. 1046. Water System Use.
               
Chap. 1048. Backflow; Cross-Connection Control.
               
Chap. 1050. Property Owners.
               
Chap. 1052. Meters.
               
Chap. 1054. Dry Water and Sewer Taps.
               
Chap. 1056. Water Availability During Emergencies.
CHAPTER 1040
Sanitary Regulations
1040.01   Inspections required.
1040.02   Private facilities prohibited when public available.
1040.03   Prevention of offensive odors.
1040.04   Cleaning; disposal of waste.
1040.99   Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to provide and regulate water systems - see Ohio R.C. 715.08, 717.01,
743.01
   Water pollution - see Ohio R.C. 715.08, 743.24
   Compulsory water connections - see Ohio R.C. 729.06, 743.23
§ 1040.01 INSPECTIONS REQUIRED.
   Any septic tank, leach bed or grease constructed trap installed or
constructed by any party within the corporate limits of the Village of
Commercial Point, Ohio, from and after the date of the passage of  this section
shall be inspected or examined for approval or rejection before completion or
use by the Board of Health of Pickaway County, Ohio, the Council of the Village
of Commercial Point, Ohio, or any duly authorized party or committee appointed
by Council to perform the duty.
(Ord. 1-66, passed 7-5-1966)
§ 1040.02 PRIVATE FACILITIES PROHIBITED WHEN PUBLIC AVAILABLE.
   (a)   No owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of any lot or land located
within the village shall establish, construct, maintain or permit to remain a
privy, cesspool or other receptacle for sewage or excreta or a connection to a
private sewer, ditch or other outlet, if such lot or land is accessible to a
public sewer constructed and used for the purpose of conveying sewage and if a
public water main or other water supply satisfactory to permit use of plumbing
is available.
   (b)   When such public sewer and water main or other water supply are
available or are hereafter made available, a connection to such public sewer
shall be established and used by such owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant.
   (c)   Upon notification by certified mail service from the village, such
owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant shall have three months to make the
connection to such public sewer and otherwise comply in all respects with this
section.
(Ord. 1500.12, passed 1- -1976)
§ 1040.03 PREVENTION OF OFFENSIVE ODORS.
   No person, being the owner, lessor, occupant or person in charge of any
premises upon which a privy vault, cesspool or septic tank is located shall
permit such vault, pool or tank or any building, fixture or device appurtenant
thereto, to become foul, noisome, filthy or offensive to neighboring property.
(Ord. 1500.12, passed 1- -1976)
§ 1040.04 CLEANING; DISPOSAL OF WASTE.
   (a)   Whenever any part of the waste in any privy vault or cesspool extends
to a point less than two feet below the surface of the ground adjacent thereto,
or whenever use of any such vault or cesspool is abandoned or where such use or
maintenance is prohibited by an ordinance or health order, the owner, lessor,
occupant or person in charge of such premises shall cause such vault or
cesspool to be emptied of its contents, thoroughly cleaned and disinfected, and
if abandoned, to be filled with clean earth or mineral matter to the level of
the adjacent ground.
   (b)   Upon notification by certified mail service from the village, such
owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant shall have 14 days to perform such
cleaning and disposal and otherwise comply in all respects with this section.
(Ord. 1500.12, passed 1- -1976)
§ 1040.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Inspections. Any party convicted of violating §
1040.01 shall be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense
and a separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed each period of 24
hours such violation shall continue after the date of the original conviction.
(Ord. 1-66, passed 7-5-1966)
   (b)   Sections 1040.02, 1040.03, and 1040.04. Any person, firm or
corporation violating any of the provisions of §§
1040.02, 1040.03, or 1040.04 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding one hundred
dollars ($100.00). Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
(Ord. 1500.12, passed 1- -1976)
CHAPTER 1042
Sewers
1042.01   Purpose.
1042.02   Governing regulations.
1042.03   Definitions.
1042.04   Connection with public sewer required.
1042.05   Storm water prohibited in sanitary sewers.
1042.06   Storm sewer use required.
1042.07   Licensing of sewer tappers and contractors; fees.
1042.08   Sewer connections; permit required; inspection; fee.
1042.09   Non-acceptable wastewater and commercial/industrial pretreatment.
1042.10   Owner to bear costs.
1042.11   Separate connection required for each building.
1042.12   Sewer service charges; billing; liability.
1042.13   Inspection.
1042.14   Tampering with sewage works.
1042.15   Industrial cost recovery.
1042.16   Certain sanitary sewer connections prohibited.
1042.17   Sewer tap fees.
1042.99   Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
   Compulsory sewer connections - see Ohio R.C. 729.06
   Sewerage rates - see Ohio R.C. 729.49
   Regulations to control house sewers and connections - see Ohio R.C. 729.51
   Interference with sewage flow - see Ohio R.C. 4933.24
§ 1042.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish the procedures, requirements,
and costs for connecting to the sewers in the Village of Commercial Point,
Ohio.
(Ord. 1700.01, passed - -)
§ 1042.02 GOVERNING REGULATIONS.
   Where there appears to be, or there is in fact, a conflict between this
chapter and Chapter 1, Drainage and Sewerage System Use, the chapter providing
the more stringent requirement, criteria, standard or procedure shall govern.
(Ord. 1700.01, passed - -)
§ 1042.03 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions of Chapter 1 shall be used in this chapter unless the
context of any section of this chapter specifically indicates that such
definitions are not applicable.
(Ord. 1700.01, passed - -)
§ 1042.04 CONNECTION WITH PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED.
   The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, or recreation, situated within the village and abutting on any
street, alley or right of way in which there is located a public sanitary sewer
of the village, are hereby required to install in conformance with the building
code, toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with
the public sewer within 60 days after the date of mailing of official notice to
do so, provided that the public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line.
(Ord. 1700.01, passed - -; Am. Ord. 1700.013, passed 2-1-1982)
§ 1042.05 STORM WATER PROHIBITED IN SANITARY SEWERS.
   Unless a permit has been issued by the Village Administrator of the Village
of Commercial Point allowing such action, no person, corporation or entity
being the owner, tenant, or in possession of real property within the village
shall do or permit to be done the following on or from such property:
   (a)   Discharge, cause to be discharged or permit to be discharged any storm
water, ground water, surface water, roof water runoff, subsurface drainage
water, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters into a sanitary
sewer line of the village;
   (b)   Install, cause to be installed or with knowledge thereof, permit to
exist a sewer tap pipe or other obstruction which protrudes into or otherwise
obstructs a sanitary sewer line of the village; or
   (c)   With knowledge thereof cause or permit to exist, a root obstruction in
a sanitary sewer line of the village, which root obstruction comes or came from
a tree or vegetation on such property. As used herein, knowledge shall be
presumed upon service of written notice as stipulated in Section 1.15.
(Ord. 1700.01, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2023-10, passed 10-2-2023)
§ 1042.06 STORM SEWER USE REQUIRED.
   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet
approved by the village. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters
may be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
(Ord. 1700.01, passed - -)
§ 1042.07 LICENSING OF SEWER TAPPERS AND CONTRACTORS; FEES.
   Missing material......
(Ord. 1700.01, passed - -)
§ 1042.08 SEWER CONNECTIONS; PERMIT REQUIRED; INSPECTION; FEE.
   (a)   Missing material.....
   (b)   Wastewater tap fees.
      (1)   The owner of any lot or plot of ground which is improved by
building thereon which is required by law to connect into the sewerage system
of the village, shall make application to the Administrator for a connection
permit and shall pay a connection fee.
      (2)   A.   A sewer tap fee shall be paid by any person or entity for each
new service connection to the village sewer system.
         B.   The tap fee shall be paid at the time of filing the application
to make the service charge.
         C.   The sewer tap fee shall be $10,200.00 or $25.50 per gallon of
standard strength sewage discharged in one average day, whichever is greater.
The average daily gallonage shall be determined by the following schedule.
Schedule of Average Day Gallonage
Place or Use Gallonage Per Day
Schedule of Average Day Gallonage
Place or Use                                  Gallonage Per Day
Apartments (Condominiums)                     250 one bedroom
                                              400 two bedroom
                                              400 three bedroom or more
Assembly halls                                2 per seat
Bowling alleys; no food service               75 per lane
Churches, small                               3-5 per sanctuary seat
Churches, large, with kitchen *note (a)       5-7 per sanctuary seat
Country clubs *note (a) and (c)               50 per member or 35 per seat at
                                              400 ppm BOD
Dance halls                                   2 per person
Drive-in theaters                             5 per car space
Factories and warehouses, no showers          25 per employee
Factories and warehouses, with showers        35 per employee
Food service operations
   Ordinary restaurant, not 24 hour *note (35 per seat at 400 ppm BOD
   24-hour restaurant *note (a)            50 per seat at 400 ppm BOD
   Banquet rooms *note (a)                 2 per seat at 400 ppm BOD
   Restaurant, along freeway *note (a)     100 per seat at 400 ppm BOD
   Tavern, very little food service *note (35 per seat at 400 ppm BOD
   Curb service, drive-in *note (a)        50 per car space at 400 ppm BOD
   Vending machine restaurants             100 per seat at 200 ppm BOD
Hospitals, no resident personnel              300 per bed
Institutions, residents                       100 per person
Laundries, coin operated                      400 per machine std. size
Laundry wastes require special consideration  Consult Village Administrator
Motels                                        100 per unit
Nursing and rest homes                        150 per patient
                                              100 per resident employee
                                              50 per nonresident employee
Office buildings *note (c)                    20 per employee or 0.2 per sq.
                                              ft. of floor space
Schools: elementary                           15 per pupil
   High and junior high                    20 per pupil
Service stations *note (b)                    1,000 per first bay
                                              500 per each additional bay
Shopping Centers
   Without food service or laundries       0.2 per sq. ft. of floor space
Single-family dwellings, one family per       400 per family
building
Swimming pool, average                        3-5 per swimmer, design load
   With hot water shower                   5-7 per swimmer, design load
Trailer parks                                 400 per trailer space
Travel trailer dumping stations at service    Consult Administration
stations
Travel trailer parks and camps                125 per trailer or tent space
Youth and recreation camps                    50 per person
*Note (a)   Connection fees for 400 ppm BOD sewage shall be doubled.
*Note (b)   Truck parking areas will require consideration for treatment of
run-off at large truck stops.
*Note (c)   The gallons per day that requires the largest treatment capacity
shall be used to compute the connection fee.
 
   (c)   Missing material.......
   (d)   Missing material.......
   (e)   Missing material.......
   (f)   Missing material.......
   (g)   (1)   The building sewers shall be a minimum of six inches in diameter
and installed per the standard drawings.
      (2)   Prior to acceptance by the Administrator, the building sewer shall
pass a low pressure air test as follows:
The time for the pressure to drop from 3.0 psi to 2.5 psi must be greater than
four minutes for six inch sewers and five minutes six seconds for eight inch
sewers.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/971b3752a8826f975aed878adc724b7ecdeedd43/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2462.png]
 
Typical Trench Sections with Type I Bedding
 
Backfill numbers refer to State of Ohio, Department of Transportation,
Construction and Material Specifications.
Type A backfill shall be granular material suitable for bedding, compacted as
stipulated in 603.08, as applicable. Granular material shall be used around
manholes, structures and cleanouts.
Type B backfill shall be natural soil free from stones larger than two inches
across their greatest dimension, topsoil, vegetation, debris, rubbish or frozen
material, compacted to 95% of its maximum laboratory dry weight.
Type C backfill shall be natural soil, free from stones larger than six inches
across their greatest dimension, vegetation, debris, rubbish or frozen material
compacted to 90% of its maximum laboratory dry weight. When approved by the
engineer, rocks no larger than one cubic foot may be deposited at least three
feet above the top of the sewer.
Aggregate for bedding is 57, 6, 67, 68, 7, 78 or 8 Item 703.
The excavated trench width 12 inches above the conduit may be increased without
extra compensation.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/971b3752a8826f975aed878adc724b7ecdeedd43/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2464.png]
 
(Ord. 1700.01, passed - -; Am. Ord. 11-91.2, passed 2-3- 1992; Am. Ord.
1700.012, passed 7-6- 1981; Am. Ord. 96.12, passed 10-7- 1996; Am. Ord. 97.10,
passed 12- 1-1997; Am. Ord. 99.14, passed 11-6- 2000; Am. Ord. 04-8, passed 5-
3- 2004; Am. Ord. 2006- 16, passed 10-2-2006; Am. Ord. 2007-42, passed 11- 12-
2007; Am. Ord. 2019-06, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 1042.09 NON-ACCEPTABLE WASTEWATER AND COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT..
   (a)   Commercial Point shall make and enforce rules and regulations
establishing the types and characteristics of sewage, commercial/industrial
wastes, and other matters which shall be discharged into the sanitary sewerage
system, the types and characteristics of sewage and commercial/industrial
wastes admissible to the system only after pretreatment, requisites for
pretreatment, and otherwise governing the discharge of sewage, commercial/
industrial wastes, and other matters into the system in the interest of safety,
and efficient operation of the wastewater treatment plant. Applicable
commercial/industrial pretreatment conditions and industrial pretreatment
regulations, as promulgated under Section 307(b) of the Clean Water Act, are
hereby incorporated in this section and made a part thereof.
   (b)   A commercial establishment/industry must, upon application for sewer
service, present to Commercial Point a tabulation of the chemical analysis of
the wastes to be discharged into the sewerage system and the volume of such
wastes, or if this is not available, the expected waste analysis based on
similar processes now in operation.
   (c)   In cases where the character of sewage or commercial/industrial waste
from any manufacturing or industrial plant, building, or premises is such that
it will damage the sewerage system or cannot be treated satisfactorily at the
Water Reclamation Facility, Commercial Point shall require such users to
dispose of such waste and prevent it from entering the sewerage system.
   (d)   In cases where the character of the sewage or commercial/industrial
waste from any manufacturing or industrial plant, building, or premises is such
that it imposes an unreasonable burden upon the sewage collection, pumping, or
treatment works greater than that imposed by the average sewage entering the
sewerage system, Commercial Point may: compel such manufacturing or industrial
plant, building, or premises to pretreat such sewage in such manner as
specified by Commercial Point before discharging it into the sewerage system;
require flow control or equalization of such wastes so as to avoid any "slug"
loads or excessive loads that may be harmful to the treatment works; or require
payment of a surcharge, as determined on a case by case basis, on any excessive
flows or loadings discharged to the treatment works to cover the additional
costs of having capacity for and treating such wastes.
   (e)   The discharge of non-acceptable commercial/industrial sewage into the
sewerage system, whether directly or indirectly, is prohibited. Wastewater
shall be deemed non-acceptable when the concentration of harmful or toxic
substances in the wastewater exceeds certain prescribed tolerable limits. Toxic
or harmful substances include, but are not necessarily limited to, the
following:
Toxic or Harmful Substances Tolerable Limits
Toxic or Harmful Substances Tolerable Limits
Arsenic                     0.2 mg/l
Barium                      1.0 mg/l
Boron                       5.0 mg/l
Cadmium                     0.1 mg/l
Chromium+ 3                 0.5 mg/l
Chromium+6                  0.25 mg/l
Cobalt                      1.0 mg/l
Copper                      0.5 mg/l
Cyanide (HCN)               0.5 mg/l
Fluoride                    5.0 mg/l
Iron                        5.0 mg/l
Lead                        0.5 mg/l
Mercury                     0.0012 mg/l
Molybdenum                  0.67 mg/l
Nickel                      2.0 mg/l
Phenols                     1.0 mg/l
Selenium                    0.10 mg/l
Silver                      0.03 mg/l
Sulfides                    10.0 mg/l
Total Dissolved Solids      1,500.0 mg/l
Tungsten                    5.0 mg/l
Zinc                        2.0 mg/l
                            Gross Beta activity (in the known absence of
Radioactive Substances      strontium and Alpha emitters) - 1,000 micro curies
                            per liter.
 
The preceding list of toxic or harmful substances is subject to revisions as
required to meet current water quality standards or effluent standards imposed
by state or federal agencies. In special cases (low volume users), the
concentration of toxic or harmful substances in the wastewater may be exceeded
if it is determined by Commercial Point that the total pounds of toxic or
harmful substances discharged to the sewage system are not harmful to or will
not interfere with the sewage treatment process or will not violate water
quality or effluent standards.
   (f)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, either directly
or indirectly to the sewerage system, any of the following described
substances, materials, waters or wastes:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 125 degrees
Fahrenheit (°F.).
      (2)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, mineral oil or other
volatile, flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
      (3)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance which, either singly or
by interaction with other wastes, is capable of creating a public nuisance or
hazard to life or of preventing entry into the sewers for their maintenance and
repair.
      (4)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0,
or having any other corrosive property of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, or personnel of the sewerage system.
      (5)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastic, wood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime
slurry, lime, chemical, or plant residues, cannery wastes, bulk solids, or any
other solid objects or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the
flow operation of the sewerage system.
      (6)   Trash in various forms, including, but not limited to the
following:
         A.   Disposable diapers of any size, nursing pads, baby wipes;
         B.   Cleaning wipes, or any other fibrous wipes;
         C.   Cotton balls, pads or swabs;
         D.   Feminine hygiene products;
         E.   Unused medication;
         F.   Prophylactics;
         G.   Facial tissue;
         H.   Hair;
         I.   Nail polish, polish remover, solvents, paint, turpentine;
         J.   Bandages and bandage wrappers;
         K.   Syringes, needles and sharps;
         L.   Teeth;
         M.   Razors;
         N.   Kitty litter;
         O.   Dental floss;
         P.   Toys; or
         Q.   Pets (living or deceased).
      (7)   Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewerage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving
waters of the sewerage system.
      (8)   Any water or wastes containing emulsified oil or grease exceeding,
on analysis, an average of 50 milligrams of oil and grease per liter determined
as total either soluble matter.
      (9)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded to a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions of the sewer and
with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
      (10)   Any water or wastes containing suspended solids of such character
or quality that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such
materials at the sewage treatment plant, or having a chlorine demand greater
than 25 mg/l.
      (11)   Any waste containing substances that would result in a violation
of the NPDES permit.
      (12)   Any unused medication including but not limited to prescription
drugs and over the counter medication.
      (13)   The above list is subject to revisions as required to meet current
water quality standards imposed by the state or federal agencies.
   (g)   No statement contained in this section shall be interpreted as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between Commercial Point and
any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by Commercial Point for treatment. In all such cases,
the provisions set forth in the Commercial Point ordinance establishing sewer
service charges will be governing factors in any contracts entered into.
   (h)   Grease, oil, sand and trash interceptors shall be installed at the
expense of the owner when, in
the opinion of Commercial Point, they are necessary for proper handling of
liquid wastes containing excessive amounts of grease, any flammable wastes,
sand, trash, and/or other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be
located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials
capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall
be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable
covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. Where
installed, all grease, oil and sand and trash interceptors shall be maintained
by the owner at his or her expense, in continuous efficient operation at all
times.
   (i)   Any commercial/industrial user who has discharge to the sanitary sewer
system, and is compelled by the Ohio Plumbing Code and/or Commercial Point to
install and maintain a grease oil, sand, and/or trash interceptor shall have
the interceptor serviced by a properly accredited service provider at a minimum
of every 90 days. Proper maintenance of interceptors includes the complete
removal and disposal of all contents, liquid and solid. This frequency of
interceptor service is subject to modification as determined by Commercial
Point. Cleaning by gravimetric separation is strictly prohibited. The owner/
operator of interceptors shall maintain a record, including receipts, of
interceptor service on the premise and be prepared to display records upon
request. These records are to be kept a minimum of three years. Dischargers
must allow full inspection of any pretreatment units, including maintenance
records, at any time when requested by a duly authorized agent of Commercial
Point. Additionally, each discharger must mail copies of quarterly service
reports to Commercial Point by no later than the 15th of the month following
this service.
   (j)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates or fails to comply with
a provision of this section shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by
state and local laws, specifically §
1042.99.
(Ord. 2007-42, passed 11-12-2007; Ord. 2020-02, passed 3-2-2020)
§ 1042.10 OWNER TO BEAR COSTS.
   Missing material......
(Ord. 1700.01, passed - -)
§ 1042.11 SEPARATE CONNECTION REQUIRED FOR EACH BUILDING.
   Missing material......
(Ord. 1700.01, passed - -)
§ 1042.12 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES; BILLING; LIABILITY.
   (a)   The sewer service charges of the Village of Commercial Point shall be
based and calculated on the volume of wastewater discharged directly or
indirectly into the sewer system, which shall be measured by the water used by
each sewer user as shown by water meter or meters. On premises using water
supplied from sources other than the village water distribution system, the
quantity of water consumed thereon each month shall be considered to be 5,000
gallons, which is the minimum number of gallons set forth in division (b) of
this section.
   (b)   The sewer service charges of the Village of Commercial Point shall be
the charges and rates set forth in the table below:
2023
                                Village                    Township
Diameter Minimum   Village      Additional    Township     Additional
of Tap   Purchase  Minimum Bill Purchase Rate Minimum Bill Purchase Rate
         Per Month Per Month    Per Gallon of Per Month    Per Gallon of Water
                                Water Used                 Used
2023
                                       Village                    Township
Diameter   Minimum        Village      Additional    Township     Additional
of Tap     Purchase       Minimum Bill Purchase Rate Minimum Bill Purchase Rate
           Per Month      Per Month    Per Gallon of Per Month    Per Gallon of
                                       Water Used                 Water Used
3/4 Inch   5,000 Gallons  $33.00       $0.0066       $41.00       $0.0082
1 Inch     8,871 Gallons  $58.55       $0.0066       $72.74       $0.0082
1-1/2 Inch 19,839 Gallons $130.94      $0.0066       $162.68      $0.0082
2 Inch     35,161 Gallons $232.06      $0.0066       $288.32      $0.0082
3 Inch     79,000 Gallons $521.40      $0.0066       $647.80      $0.0082
4 Inch     140,645        $928.26      $0.0066       $1,153.29    $0.0082
           Gallons
6 Inch     316,600        $2,089.56    $0.0066       $2,596.12    $0.0082
           Gallons
8 Inch     568,387        $3,751.35    $0.0066       $4,660.77    $0.0082
           Gallons
 
   (c)   When accurate meter readings cannot be obtained at the time of a
scheduled meter reading, or where necessary for administrative purposes, the
quantity of water used may be estimated for sewer billing purposes. Estimated
usage will be based upon actual meter readings from prior cycles or by such
other fair and reasonable methods. Where unmetered wastewater is discharged to
the sewer system without adequate sewer metering, the village reserves the
right to bill the amount of flow based upon its engineering judgment of a
reasonable estimate of unmetered usage. Where the usage is estimated because of
inability to read the meter, any necessary corrections shall be made at the
time of the next actual meter reading or when appropriate. The village may
modify any sewer service charge as set forth in this section if the property
owner demonstrates to the village that the water or wastewater measured by the
owner's meter is greater than that actually being discharged directly or
indirectly into the village sewer system, but no charge resulting from any such
modification shall be less than the amount of the minimum bill per month set
forth in this section.
   (d)   Each sewer charge levied pursuant to this chapter is made a lien upon
and against the premises charged, and if the charge is not paid within 30 days
after it becomes due and payable, it shall be certified by the village to the
Auditor of Pickaway County, Ohio, who shall place the charge on the tax list
and duplicate with the interest and penalties provided by law, to be collected
as other municipal taxes are collected.
(Ord. 2022-35, passed 12-5-2022)
§ 1042.13 INSPECTION.
   Missing material.....
(Ord. 1700.01, passed - -)
§ 1042.14 TAMPERING WITH SEWAGE WORKS.
   Missing material.....
(Ord. 1700.01, passed - -)
§ 1042.15 INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY.
   Missing material.....
(Ord. 1700.01, passed - -)
§ 1042.16 CERTAIN SANITARY SEWER CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   No roof drains, foundation drains, water pipes, or other clean water drains
from any residence or building within the Village of Commercial Point shall be
connected directly to the sanitary sewers as constructed and a part of the
general sanitary sewerage treatment program and related facilities.
(Ord. 1800.03, passed 8-2-1975)
§ 1042.17 SEWER TAP FEES.
   A sanitary sewer tap fee shall be paid by any person or entity for each new
service connection to the village sanitary sewer system. The tap fee or fees
shall be paid at the time of filing the application to make the service
connection or connections. The sanitary sewer tap fees shall be as follows:
Sewer Tap Fee Table
Tap Size (inches) Tap Fee
Sewer Tap Fee Table
Tap Size (inches) Tap Fee
3/4               $10,200
1                 $18,135
1-1/2             $40,802
2                 $72,535
3                 $163,206
4                 $290,144
6                 $652,823
8                 $1,160,576
 
(Ord. 2022-26, passed 10-3-2022)
§ 1042.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Missing material.....
(Ord. 1700.01, passed - -)
   (b)   Certain sanitary sewer connections prohibited.
      (1)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
§
1042.16 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be fined in an amount not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00).
      (2)   Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue,
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
(Ord. 1800.03, passed 8-2-1975)
   (c)   Section 1042.08.
      (1)   No person or entity shall make a service connection or any part
thereof to the sanitary sewer system or water system of the Village of
Commercial Point unless the proper tap fee or fees have
been paid and a permit has been issued by the village to make the service
connection to the village sewer or water system.
      (2)   Whoever violates §
1042.08 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(Ord. 1800.03, passed 8-2-1975; Am. Ord. 2006-16, passed 10-2-2006; Am. Ord.
2007-42, passed 11-12-2007)
CHAPTER 1044
Water Connections, Fees, Permits and Billings
1044.01   Purpose.
1044.02   Governing regulations.
1044.03   Definitions.
1044.04   Application for water or sewer service.
1044.05   Connection to the water system.
1044.06   Owner to bear cost and to be responsible for service line.
1044.07   Water connection tap.
1044.08   Water meter; installation.
1044.09   Temporary water service.
1044.10   Inspection.
1044.11   Repair of service lines.
1044.12   Water service charges.
1044.13   Bill and payment for services; remedies for non-payment.
1044.14   Termination of service for delinquent accounts miscellaneous fees and
charges.
1044.15   Water service to village residents.
1044.16   Water service to non-village residents.
1044.17   Requirements of new connections outside village limits by developers.
1044.18   Requirements of new connections outside village limits by private
property owners.
1044.99   Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to provide and regulate water systems - see Ohio R.C. 715.08, 717.01,
743.01
   Water pollution - see Ohio R.C. 715.08, 743.24
   Compulsory water connections - see Ohio R.C. 729.06, 743.23
§ 1044.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish the procedures, requirements,
and cost for connecting to and making use of the village water system,
(Ord. 2100.05, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 1044.02 GOVERNING REGULATIONS.
   Where there appears to be, or there is in fact, a conflict between this
chapter and Chapter 1, General Provisions, the chapter providing the more
stringent requirement, standard, or procedure shall govern.
(Ord. 2100.05, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 1044.03 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions of Chapter 1 shall be used in this chapter unless the
context of any section of this chapter specifically indicates that such
definitions are not, applicable.
(Ord. 2100.05, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 1044.04 APPLICATION FOR WATER OR SEWER SERVICE.
   (a)   All applications for water or sewer service must be made on forms
provided by the village.
   (b)   Each application must state truly and fully the uses to be made of
water or sewer service.
   (c)   A separate application for service may be required for each premises.
   (d)   Each application must be signed by the owner of the premises to be
supplied water or sewer service.
(Ord. 2100.05, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 1044.05 CONNECTION TO THE WATER SYSTEM.
   (a)   (1)   All connections shall be made and maintained in accordance with
county specifications and standards.
      (2)   No person shall:
         A.   Construct or connect a service line to the village systems until
a permit has been issued by the village;
         B.   Connect a service line to more than one building or facility
without the village’s prior approval; or
         C.   Install, cause to be installed or, with knowledge thereof, permit
to exist a connection, tap pipe, or other obstruction which protrudes into or
otherwise obstructs a village sewer or waterline.
   (b)   Prior to the issuance of the permit to install, the owner shall pay
the connection fee, meter charge and inspection fee as provided for herein.
   (c)   (1)   The payment of a connection fee does not relieve any person from
the responsibilities enumerated in these regulations.
      (2)   No permit to connect property to a village system shall be issued
nor shall any such connection be made unless and until the fees herein imposed,
along with all other charges and fees that pertain to that village system have
been paid.
   (d)   (1)   All tap permits shall become null and void, if not used within
90 days from the date of issuance.
      (2)   Upon application by the owner, 50% of the connection or tap fee and
all inspection and meter fees shall be refunded after a permit becomes null and
void.
      (3)   If not requested by the owner within one year of the date of
issuance, no refund shall be made.
(Ord. 2100.05, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 1044.06 OWNER TO BEAR COST AND TO BE RESPONSIBLE FOR SERVICE LINE.
   (a)   (1)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and
connection of service lines shall be borne by the owner of the property being
connected to the village system.
      (2)   The owner shall indemnify the village from any loss or damage that
may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of any service
line.
   (b)   (1)   The customer shall be responsible for all leaks or blockage in a
service line and shall, at his or her expense, construct, maintain and keep it
in good repair.
      (2)   When leaks or other defects in a service line are discovered, the
village may disconnect the service line.
      (3)   Except in cases of real emergency, however, the village shall give
the customer notice of such difficulty and shall allow the customer reasonable
time in which to have repairs made or other maintenance work accomplished.
(Ord. 2100.06, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 1044.07 WATER CONNECTION TAP.
   (a)   The owner of any lot or plot of ground who wishes to connect to a
village water system shall first pay a connection fee and meter fee as
established by the following table.
   (b)   Water connection fee.
Water Tap Fee Table
Tap Size (Inches) Tap Fee
Water Tap Fee Table
Tap Size (Inches) Tap Fee
3/4               $8,000
1                 $14,223
1-1/2             $32,002
2                 $56,891
3                 $128,005
4                 $227,564
6                 $512,018
8                 $910,255
10                $1,422,274
12                $2,048,075
Note: The village shall not allow any master meter arrangements for
residential purposes.
 
   (c)   (1)   When a service line is used for fire protection only, the water
tap fees shall be reduced to 10% of the above rate.
      (2)   The service line for fire protection shall be separate from all
other service lines.
      (3)   There shall not be any connection between a fire protection system
and water system for domestic use.
(Ord. 2100.05, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 1044.08 WATER METER; INSTALLATION.
   (a)   The village will provide all water meters upon payment of the meter
fee.
   (b)   All meter installations shall be inspected and approved by the
village, prior to turning on the water.
   (c)   At least a 24-hour notice shall be given to the village for meter
inspections.
(Ord. 2100.05, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 1044.09 TEMPORARY WATER SERVICE.
   (a)   (1)   When temporary water service is requested for any purpose, the
village shall make an estimate of the cost of installing and removing the
facilities required for such service and the applicant for the service shall
deposit with the village the amount of such estimate.
      (2)   When such temporary service is no longer desired and is
discontinued, all facilities not thereafter usable shall be removed and the
actual installation and removal cost shall be determined.
      (3)   The customer shall then be reimbursed for the amount of his or her
deposit less the “in-and-out” cost determined as above.
      (4)   During the period of the temporary service, the customer shall also
be liable for a service charge calculated in accordance with this chapter.
   (b)   (1)   In lieu of the deposit as described in division (a) above, a fee
of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid for the installation of a three-fourths
inch meter on a service line for use by a contractor during the construction of
a building.
      (2)   The contractor shall provide adequate support for the meter in a
protected place.
      (3)   Failure of the contractor to provide proper care for the meter or
misuse of or the damage to the meter may constitute grounds for removal of the
meter and terminating the temporary service.
      (4)   The fifty dollars ($50.00) shall cover the cost of the first 10,000
gallons of water used.
      (5)   Upon return of the meter in good repair, the contractor shall be
refunded twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
(Ord. 2100.05, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 1044.10 INSPECTION.
   (a)   All connections to a village system and the installation of all
service lines shall be inspected by the village.
   (b)   (1)   The connection fees includes the cost of an initial inspection
and one repeat inspection or two hours of inspection by the village for each
permit issued.
      (2)   Should more than the initial and one repeat inspection or more than
two hours of inspection time be required because of failure of the owner, his
or her contractor or authorized representative to install, maintain, repair,
alter, or perform other works necessary to install the connection and service
line in accordance with these regulations an additional fee of fifteen dollars
($15.00) per hour, or increment thereof shall be charged for the time required
to ensure compliance with these regulations.
      (3)   Such additional fees shall be paid prior to the final approval of
the service line for which the permit was issued.
(Ord. 2100.05, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 1044.11 REPAIR OF SERVICE LINES.
   (a)   The owner of any lot or plot of ground which has a service line that
has been tapped or connected to a village system but which requires
maintenance, repair, alteration or other work to either eliminate the service
line or to cause the service line to conform to these regulations shall perform
or cause the performance of the necessary work.
   (b)   Prior to any work being performed the owner or his or her authorized
representative shall notify the village.
(Ord. 2100.05, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 1044.12 WATER SERVICE CHARGES.
   (a)   The following water rate schedule shall be effective on January 1,
2023:
2023
         Minimum   Village      Village       Township     Township
Diameter Purchase  Minimum Bill Additional    Minimum Bill Additional
of Tap   Per Month Per Month    Purchase Rate Per Month    Purchase Rate
                                Per Gallon                 Per Gallon
2023
           Minimum        Village      Village       Township     Township
Diameter   Purchase       Minimum Bill Additional    Minimum Bill Additional
of Tap     Per Month      Per Month    Purchase Rate Per Month    Purchase Rate
                                       Per Gallon                 Per Gallon
3/4 Inch   5,000 Gallons  $33.00       $0.0066       $41.00       $0.0082
1 Inch     8,871 Gallons  $58.55       $0.0066       $72.74       $0.0082
1-1/2 Inch 19,839 Gallons $130.94      $0.0066       $162.68      $0.0082
2 Inch     35,161 Gallons $232.06      $0.0066       $288.32      $0.0082
3 Inch     79,000 Gallons $521.40      $0.0066       $647.80      $0.0082
4 Inch     140,645        $928.26      $0.0066       $1,153.29    $0.0082
           Gallons
6 Inch     316,600        $2,089.56    $0.0066       $2,596.12    $0.0082
           Gallons
8 Inch     568,387        $3,751.35    $0.0066       $4,660.77    $0.0082
           Gallons
 
   (b)   The owner of the property which is served by the village system shall
be liable for all charges for the service rendered that property.
   (c)   A monthly water tower maintenance charge will be collected from all
users. The rate will be determined by dividing the annual water tower
maintenance payment by the total number of users as of November 1, 2022.
   (d)   All bulk water sold by the Village of Commercial Point shall be at the
rate of twenty dollars ($20.00) per load, plus seven dollars ($7.00) for each
1,000 gallons of water or part thereof.
(Ord. 2022-34, passed 12-5-2022)
§ 1044.13 BILL AND PAYMENT FOR SERVICES; REMEDIES FOR NON-PAYMENT.
   (a)   (1)   All bills shall be due and payable on the date shown on the
bill.
      (2)   When service to any premises is established on a date between
billing dates, the bill shall be pro-rated between owners.
   (b)   Bills will be mailed to the owner at the address of the premises
serviced unless the owner requests, in writing, that they be sent to some other
address specified by him or her.
   (c)   The failure to receive a bill shall not relieve the owner of the
obligation to pay the same when due.
   (d)   Bills unpaid after the date shown on the bill shall be considered
delinquent, and shall subject the premises to a 10% delinquency charge, to
discontinuance of service, and other remedies of law.
   (e)   (1)   The owner shall notify the village of any errors or
discrepancies in the billing prior to the date the bill becomes delinquent.
      (2)   Failure to make such notification constitutes acceptance of the
bill as mailed.
(Ord. 2100.05, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 1044.14 TERMINATION OF SERVICE FOR DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS; MISCELLANEOUS FEES
AND CHARGES.
   (a)   Termination of water service. The village may terminate water and/or
sewer services to any person or real estate using the village water and/or
sewer system for the failure to pay any account or for a violation of any
ordinance or rule and regulation promulgated pursuant to this chapter.
   (b)   Notice of termination. In the event that a customer fails to pay a
utility bill by the fifteenth (15th) day of the month, the billing clerk shall
send notice to the account holder of such delinquency with the next utility
bill and shall inform such account holder that the village shall terminate
supply of the public utility if the account remains delinquent and the entire
balance due is not received by 12:00 p.m. (noon) on or before the fifteenth
(15th) day of the month at the village offices located at 9 Belishazzer in the
Village of Commercial Point, Ohio. The notice shall indicate the basis upon
which service is being terminated and date after which service will be
terminated if the violations are not corrected, or applicable payment or
payment agreements are not received by the village. The notice shall also
indicate the hearing rights afforded to any person affected by the termination
notice by which the person may contest the water and/or sewer service
termination. The notice shall be mailed or hand delivered to the address of the
customer of record and to the service address.
   (c)   Hearing procedures. Any affected person (an owner, occupant, resident
or tenant of the affected property) desiring a hearing concerning a termination
of water and/or sewer service under this section may request an informal
hearing with the Mayor or official designated by the Mayor by submitting a
written and signed request to the Fiscal Officer no later than five days after
receipt of a termination notice. Failure of an affected person to file a
request for hearing within the allotted five day period shall constitute a
waiver by that person of their right to a hearing under this section. The Mayor
or the official designated by the Mayor shall convene a hearing on the matter
within ten days of receiving the request for hearing. If a hearing cannot be
scheduled within this ten-day period, then the water service termination shall
be automatically stayed, pending the holding of a hearing on this matter. The
hearing procedure herein does not apply to those customers receiving notice of
termination under division (e).
   (d)   Termination of services. If the account holder fails to pay the entire
balance due by 12:00 p.m. (noon) on or before the fifteenth (15th) day of the
month at the village offices in accordance with division (b) hereinabove, the
Mayor, or his or her designee, shall cause the termination of the supply of the
public utility to the delinquent account.
   (e)   Payment agreements.
      (1)   Pre-termination payment agreement. The Mayor and the billing clerk
are hereby authorized to enter into a pre-termination payment agreement for the
repayment of delinquent utility bills prior to termination of the municipal
utility service. The Mayor or the billing clerk shall reduce such agreement to
writing, in the form attached to Ordinance 2007-28 as Exhibit 1, and
incorporated herein. The maximum duration of a payment agreement under this
division is a six-month period after the date of execution. The Mayor or the
billing clerk are hereby authorized to terminate utility service within ten
days of customer default on such payment agreement. Written notice of
termination shall be mailed to customer.
      (2)   Post-termination payment agreement. The Mayor is hereby authorized
to enter into a payment agreement for the repayment of delinquent utility bills
after termination of the municipal utility service. The Mayor shall reduce such
agreement to writing, in the form attached to Ord. 2007-28 as Exhibit 2, and
incorporated herein. The customer shall pay a reinstatement fee when entering
into a payment agreement herein, in addition to any delinquent amount on the
account and any current utility bills which may be accumulated after
reinstatement of the municipal utility service. Upon execution of a post-
termination payment agreement, the Mayor or his or her designee shall cause the
reinstatement of the customer's account and supply of the municipal utility
service. The maximum duration of a payment agreement under this section is a
six-month period after the date of execution. The Mayor, or his or her
designee, is hereby authorized to terminate utility service within ten days of
customer default on such payment agreement without additional notice to such
customer. Written notice of termination shall be mailed to customer.
   (f)   Reinstatement. Upon payment of the delinquency and the entire balance
due, or the execution of a payment agreement as provided for in division (e)
(2), the Mayor, or his or her designee, may reinstate the account and supply of
the public utility. The customer shall pay a reinstatement fee for water
service of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and for sewer service shall pay the
actual cost incurred to disconnect and reinstate service or five-hundred
dollars ($500.00), whichever is more.
   (g)   Miscellaneous fees and charges.
      (1)   Water meter replacement charge. The water meter replacement charge
shall be sixty dollars ($60.00).
      (2)   Relocate water meter/remote. The charge to relocate the meter and/
or remote due to obstruction of the meter and/or remote at the request of a
customer shall be sixty dollars ($60.00).
      (3)   Inspection/installation fee. The service charge to install or
inspect a meter shall be sixty dollars ($60.00).
      (4)   Unauthorized use. There shall be a service charge to investigate,
notify or discontinue water service as a result of fraud, illegal diversion of
water or unauthorized commencement of services. The village shall levy a charge
of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense and one hundred dollars
($100.00) for the second offense, plus a charge for the water utilized.
      (5)   Testing of meter. There shall be a forty dollar ($40.00) charge for
meter testing at the customer's request when the meter tests between 97% and
103% accuracy. There shall not be a charge if the meter does not test between
97% and 103% accuracy.
      (6)   Replacement/repair. There shall be a charge of twenty dollars
($20.00) for replacing water box lids, thirty dollars ($30.00) for replacing
the top section of the water box and forty-five dollars ($45.00) for replacing
the entire water box, plus the cost of excavation.
      (7)   Returned check charge. The returned check charge shall be twenty-
five dollars ($25.00).
   (h)   This section does not apply to a termination or disruption of water
and/or sewer service due to routine or scheduled maintenance of the water and/
or sewer system or to emergency circumstances.
(Ord. 2006-18, passed 11-6-2006; Am. Ord. 2007-28, passed 8-6-2007)
§ 1044.15 WATER SERVICE TO VILLAGE RESIDENTS.
   (a)   A water tap fee shall be paid by any person or entity for each new
service connection to the village water system. The tap fee shall be paid at
the time of filing the application to make the service connection.
   (b)   The water tap fees shall be as follows:
Tap Diameter (Inches) Tap Fee
Tap Diameter (Inches) Tap Fee
3/4                   $ 4,000.00
1                     $ 7,111.00
1 ½                  $ 16,000.00
2                     $ 28,444.00
3                     $ 64,000.00
4                     $113,778.00
6                     $256,000.00
8                     $455,111.00
 
   (c)   The village shall not allow any master meter arrangements for
residential purposes.
   (d)   When a service line is used for fire protection only, the water tap
fees shall be reduced to 30% of the above rate. The service line for fire
protection shall be separate from all other service lines. There shall not be
any connection between a fire protection system and water system for domestic
use.
(Ord. 6-92.3, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 2006-16, passed 10-2-2006; Am. Ord.
2007-42, passed 11-12-2007)
§ 1044.16 WATER SERVICE TO NON-VILLAGE RESIDENTS.
   (a)   Any residence outside the corporation of Commercial Point, Ohio will
be provided with village water service only after required annexation
procedures are followed and tap fees are paid.
   (b)   After annexation, the residence must be inside the corporation limits
and tax district of Commercial Point, Ohio.
(Ord. 6-92.3, passed - -1992)
§ 1044.17 REQUIREMENTS OF NEW CONNECTIONS OUTSIDE VILLAGE LIMITS BY DEVELOPERS.
   (a)   (1)   Prior to the extension of any water, sanitary sewer and/or storm
sewer connection outside the municipal corporation limits to serve a new
development, the developer or developers of any land to be connected to the
municipal water, sanitary sewer and/or storm sewer system of the village shall
be required to enter into an annexation agreement with the village under the
terms of which the developer or developers of the land to be connected shall
consent and agree to sign any and all petitions, forms, or other documents
necessary or in conjunction with annexation presented to it by representatives
of the Village of Commercial Point, and/or any other land owner desirous of
causing this property to subsequently be annexed to the village at such time as
this property becomes contiguous with any portion of the village.
      (2)   Further, the developer or developers shall include a restriction in
all deeds transferring any interests in this land to be connected requiring
that the recipient of such conveyance shall also be subject to this requirement
regarding annexing the property to the village at such time as the property
becomes contiguous to the municipal corporation limits.
   (b)   Property outside the municipal corporation limits sought to be
developed by a developer or developers of the land may be connected to the
water, sanitary sewer and/or storm sewer lines of the village only if the
capacity of such water, sanitary sewer and/or storm sewer lines are sufficient
to accommodate the additional flow increment calculated to become tributary to
such sanitary sewer or storm sewer and the water flow is sufficient to provide
appropriate water pressure for ordinary household purposes for any additional
dwelling as a result of such connection.
   (c)   The developer or developers of any land to be connected to the
existing sanitary sewer and/or storm sewer or to be connected to existing water
lines connecting to the village water system shall be required to construct all
such sewers and to install all such water lines necessary to serve the
developer’s land at its or their own expense, having received approval of
detailed plans therefore, from the village and any other governmental agencies.
   (d)   All such connections as set forth in division (c) of this section
shall be installed and inspected by appropriate representatives of the village
prior to any and all construction on any building sites which consist of two or
more lots.
   (e)   All such connections set forth in division (c) of this section shall
conform to the statutes and regulations of the State of Ohio and the ordinances
and regulations of the Village of Commercial Point relative to construction and
use of public sewers and connection and use of the public water system.
(Ord. 00-3, passed 11-6-2000)
§ 1044.18 REQUIREMENTS OF NEW CONNECTIONS OUTSIDE VILLAGE LIMITS BY PRIVATE
PROPERTY OWNERS.
   (a)   (1)   A private property owner who is not a developer of any land
outside the municipal corporation limits who is desirous of connecting to the
existing sanitary sewer and/or storm sewer or to be connected to the existing
water lines of the village water system shall, prior to such connection, be
required to sign an agreement with the village under the terms of which the
property owner as well as his or her heirs, executors, administrators,
successors and assigns shall be obligated to consent and agree to sign any and
all petitions, forms, or other documents necessary or in conjunction with
annexation presented to the property owner by representatives of the Village of
Commercial Point and/or any other land owner desirous of causing this property
to be annexed to the municipal corporation limits of the village when it
becomes contiguous to any portion of the municipal corporation limits.
      (2)   Further, the property owner shall include a restriction in any
subsequent transfers of any interest in property to be connected which requires
that the recipient of such conveyance shall also be subject to this requirement
regarding annexing the property to the village at such time as the property
becomes contiguous to the municipal corporation limits.
   (b)   Prior to the connection of any private property outside the municipal
corporation limits to the sanitary sewer and/or storm sewer or to the existing
water lines connected to the village water system, representatives of the
village shall first ensure that the capacity of such sanitary sewer and/or
storm sewer lines or the water lines are sufficient to accommodate the
additional flow increment calculated to be tributary to such sewer and that the
water flow is sufficient to provide appropriate water pressure for ordinary
household purposes for any additional dwelling as a result of such connection.
   (c)   The property owner of any land to be connected to existing sanitary
sewer and/or storm sewer or to be connected to existing water lines connected
to the village water system shall be required to construct all sewers and to
install all such water lines necessary to serve his or her land at his or her
own expense, after having received approval of detailed plans therefore from
the village and any other governmental agencies.
   (d)   All such connections as set forth in division (c) of this section
shall be installed and inspected by representatives of the village prior to
actual connection to the existing sewer or water system of the village.
   (e)   All such connections as set forth in division (c) of this section
shall conform to the statutes and regulations of the State of Ohio and the
ordinances and regulations of the Village of Commercial Point relative to
construction and use of public sewers and connection and use of the public
water system.
(Ord. 00-3, passed 11-6-2000)
§ 1044.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
202.99.
   (b)   Sections 1044.01 through 1044.14. Whoever violates any provision of §§
1044.01 through
1044.14 or village directives pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the
remedies of Section 1.14 Penalty.
(Ord. 2100.05, passed 8-27-1984)
   (c)   Section 1044.15.
      (1)   No person or entity shall make a service connection or any part
thereof to the sanitary sewer system or water system of the Village of
Commercial Point unless the proper tap fee or fees have been paid and a permit
has been issued by the village to make the service connection to the village
sewer or water system.
      (2)   Whoever violates §
1044.15 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
(Ord. 2006-16, passed 10-2-2006; Am. Ord. 2007-42, passed 11-12-2007)
CHAPTER 1046
Water System Use
1046.01   Purpose.
1046.02   Scope.
1046.03   Governing regulations.
1046.04   Definitions.
1046.05   Prohibited use.
1046.06   Protection for accidental contamination or damage.
1046.07   Unauthorized activities.
1046.99   Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to provide and regulate water systems - see Ohio R.C. 715.08, 717.01,
743.01
   Water pollution - see Ohio R.C. 715.08, 743.24
   Compulsory water connections - see Ohio R.C. 729.06, 743.23
§ 1046.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use of the water system owned
and operated by the village.
(Ord. 2100.05, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 1046.02 SCOPE.
   The scope of this chapter is to establish the criteria for the use of the
water system.
(Ord. 2100.05, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 1046.03 GOVERNING REGULATIONS.
   Where there appears to be, or there is in fact, a conflict between this
chapter and Chapter 1, General Provisions, the chapter providing the more
stringent requirement, standard, or procedure shall govern.
(Ord. 2100.05, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 1046.04 DEFINITIONS.
   The definition of Chapter 1 shall be used in this chapter unless the context
of any section of this chapter specifically indicates that such definitions are
not applicable.
(Ord. 2100.05, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 1046.05 PROHIBITED USE.
   No person shall connect any pipe or conduit which directly or indirectly
connects the village water system to:
   (a)   Any pipe or conduit containing, or intended to contain any liquid or
material that would be or could be injurious to the customer’s health or
welfare, injurious to the water system, or contaminate the water provided by
the village;
   (b)   Any private well system or other private source of water, or any
system of liquid conveyance such as sewer drains or tiles;
   (c)   Any pond, lake, pool, or any devices therein, without village approved
backflow protection; or
   (d)   Any system that serves buildings other than the buildings for which
the service was obtained.
(Ord. 2100.05, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 1046.06 PROTECTION FOR ACCIDENTAL CONTAMINATION OR DAMAGE.
   (a)   Each customer of the water system shall protect the portion of the
system on their premises from damage or contamination.
   (b)   Any person in charge of or responsible for a process, use or activity
that causes or produces damage, or adds compounds, elements or materials to the
water, or otherwise contaminates the water in the village water system shall
immediately notify the village.
   (c)   Such notification will not relieve the responsible person of liability
for any consequential expense, loss or damage to the water system, or injury or
disease to person(s) using the water service.
(Ord. 2100.05, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 1046.07 UNAUTHORIZED ACTIVITIES.
   No customer or person shall cause, permit or add any material additives or
compounds to the water provided by the village without obtaining prior village
approval.
(Ord. 2100.05, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 1046.99 PENALTY.
   Missing material.....
(Ord. 2100.05, passed 8-27-1984)
CHAPTER 1048
Backflow; Cross-Connection Control
1048.01   Cross connection control; general facility.
1048.02   Definitions.
1048.03   Water system.
1048.04   Cross-connections prohibited.
1048.05   Survey and investigations.
1048.06   Where protection is required.
1048.07   Type of protection required.
1048.08   Backflow prevention devices.
1048.09   Installation.
1048.10   Inspection and maintenance.
1048.11   Booster pumps.
1048.99   Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
   Compulsory sewer connections - see Ohio R.C. 729.06
   Sewerage rates - see Ohio R.C. 729.49
   Regulations to control house sewers and connections - see Ohio R.C. 729.51
   Interference with sewage flow - see Ohio R.C. 4933.24
§ 1048.01 CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL; GENERAL FACILITY.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is:
      (1)   To protect the public potable water supply from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the consumer’s water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public
potable water system;
      (2)   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-
connections, actual or potential, between the public or consumer’s potable
water system and non-potable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or
systems containing process fluids; and
      (3)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-
connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the
contamination or pollution of the public and consumer’s potable water systems.
   (b)   Application. This chapter shall apply to all premises served by the
public potable water system of the Village of Commercial Point.
   (c)   Policy. 
      (1)   The Superintendent of Water shall be responsible for the protection
of the public potable water system from contamination due to backflow of
contaminants through the water service connection.
      (2)   If, in the judgment of the Superintendent of Water, an approved
backflow prevention device is necessary at the water service connection to any
consumer’s premises for the safety of the water system, the Superintendent of
Water or his or her authorized representative shall give notice to the consumer
to install such approved backflow prevention device at each service connection
to his or her premises.
      (3)   The consumer shall immediately install such approved device or
devices at his or her own expense, and failure, refusal or inability on the
part of the consumer to install such device or devices immediately shall
constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such
device or devices have been installed.
(Ord. 2200.21, passed 2-5-1996)
§ 1048.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR GAP SEPARATION. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water
to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
   APPROVED. That a backflow prevention device or method has been accepted by
the supplier of water and the director as suitable for the proposed use.
   AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM.
      (1)   Any water system on or available to the premises other than the
public water system and includes the water supplied by the system.
      (2)   These auxiliary waters may include water from another supplier’s
public water system; or water from a source such as wells, lakes, or streams;
or process fluids; or used water. They may be polluted or contaminated or
objectionable or constitute a water source or system over which the supplier of
water does not have control.
   BACKFLOW. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into
the distributing pipes of a potable water supply from any source other than the
intended source of the potable water supply.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. Any device, method, or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system.
   CONSUMER. The owner or person in control of any premises supplied by or in
any manner connected to a public water system.
   CONSUMER’S WATER SYSTEM.
      (1)   Any water system, located on the consumer’s premises, supplied by
or in any manner connected to a public water system.
      (2)   A household plumbing system is considered to be a CONSUMER’S WATER
SYSTEM.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water by sewage or
process fluid or waste to a degree which could create an actual hazard to the
public health through poisoning or through spread of disease by exposure.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any arrangement whereby backflow can occur.
   DEGREE OF HAZARD. Is a term derived from an evaluation of the potential risk
to health and the adverse effect upon the potable water system.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency or his or
her duly authorized representative.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of two single,
independently acting, check valves including tightly closing shutoff valves
located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the
water-tightness of each check valve.
   HEALTH HAZARD. 
      (1)   Any condition, device, or practice in a water system or its
operation that creates, or may create, a danger to the health and well-being of
users.
      (2)   The word SEVERE as used to qualify HEALTH HAZARD means a hazard to
the health of the user that could reasonably be expected to result in
significant morbidity or death.
   INTERCHANGEABLE CONNECTION. An arrangement or device that will allow
alternate but not simultaneous use of two sources of water.
   NON-POTABLE WATER. Water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary use.
   PERSON. The state, any political subdivision, public or private corporation,
individual, partnership, or other legal entity.
   POLLUTION. The presence in water of any foreign substance that tends to
degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness or
quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the
public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for
domestic use.
   POLLUTION HAZARD. A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable
or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water system
or a potable consumer’s water system.
   POTABLE WATER. Water which is satisfactory for drinking, culinary, and
domestic purposes and meets the requirements of the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency.
   PROCESS FLUIDS.
      (1)   Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or
otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would
constitute a health, pollutional, or system hazard if introduced into the
public or a potable consumer’s water system.
      (2)   This includes, but is not limited to:
         A.   Polluted or contaminated waters;
         B.   Process waters;
         C.   Used waters originating from the public water system which may
have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
         D.   Cooling waters;
         E.   Contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams, or
irrigation systems;
         F.   Chemicals in solution or suspension; or
         G.   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids
used in industrial or other processes, or for fire fighting purpose.
   PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM. Has the meaning ascribed to such term in Ohio R.C. §§
6109.01 and 6109.02.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE.
      (1)   A device containing a minimum of two independently acting check
valves together with an automatically operated pressure differential relief
valve located between two check valves.
      (2)   During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the
pressure between these two checks shall be less than the supply pressure.
      (3)   In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief
valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure
between the check valves at less than the supply pressure.
      (4)   The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at
each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located
test cocks.
   SERVICE CONNECTION.
      (1)   The terminal end of a service line from the public water system.
      (2)   If a meter is installed at the end of the service, then the SERVICE
CONNECTION means the downstream end of the meter.
   SUPPLIER OF WATER. The owner or operator of a public water system.
   SYSTEM HAZARD. A condition posing an actual or potential threat of damage to
the physical properties of the public water system or a potable consumer’s
water system.
   USED WATER. Any water supplied by a supplier of water from a public water
system to a consumer’s water system after it has passed through the service
connection and is no longer under the control of the supplier.
(Ord. 2200.21, passed 2-5-1996)
§ 1048.03 WATER SYSTEM.
   (a)   The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts:
      (1)   The public potable water system; and
      (2)   The consumer’s water system.
   (b)   The public potable water system shall consist of the source facilities
and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the
potable water system under the control of the Superintendent of Water up to the
point where the consumer’s water system begins.
   (c)   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in
the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the public
distribution system.
   (d)   The public distribution system shall include the network of conduits
used for delivery of water from the source to the consumer’s water system.
   (e)   The consumer’s water system shall include those parts of the
facilities beyond the service connection which are utilized in conveying water
from the public distribution system to points of use.
(Ord. 2200.21, passed 2-5-1996)
§ 1048.04 CROSS-CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any
premises where actual or potential cross-connections to the public potable or
consumer’s water system may exist unless such actual or potential cross-
connections are abated or controlled to the satisfaction of the Superintendent
of Water.
   (b)   No connection shall be installed or maintained whereby water from an
auxiliary water system may enter a public potable or consumer’s water system
unless such auxiliary water system and the method of connection and use of such
system shall have been approved by the Superintendent of Water and by the
Director of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency as required by Ohio R.C. §
6109.13.
(Ord. 2200.21, passed 2-5-1996)
§ 1048.05 SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (a)   The consumer’s premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
Superintendent of Water, or his or her authorized representative, for the
conduction of surveys and investigations of water use practices within the
consumer’s premises to determine whether there are actual or potential cross-
connections to the consumer’s water system through which contaminants or
pollutants could backflow into the public potable water system.
   (b)   On request by the Superintendent of Water, or his or her authorized
representative, the consumer shall furnish information on water use practices
within his or her premises.
   (c)   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to conduct
periodic surveys of water use practices on his or her premises to determine
whether there are actual or potential cross-connections in his or her water
system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or the
public potable water system.
(Ord. 2200.21, passed 2-5-1996)
§ 1048.06 WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED.
   (a)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system serving premises, where in the
judgment of the Superintendent of Water or the Director, actual or potential
hazards to the public potable water system exist.
   (b)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system serving premises where the following
conditions exist:
      (1)   Premises having an auxiliary water system, unless such auxiliary
system is accepted as an additional source by the Superintendent of Water and
the source is approved by the Director of the Ohio Environmental Protection
Agency;
      (2)   A.   Premises on which any substance is handled in such a fashion
as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public potable water system.
         B.   This shall include premises having sources or systems containing
process fluids or waters originating from the public potable water system which
is no longer under the sanitary control of the Superintendent of Water;
      (3)   Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of
the Superintendent of Water, are not correctable, or intricate plumbing
arrangements which make it impractical to determine whether or not cross-
connections exist;
      (4)   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
completion cross-connection survey;
      (5)   Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or reestablished; and
      (6)   Others specified by the Superintendent of Water or the Director.
   (c)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system serving, but not necessarily limited
to, the following types of facilities unless the Superintendent of Water or the
Director determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public potable
water system exists:
      (1)   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes;
      (2)   Laboratories;
      (3)   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities;
      (4)   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water
pumping stations;
      (5)   Food or beverage processing plants;
      (6)   Chemical plants;
      (7)   Metal plating industries;
      (8)   Petroleum processing or storage plants;
      (9)   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors;
      (10)   Car washes; and
      (11)   Others specified by the Superintendent of Water or the Director.
   (d)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed at any point
of connection between the public potable or consumer’s water system and an
auxiliary water system, unless such auxiliary system is accepted as an
additional source by the Superintendent of Water and the source is approved by
the Director of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency.
(Ord. 2200.21, passed 2-5-1996)
§ 1048.07 TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED.
   (a)   The type of protection required under §§
1048.06(a), (b) and (c) of these regulations shall depend on the degree of
hazard which exists as follows:
      (1)   An approved air gap separation shall be installed where the public
potable water system may be contaminated with substances that could cause a
severe health hazard;
      (2)   An approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the public
potable water system may be contaminated with any substance that could cause a
system or health hazard; and
      (3)   An approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device or an approved double check valve assembly
shall be installed where the public potable water system may be polluted with
substances that could cause a pollutional hazard not dangerous to health.
   (b)   The type of protection required under §
1048.06(d) of these regulations shall be an approved air gap separation or an
approved interchangeable connection.
   (c)   Where an auxiliary water system is used as a secondary source of water
for a fire protection system, the provisions of division (b) above for an
approved air gap separation or an approved interchangeable connection may not
be required, provided:
      (1)   At premises where the auxiliary water system may be contaminated
with substances that could cause a system or health hazard, the public or
consumer’s potable water system shall be protected against backflow by
installation of an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
device;
      (2)   At all other premises, the public or consumer’s potable water
system shall be protected against backflow by installation of either an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device or an approved
double check valve assembly;
      (3)   The public or consumer’s potable water system shall be the primary
source of water for the fire protection system;
      (4)   The fire protection system shall be normally filled with water from
the public or consumer’s potable water system;
      (5)   The water in the fire protection system shall be used for fire
protection only, with no regular use of water from the fire protection system
downstream from the approved backflow prevention device; or
      (6)   The water in the fire protection system shall contain no additives.
(Ord. 2200.21, passed 2-5-1996)
§ 1048.08 BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (a)   Any backflow prevention device required by these rules and regulations
shall be of a model or construction approved by the Superintendent of Water and
the Director and shall comply with the following.
      (1)   An air gap separation, to be approved, shall be at least twice the
diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically above the top rim of the
vessel, but in no case less than one inch.
      (2)   A double check valve assembly or a reduced pressure principle
backflow prevention device shall be approved by the Superintendent of Water,
and shall appear on the current list of approved backflow prevention devices of
the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency.
      (3)   A.   An interchangeable connection, to be approved, shall be either
a swing type connector or a four-way valve of the lubricated plug type that
operates through a mechanism which unseats the plug, turns it 90 degrees and
reseats the plug.
         B.   Four-way valves shall not be used as stop valves but must have
separate stop valves on each pipe connected to the valve.
         C.   The telltale port on the four-way valve shall have no piping
connected and the threads or flange on this port shall be destroyed so that a
connection cannot be made.
   (b)   (1)   Existing backflow prevention devices approved by the
Superintendent of Water or the Director of the Ohio Environmental Protection
Agency at the time of installation and properly maintained shall, except for
inspection, testing and maintenance requirements, be excluded from the
requirement of division (a) above of this regulation providing the
Superintendent of Water is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the
public potable water system.
      (2)   Whenever the existing device is moved from the present location or
requires more than minimum maintenance or when the Superintendent of Water
finds that the maintenance of the device constitutes a hazard to health, the
device shall be replaced by a backflow prevention device meeting the
requirements of these regulations.
(Ord. 2200.21, passed 2-5-1996)
§ 1048.09 INSTALLATION.
   (a)   (1)   Backflow prevention devices required by these rules and
regulations shall be installed at a location and in a manner approved by and at
the expense of the water consumer.
      (2)   In addition, any backflow prevention device required by §
1048.07(b) and (c) of these regulations shall be installed at a location and in
a manner approved by the Director of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency
as required by Ohio R.C. § 6109.13 of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (b)   Backflow prevention devices installed on the service line to a
consumer’s water system shall be located on the consumer’s side of the water
meter, as close to the meter as is reasonably practical, and prior to any other
connection.
   (c)   (1)   Pits or vaults shall be of water-tight construction, be so
located and constructed as to prevent flooding and shall be maintained free
from standing water by means of either a sump and pump or a suitable drain.
      (2)   Such sump pump or drain shall not connect to a sanitary sewer nor
permit flooding of the pit or vault by reverse flow for its point of discharge.
      (3)   An access ladder and adequate natural or artificial lighting shall
be provided to permit maintenance, inspection and testing of the backflow
prevention device.
   (d)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices must be
installed above ground level or floor level, whichever is higher.
(Ord. 2200.21, passed 2-5-1996)
§ 1048.10 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to have
inspections, tests, and overhauls made in accordance with the following
schedule, or more often where inspections indicate a need:
      (1)   Air gap separations shall be inspected at the time of installation
and at least every 12 months thereafter;
      (2)   A.   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested
for tightness at the time of installation and at least every 12 months
thereafter.
         B.   They shall be dismantled, inspected internally, cleaned and
repaired whenever needed and at least every 30 months;
      (3)   A.   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall
be inspected and tested for tightness at the time of installation and at least
every 12 months thereafter.
         B.   They shall be dismantled, inspected internally, cleaned and
repaired whenever needed and at least every five years; and
      (4)   Interchangeable connections shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least every 12 months thereafter.
   (b)   Inspections, tests, and overhauls of backflow prevention devices shall
be made at the expense of the water consumer and shall be performed by the
Superintendent of Water or a person approved by the Superintendent of Water as
qualified to inspect, test and overhaul backflow prevention devices.
   (c)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the
expense of the consumer without delay.
   (d)   (1)   The water consumer must maintain a complete record of each
backflow prevention device from purchase to retirement.
      (2)   This shall include a comprehensive listing that includes a record
of all tests, inspections, repairs and overhauls.
      (3)   Records of inspections, tests, repairs and overhaul shall be
submitted to the Superintendent of Water.
   (e)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
Superintendent of Water.
(Ord. 2200.21, passed 2-5-1996)
§ 1048.11 BOOSTER PUMPS.
   (a)   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off
device designed to shut-off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to ten pounds per square inch gauge
or less.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low
pressure cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the
Superintendent of Water, at least once a year, that the device is operating
properly.
(Ord. 2200.21, passed 2-5-1996)
§ 1048.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   The Superintendent of Water shall deny or discontinue, after
reasonable notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises
wherein any backflow prevention device required by these regulations is not
installed, tested and maintained in a manner acceptable to the Superintendent
of Water, or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has been
removed or by-passed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the
premises, or if a low pressure cut-off required by these regulations is not
installed and maintained in working order.
   (b)   Water services to such premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Water.
(Ord. 2200.21, passed 2-5-1996)
CHAPTER 1050
Property Owners
1050.01   Upon annexation.
1050.02   Water and sewer service provided to properties located outside the
municipal corporation boundaries.
CROSS REFERENCES
   Compulsory sewer connections - see Ohio R.C. 729.06
   Sewerage rates - see Ohio R.C. 729.49
   Regulations to control house sewers and connections - see Ohio R.C. 729.51
   Interference with sewage flow - see Ohio R.C. 4933.24
§ 1050.01 UPON ANNEXATION.
   Upon annexation to the village, or upon connection to the village sewer and
water systems, any property owner located on the boundary of existing water or
sewer lines is hereby required to extend such lines along the front perimeter
of the property at the owner’s expense.
(Ord. 2005-25, passed 12-5-2005)
§ 1050.02 WATER AND SEWER SERVICE PROVIDED TO PROPERTIES LOCATED OUTSIDE THE
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION BOUNDARIES.
   (a)   The sanitary sewer rates as set forth in previous sections of these
regulations which established the current rate schedule for users of the
sanitary sewerage system of the village is hereby amended and there is hereby
charged to each such user situated outside of the municipal corporation limits
of the Village of Commercial Point having an active sewer connection with the
sewerage system of the village or otherwise discharging sewage, industrial
wastes, water or other liquids, either directly or indirectly, into the village
sewerage system, a 35% surcharge which shall be in excess of and in addition to
the amounts set forth on the schedule of sanitary sewer rates for such services
provided to users of the sewerage system within the village corporation limits.
   (b)   The water rates as set forth in previous sections of these regulations
which established the current rate schedule for users of the water system of
the village is hereby amended and there is hereby charged to each such user of
water situated outside the municipal corporation limits of the Village of
Commercial Point having an active connection with the water system of the
village a 35% surcharge which shall be in excess of and in addition to the
amount set forth on the schedule of water rates for such
services provided for users of water within the village corporation limits.
   (c)   This additional 35% surcharge to the sanitary sewer rate schedules and
water rate schedules of the village for users of the sanitary sewerage system
and water system situated outside the municipal corporation limits shall be
placed in effect and shall apply to all meter readings occurring on or after
November 7, 1994.
(Ord. 2208, passed 11-7-1994)
CHAPTER 1052
Meters
1052.01   Eliminating the use of master meters.
1052.02   Procedures for the inspection, testing and repair of water meters.
1052.03   Irrigation water meters authorized for commercial and industrial
properties.
CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to provide and regulate water systems - see Ohio R.C. 715.08, 717.01,
743.01
   Water pollution - see Ohio R.C. 715.08, 743.24
   Compulsory water connections - see Ohio R.C. 729.06, 743.23
§ 1052.01 ELIMINATING THE USE OF MASTER METERS.
   (a)   The use of master meters for collection of water and sewer rents for
new residential units located in the village service area is hereby eliminated.
   (b)   All residents of new residential units located in the village service
area, including single family units, two family units, low density apartment
units and mobile home residential units under §§ 1262.02, 1262.03, 1262.04, and
1262.05, respectively, of the Zoning Code of the village, are hereby required
to purchase sewer and water taps with individual meters.
(Ord. 2005-24, passed 12-5-2005)
§ 1052.02 PROCEDURES FOR THE INSPECTION, TESTING AND REPAIR OF WATER METERS.
   (a)   Upon written request of an owner or consumer who feels that the water
meter serving his or her property is inaccurate, an employee of the village
water works system shall remove the meter for proper testing to determine its
accuracy.
   (b)   If, upon examination and testing, it is found that the meter so tested
is determined to have an error in registration in excess of ten percent of its
normal rated capacity, then the meter shall be repaired to register correctly,
and a proper reduction shall be made on the water bill of such consumer.
   (c)   If, upon examination and testing, it is found that the meter registers
within 10% of its normal rated capacity, then no adjustment will be made to the
consumer billing and the consumer shall be charged for the cost of the meter
test.
   (d)   Prior to the testing of any meters at the consumer’s request, a charge
of forty-five dollars ($45.00) shall be paid by the consumer in advance of the
test to be applied to the costs associated with the meter testing.
   (e)   In the event that the meter so tested is found to have an error in
registration in excess of 10% of its normal rated capacity, then this charge
shall be refunded and any disputed bill shall be corrected accordingly.
(Ord. 02-15, passed - -2002)
§ 1052.03 IRRIGATION WATER METERS AUTHORIZED FOR COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL
PROPERTIES.
   (a)   Irrigation water meter defined. An IRRIGATION WATER METER is hereby
defined as a water meter that measures water used to irrigate natural
landscaping such as grass, plants, trees, and other vegetation.
   (b)   The following conditions apply to the installation and operation of
irrigation water meters:
      (1)   Irrigation water meters shall be available to property owners
within the following zoning districts only:
         A.   Neighborhood Commercial District (NC) under
Chapter 1165 of the Zoning Code;
         B.   General Commercial District (GC) under
Chapter 1167 of the Zoning Code;
         C.   Suburban Office District (SC) under
Chapter 1169 of the Zoning Code;
         D.   Limited Manufacturing District (LM) under
Chapter 1171 of the Zoning Code;
         E.   Planned Commercial District (PCD) under §
1173.02(b) of the Zoning Code;
         F.   Planned Industrial District (PID) under §
1173.02(c) of the Zoning Code; and
         G.   Planned Unit Districts (PUD) under §
1173.02(d)(2) of the Zoning Code.
      (2)   Irrigation water meters shall be a maximum size of one inch in
diameter;
      (3)   There shall be no sanitary sewer charge associated with irrigation
water meters;
      (4)   There shall be no minimum monthly payment associated with
irrigation water meters;
      (5)   The water fee for irrigation water meters shall be the same as the
inside village water rate in effect per gallon of water usage;
      (6)   Irrigation water meters shall be installed per village
specifications;
      (7)   Irrigation water meters shall be purchased from the village; and
      (8)   Irrigation water meters shall be installed by village personnel.
   (c)   In addition to the conditions described in division (b) of this
section, irrigation water meters shall be available only to commercial and
industrial properties and shall not be available to residential properties.
(Ord. 2021-19, passed 6-21-2021)
CHAPTER 1054
Dry Water Taps and Sewer Taps
1054.01   General provisions.
CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to provide and regulate water systems - see Ohio R.C. 715.08, 717.01,
743.01
   Water pollution - see Ohio R.C. 715.08, 743.24
   Compulsory water connections - see Ohio R.C. 729.06, 743.23
§ 1054.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   (1)   Any person who has acquired or purchased a water or sewer tap
from the Village of Commercial Point after the effective date of this section,
and who does not put such tap into use or service by connecting the tap to the
public utility systems of the village within two years after paying for the
tap, shall pay the minimum monthly service charge for each such tap as
established by the ordinances of the village.
      (2)   Upon expiration of the two year period, the village shall begin
sending the monthly water or sewer bill to any person who has not connected the
tap to a village utility system.
   (b)   (1)   Within 30 days after receiving the first bill from the village
for a tap which has not been placed into service or use as set forth in
division (a) above of this chapter, the property owner may elect to forfeit the
tap and the tap fee previously paid instead of paying the minimum monthly
service charge for such tap.
      (2)   In order to make this election, the property owner shall notify the
village in writing that the tap is to be forfeited within the 30-day period set
forth in this division.
   (c)   This section shall not apply to any sewer or water tap which is
governed by a contract or agreement entered into by the village for multiple
taps for a proposed subdivision or other development or with any political
subdivision.
(Ord. 4-92.4, passed 6-1-1992)
CHAPTER 1056
Water Availability During Emergencies
1056.01   Authority to declare emergency
1056.02   Watering restrictions and regulations.
1056.03   Violations of regulations prohibited.
1056.04   Disconnection of service for violation.
1056.99   Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to provide and regulate water systems - see Ohio R.C. 715.08, 717.01,
743.01
§ 1056.01 AUTHORITY TO DECLARE EMERGENCY.
   (a)   The Mayor and/or Village Administrator are hereby authorized to
declare that a state of water availability emergency exists when, from time to
time, the Mayor and/or Village Administrator reasonably determines that there
is a shortage of water in or available to the village’s water service system
such that certain restrictions on the use of water from such system during such
time are reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare
of the inhabitants of the village and the water system service consumers.
   (b)   Examples of situations which create such an emergency include, but are
not limited to, the following:
      (1)   A water main break;
      (2)   Any physical or mechanical failure at the water treatment plant;
      (3)   Dry or drought conditions; or
      (4) Restriction of water supply by state or federal authorities.
(Ord. 02-14, passed 9-9-2002)
§ 1056.02 WATERING RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   (1)   The Mayor and/or Village Administrator are hereby authorized to
prescribe such regulations, limitations and prohibitions of water use from the
village’s water service system during a state of water availability emergency
as the Mayor determines and/or Village Administrator are
reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the village and the water system users.
      (2)   Such regulations limitations and prohibitions may be changed and
modified by the Mayor and/or Village Administrator from time to time during
such state of water availability emergency as the Mayor and/or Village
Administrator determine to be necessary and prudent.
   (b)   During a water emergency, non-essential uses of water including, but
not limited to, the following may be restricted, regulated or otherwise
prohibited as provided in this chapter:
      (1)   Watering or sprinkling of any lawn, tree, shrub, flower, garden or
part hereof, or for any similar purpose;
      (2)   The commercial and residential use of water to wash boats, cars,
trucks and other vehicles;
      (3)   Filling swimming pools;
      (4)   Watering from hydrants;
      (5)   Washing sidewalks, driveways, porches and building exteriors;
      (6)   The sterilization, blow-off and testing of water lines and sewer
mains; or
      (7)   The burning of paper, trash, wood, or other combustible materials.
   (c)   The Mayor and/or Village Administrator, in exercise of his or her
reasonable discretion, may provide special consideration, including exemption
for the following business related uses and purposes:
      (1)   Commercial car wash;
      (2)   Sod farms; and
      (3)   Commercial lawn and garden centers.
   (d)   (1)   Upon declaration of and during the existence of a water
emergency, the Mayor and/or Village Administrator is hereby authorized and
directed to determine which non-essential uses of water shall be restricted or
prohibited.
      (2)   Such declaration shall be made public by publication thereof in a
newspaper of general circulation in the village, by posting notice at the
municipal building and by giving notice to local media.
(Ord. 02-14, passed 9-9-2002)
§ 1056.03 VIOLATIONS OF REGULATIONS PROHIBITED.
   During the period of water availability emergency declared by the Mayor and/
or Village Administrator, no person, corporation, partnership, association or
other legal entity shall use water supplied from the village’s water service
system for any purpose in violation of or contrary to regulations, limitations
or prohibitions of water use as are promulgated by the Mayor and/or Village
Administrator pursuant to §
1056.02.
(Ord. 02-14, passed 9-9-2002)
§ 1056.04 DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE FOR VIOLATION.
   (a)   In addition to any fine and incarceration which may be imposed, upon a
finding that water from the village’s water service system has been used in
willful violation of §
1056.03, with the knowledge and consent of the owner or lessee of the property
from which the water is used, the court may order termination of water service
from the village’s water service system to the property where the violation is
found to have occurred for such time as the court determines, but not to exceed
the period of the water availability emergency.
   (b)   If service is terminated pursuant to order of the court, it shall not
be reconnected or restored until application for reconnection, accompanied with
the reconnection fee, by the property owner or his or her agent is made to the
Water Department as with all other reconnections of water service.
(Ord. 02-14, passed 9-9-2002)
§ 1056.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Each person, corporation, partnership, association or legal entity
found to be in violation of a first offense of §
1056.03 shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
   (b)   A second offense in violation of §
1056.03 during the state of water availability emergency shall constitute a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (c)   A third or any subsequent offense in violation of §
1056.03 during the state of water availability emergency shall constitute a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. 02-14, passed 9-9-2002)
   TITLE SIX - Other Public Services
               
Chap. 1080. Solid Waste.
               
Chap. 1082. Street Lighting.
CHAPTER 1080
Solid Waste
1080.01   Rates and fees.
1080.02   Solid waste management plan of the Ross, Pickaway, Highland and
Fayette Joint Solid Waste Management District.
CROSS REFERENCES
   Collection and disposal of garbage and rubbish - see Ohio R.C. 715.43,
717.01
   Employment of scavengers - see Ohio R.C. 3707.39
   Littering - see TRAF. 432.42; GEN. OFF. 660.03
   Filthy accumulations - see GEN. OFF. 660.04
   Open burning - see GEN. OFF. 660.08
§ 1080.01 RATES AND FEES.
   (a)   Rates.
      (1)   Effective January 1, 2007 through December 31, 2007 the service
charges to be charged residential customers shall be ten dollars and 50 cents
($10.50) per month, with the exception of senior citizens.
      (2)   Effective January 1, 2007 through December 31, 2007 the senior
citizen rate to be charged residential customers shall be ten dollars ($10.00)
per month.
   (b)   Solid Waste Collection Fund.
      (1)   A.   There shall be, and hereby is, charged to each subscriber
household being provided with collection and disposal services for residential
solid waste within the Village of Commercial Point, Pickaway County, Ohio, a
monthly service charge equal to the rate which the company awarded the
exclusive franchise charges to the village for each household using such
collection and disposal services.
         B.   In addition to the above monthly service charge, there shall also
be assessed to each subscriber household being provided with collection and
disposal services for residential solid waste, a fee of one dollar ($1.00) per
month to cover the cost incurred by the village in administering the billing
and collection of such accounts and for the cost of street and alley repair
associated with providing these services.
         C.   1.   The monthly service charges together with the
administrative/street repair costs shall be included on each subscriber
household’s monthly water and sewage bill and shall be payable under the same
terms and conditions as the current water and sewage billing.
            2.   Further, collection and disposal services may be suspended and
reinstated under the same terms and conditions as are applied to the collection
of water and sewer charges.
      (2)   A.   There is hereby established a separate fund designated as the
Solid Waste Collection Fund to be used for the deposit of all funds received
from the collection of rates and charges for residential solid waste including
the administrative/street repair costs.
         B.   This fund shall be used solely for payment of any charges to the
village by the company awarded the exclusive franchise for the collection and
disposal of residential solid waste, any costs to the village to administer the
billing and collection of residential solid waste accounts and any costs for
the maintenance, repair and replacement of any streets associated with
providing these collection and disposal services to the citizens of the
village.
      (3)   The rates and charges for the collection and disposal services for
residential solid waste as set forth in this division including any
administrative/street repair costs shall be placed in effect and shall apply to
all subscriber households of these services occurring on or after April 1,
1999.
(Ord. 11-89.1, passed 11-6-1989; Am. Ord. 99-1, passed 3-1-1999; Am. Ord. 04-
27, passed 11-15-2004; Am. Ord. 2005-29, passed 12-5-2005; Am. Ord. 2006-27,
passed 12-4-2006)
§ 1080.02 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN OF THE ROSS, PICKAWAY, HIGHLAND AND
FAYETTE JOINT SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT DISTRICT.
   (a)   The Board of Directors (Board) of the Ross, Pickaway, Highland,
Fayette Joint Solid Waste Management District (District) has established and
convened a Solid Waste Management Policy Committee in accordance with Ohio R.C.
§ 3734.54 (Policy Committee) to prepare a Solid Waste Management Plan for the
District as required by Ohio R.C. § 3734.54 (Plan) and all revisions of the
Plan pursuant to Ohio R.C. §§ 3734.54 and 3734.56.
   (b)   The Policy Committee is authorized by Ohio R.C. § 3734.573(A) to levy
a fee on the generation of solid wastes within the District for the purposes
provided in Ohio R.C. § 3734.573(A).
   (c)   The Policy Committee has adopted and submitted to this Council a
resolution adopting a proposed generation fee on the generation of solid wastes
within the District.
   (d)   The Council is required by Ohio R.C. § 3734.57 to approve or
disapprove the proposed generation fee and has been requested to approve that
fee.
   (e)   The proposed generation fee adopted by the Policy Committee to be
levied under Ohio R.C. § 3734.573(A) upon the generation of solid wastes within
the District is hereby approved.
   (f)   The Council finds and determines that all formal actions of this
Council concerning and relating to the passage of this section were taken in an
open meeting of this Council and that all deliberations of this Council and of
any committees that resulted in those formal actions were in meetings open to
the public in compliance with the law.
(Ord. 3-92-3, passed 3-2-1992; Am. Ord. 2207, passed 7-11-1994; Am. Ord.
2200.15, passed 8-7-1995; Am. Ord. 98-4, passed 10-12-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-28,
passed 12-5-2005)
CHAPTER 1082
Street Lighting
1082.01   Purpose.
1082.02   Location.
1082.03   New poles.
1082.04   Paid from street lighting funds.
CROSS REFERENCES
   City consent for electrical fixtures and lines on public property - see Ohio
R.C. 715.27, 4933.03, 4933.13, 4933.16
   Power to regulate electric rates - see Ohio R.C. 743.26, 743.28, 4909.34 et
seq.
   Contract for electricity - see Ohio R.C. 743.38, 4933.04
   Electric companies - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4933
§ 1082.01 PURPOSE.
   The Council of the village for the safety and well-being of the village
shall increase the street lighting.
(Ord. 1-8-70, passed 8-3-1970; Am. Ord. 11-2-71, passed 11-15-1971; Am. Ord.
11-3-71, passed 11-15-1971; Am. Ord. 5-11-72, passed 11-6-1972)
§ 1082.02 LOCATION.
Number of Lights Location
Number of Lights Location
One light        South Street on West Street intersection
One light        North Street on West Street intersection
                 At the cross of two unnamed alleys, one alley running north
One light        from Scioto Street to Assyrian Street: other alley running
                 east from Belshazzer Street to Cyrus Street
One light        Brown Street erected halfway between Front Street on East and
                 Main Street West
Three lights     Scioto Street erected between the corporation limits to the
                 west and the school property to the east
One light        First Street on Harsh Alley intersection
One light        Second Street on Harsh Alley intersection
One light        On Harsh Alley erected halfway between First Street on the
                 east and Second Street on the west
One light        Third Street on Harsh Alley intersection
One light        Harsh Alley erected halfway between Second Street on the east
                 and Third Street on the west
 
(Ord. 1-8-70, passed 8-3-1970; Am. Ord. 11-2-71, passed 11-15-1971; Am. Ord.
11-3-71, passed 11-15-1971; Am. Ord. 5-11-72, passed 11-6-1972)
§ 1082.03 NEW POLES.
   All addition lights shall be erected on new poles.
(Ord. 1-8-70, passed 8-3-1970; Am. Ord. 11-2-71, passed 11-15-1971; Am. Ord.
11-3-71, passed 11-15-1971; Am. Ord. 5-11-72, passed 11-6-1972)
§ 1082.04 PAID FROM STREET LIGHTING FUNDS.
   Increased costs shall be paid from existing street lighting funds.
(Ord. 1-8-70, passed 8-3-1970; Am. Ord. 11-2-71, passed 11-15-1971; Am. Ord.
11-3-71, passed 11-15-1971; Am. Ord. 5-11-72, passed 11-6-1972)
PART ELEVEN: PLANNING AND ZONING CODE
   TITLE ONE - Subdivision Regulations
         
Chap. 1101.   General Provisions.
         
Chap. 1103.   Definitions.
         
Chap. 1105.   Administration, Enforcement and Penalty.
         
Chap. 1107.   Boundary Line Adjustment and Minor Subdivisions.
         
Chap. 1109.   Subdivision Application Procedure and Appeal Process.
         
Chap. 1111.   Amendments.
         
Chap. 1113.   Preliminary Plan and Final Plat Requirements.
         
Chap. 1115.   Required Improvements.
         
Chap. 1117.   Bonds, Insurance, Fees and Inspection Process.
         
Chap. 1130.   Planning and Zoning Residential Standards.
         
Appendix A.   Final Plat Wording.
         
Appendix B.   Subdivider's Agreement.
      TITLE THREE - Zoning Administration
         
Chap. 1131.   General Provisions.
         
Chap. 1133.   Definitions.
         
Chap. 1135.   Administration, Enforcement and Penalty.
         
Chap. 1137.   Planning and Zoning Administrator.
         
Chap. 1139.   (Reserved)
         
Chap. 1141.   Site Development Plans.
         
Chap. 1143.   Amendments.
         
Chap. 1145.   Conditional Uses.
         
Chap. 1147.   Variances.
         
Chap. 1149.   Nonconforming Lots, Uses and Structures.
      TITLE FIVE - Zoning Districts
         
Chap. 1151.   Districts Established.
         
Chap. 1153.   General Zoning Regulations.
         
Chap. 1155.   Limited Density Residential District. (R-1)
         
Chap. 1157.   Low Density Residential District. (R-3)
         
Chap. 1159.   Optional Traditional Neighborhood Development Floating District.
(TND)
         
Chap. 1161.   Old Town Zoning Districts.
         
Chap. 1163.   Multi-Family Residential Districts.
         
Chap. 1165.   Neighborhood Commercial District. (NC)
         
Chap. 1167.   General Commercial District. (GC)
         
Chap. 1169.   Suburban Office and Institution Districts. (SO)
         
Chap. 1171.   Limited Manufacturing District. (LM)
         
Chap. 1173.   Planned Districts. (PRD, PCD, PID, PUD and PCND)
         
Chap. 1175.   Overlay Districts. (LC, LR, S-1 and S-2)
         
Chap. 1177.   Floodplain District. (FP)
         
Chap. 1179.   Exceptional Use District. (EU)
      TITLE SEVEN - Supplemental Zoning Regulations
         
Chap. 1181.   Special Provisions. (with amendment deleting § 1181.06)
         
Chap. 1183.   Height, Area and Yard Modifications.
         
Chap. 1185.   Off-Street Parking and Loading.
         
Chap. 1187.   Home Occupations.
         
Chap. 1189.   Signs.
         
Chap. 1191.   Landscaping and Screening.
         
Chap. 1193.   Wireless Communication Facilities.
         
Chap. 1195.   Accessory Uses and Structures.
         
Chap. 1197.   Right-of-Way Use.
         
Chap. 1199.   Commercial Development Standards.
      APPENDICES
         
Appendix A   Zoning Map
         
Appendix B   Text Amendments
         
Appendix C   Standard Drawings
TITLE ONE - Subdivision Regulations
               
Chap. 1101.   General Provisions.
               
Chap. 1103.   Definitions.
               
Chap. 1105.   Administration, Enforcement and Penalty.
               
Chap. 1107.   Boundary Line Adjustment and Minor Subdivisions.
               
Chap. 1109.   Subdivision Application Procedure and Appeal Process.
               
Chap. 1111.   Amendments.
               
Chap. 1113.   Preliminary Plan and Final Plat Requirements.
               
Chap. 1115.   Required Improvements.
               
Chap. 1117.   Bonds, Insurance, Fees and Inspection Process.
               
Chap. 1130.   Planning and Zoning Residential Standards.
               
Appendix A.   Final Plat Wording.
               
Appendix B.   Subdivider's Agreement.
CHAPTER 1101
General Provisions
1101.01   Title.
1101.02   Authority.
1101.03   Jurisdiction.
1101.04   Effective date.
1101.05   Purpose and intent.
1101.06   Relationship to existing subdivision regulations.
1101.07   Relationship to comprehensive planning.
1101.08   Severability.
1101.09   Platting required.
1101.10   Interpretation and conflicting ordinances.
1101.11   Council authority over planning and zoning.
1101.12   General notes defined.
§ 1101.01 TITLE.
   (a)   Title One of this Part Eleven - Planning and Zoning Code shall be
known and may be designated and cited as "The Village of Commercial Point,
Ohio, Subdivision Regulations", and heretofore may be referred to as the
Subdivision Regulations.
   (b)   Unless otherwise provided herein or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this Title One as those governing the interpretation of the
Ohio Revised Code.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1101.02 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in R.C. Chapter
711 and 713.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1101.03 JURISDICTION.
   This chapter shall be applicable throughout the municipality's planning
jurisdiction, which comprises the area within the corporate boundaries of the
Village of Commercial Point, Ohio and to all subdivisions that are subject to
extraterritorial jurisdiction, which the municipality may choose to exercise
under the provision of R.C. § 711.09.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1101.04 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The provisions of these Subdivision Regulations and the referenced 2018
Construction Specifications, Materials, and Standard Drawings are adopted by
this chapter and become effective on June 15, 2020.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1101.05 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (a)   The purpose of this Title One is to establish subdivision standards
and procedures for Commercial Point, Ohio.
   (b)   This Title One is to guide and facilitate the orderly, beneficial
growth of the community by assuring the orderly subdivision of land and its
development, and to promote the public health, safety, convenience, comfort,
prosperity and general welfare.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1101.06 RELATIONSHIP TO EXISTING SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.
   These Subdivision Regulations are adopted in whole and are a replacement of
the Subdivision Regulations of Commercial Point effective February 2, 1988
(Ord. 2100.01C, passed 11-2-1987; Am. Ord. 98-1, passed 3-3-1998) and 6/3/2004
and as codified by Ordinance 2008-14 adopted 12/1/2008, and as codified by
Ordinance 2018-02 adopted 8/6/2018 and effective September 6, 2018.
Implementation of this zoning code is not intended to be onerous.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1101.07 RELATIONSHIP TO COMPREHENSIVE PLANNING.
   It is the intention of Council that this chapter shall implement the
subdivision policies adopted by Council for Commercial Point, as reflected in a
comprehensive land-use plan adopted May 2, 2011 and all amendments thereto, and
all other planning documents formally adopted by Council. While the Council
reaffirms its commitment that this Title One and any amendment to it be in
conformity with adopted planning policies, the Council hereby expresses its
intent that neither this Title One nor any amendment to it may be challenged on
the basis of any alleged nonconformity with any planning document.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1101.08 SEVERABILITY.
   Each chapter, section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or other
divisible part of the Subdivision Regulations is hereby declared to be
severable and if any such chapter, section, paragraph, sentence, clause,
phrase, or other divisible part is declared unconstitutional or otherwise
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction in a valid judgment or decree,
such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining
chapters, sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases, or other devisable
part of these regulations since the same would have been enacted without the
incorporation into these regulations of such unconstitutional or invalid
chapter, section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or other devisable part.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1101.09 PLATTING REQUIRED.
   (a)   No land shall be subdivided within the corporate boundaries of the
municipality except in compliance with these Subdivision Regulations and the
Zoning Code.
   (b)   No certificate of zoning compliance or certificate of occupancy shall
be issued for any parcel or plat of land which was created by subdivision after
the effective date of, and not in conformity with, the provisions of this
chapter, and no excavation of land or construction of any public or private
improvements shall take place or be commenced except in conformity with these
regulations and other applicable municipal codes.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1101.10 INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.
   In the interpretation and application, the provisions of these Subdivision
Regulations shall be held to be minimum requirements. It is not intended by
these Subdivision Regulations to interfere with, or abrogate, or annul any
easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties unless they violate
these Subdivision Regulations. When specific provisions of these Subdivision
Regulations conflict with any other lawfully adopted regulations, ordinances,
or resolutions, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standard shall
apply and thereby supersede the less strict requirement(s). It is the intent of
these Subdivision Regulations that all questions of interpretation,
administration and enforcement shall be presented to the Planning and Zoning
Administrator. Decisions of the Planning and Zoning Administrator may be
appealed in accordance with §
1105.08.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1101.11 COUNCIL AUTHORITY OVER PLANNING AND ZONING.
   The Council of the Village of Commercial Point shall have full authority
over all planning and zoning decisions within the Village. It is the intent of
the Council, as the legislative authority for the Village, to retain all
decision-making authority over planning and zoning matters granted to the
Council under R.C. Chapter 7 and not to delegate any such authority to any
subordinate commission, board, or panel. Except as otherwise required by law,
all ordinances and resolutions relating to planning and zoning matters may be
passed by a vote of a majority of all of the members of the Council.
   (a)   Duties. The duties of Council include, but are not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is in error in
any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Planning and
Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   To initiate amendments to the provisions of this Zoning Code and
official Zoning Map.
      (3)   To review all proposed amendments of this Zoning Code and Zoning
Map, as per
Chapter 1143.
      (4)   To review all proposed preliminary development plans, as per
Chapter 1173.
      (5)   To review and act upon applications for variances from the
requirements of this Zoning Code, as per
Chapter 1147.
      (6)   To review and act upon applications for conditional use permits, as
per
Chapter 1145 and all other pertinent sections of this Zoning Code.
      (7)   To act on all major site development plans, as per
Chapter 1141.
      (8)   To act on all development plans, as per
Chapter 1173.
      (9)   To review and act upon reconstruction and substitution of
nonconforming uses.
      (10)   To act on major subdivisions, per the Subdivision Regulations of
Commercial Point.
   (b)   Matters of Interpretation. It is the intent of this Zoning Code that
all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the
Planning and Zoning Administrator, and that such questions shall be presented
to Council on appeal from the decision of the Planning and Zoning
Administrator.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1101.12 GENERAL NOTES DEFINED.
   The General Notes of Commercial Point are administrative in nature,
administered by the Technical Review Group, and, therefore, not an adopted
section of these Subdivision Regulations. The General Notes are subject to
change upon adoption by motion by the Technical Review Group. The Technical
Review Group shall keep records of any changes made to the General Notes.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1103
Definitions
1103.01   General definitions.
1103.02   Specific definitions.
§ 1103.01 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   Except where specifically defined herein, all words used in the Subdivision
Regulations shall carry customary meanings. Words used in the present tense
include the future tense; the plural includes the singular and the singular
includes the plural; the word LOT includes the word PARCEL and PLOT; the word
BUILDING includes the word STRUCTURE; the word SHALL is mandatory, the word MAY
is permissive, and the word SHOULD is preferred; the words USED or OCCUPIED
include the words INTENDED, DESIGNED OR ARRANGED TO BE USED OR OCCUPIED; and
the word PERSON includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust,
company, or corporation as well as an individual. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders. A general
term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class
enumerated unless expressly so limited.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1103.02 SPECIFIC DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENT means the authorized representative of the owner. The authority of the
agent shall be established to the satisfaction of the Planning and Zoning
Administrator.
   ALLEY means a public right-of-way less than 50 feet wide which affords only
a secondary means of access to property abutting thereon.
   ANSI means American National Standards Institute.
   APPLICANT means the authorized representative of the developer. The
authority of the applicant shall be established to the satisfaction of the
Planning and Zoning Administrator.
   ARCHITECT means an architect registered by the State of Ohio.
   ARTERIAL STREET. See STREETS.
   AS BUILT PLANS means engineering construction plans that have been revised
to incorporate all changes that occurred during construction of the project.
   ASTM means American Society of Testing and Materials.
   AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC (ADT) means the total traffic volume during a given
time period in whole days greater than one day and less than one year divided
by the number of days in that time period.
   AWWA means American Water Works Association.
   BLOCK means all or part of one side of a street between two intersecting
streets.
   BOND means any form of security including cash deposit, surety bond,
collateral, property, or letter of credit in a form satisfactory to the Law
Director.
   BUFFER means any combination of mounds, fencing, plantings, etc., intended
to separate one land use from another.
   BUILDABLE AREA means the area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard and
open space requirements of the Zoning Code have been met.
   BUILDING means any structure securely affixed to land having a roof
supported by columns or walls, entirely separated on all sides from any similar
structure or entirely separated on all sides by walls in which there are no
communicating doors, windows or similar openings and intended for the shelter,
housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods or
materials of any kind or nature.
   CALIPER means the diameter of a tree as measured six inches above the ground
up to and including four inch caliper size. Thereafter, diameter-at-breast-
height (DBH) is used.
   CERTIFICATE OF DEPOSIT means a certificate held on deposit by a financial
institution for the municipality until such time as the subdivider has
fulfilled his obligation to install the required improvements.
   COLLECTOR STREET. See STREETS.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN means the plan or plans prepared and adopted by Council
as may be amended, indicating the general locations recommended for the
principal streets, parks, public buildings, zoning districts, character and
extent of community development and other physical aspects of urban and rural
planning.
   CONCEPT PLAN means written and graphic documents that indicate in a
conceptual form the proposed land uses and their overall impact on the subject
property and surrounding properties.
   COUNCIL means the Council of Commercial Point, Ohio.
   COUNTY means Franklin or Pickaway County, Ohio, as applicable.
   CULVERT, MAJOR means any culvert in excess of 12 inches.
   CUT SHEETS means tabular survey information used for the purpose of
constructing the improvements.
   DENSITY means the number of dwelling units per unit of land. To determine
density divide the total number of dwelling units by the net developable site
as measured in acres. (See definition of NET DEVELOPABLE SITE.)
   DEVELOPER. See SUBDIVIDER.
   DEVELOPMENT means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate.
   DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) means the outside bark diameter of a tree as
measured four and one-half feet above the forest floor on the uphill side of a
tree.
   EASEMENT means a grant of one or more of the property rights by the property
owner and/or for the use by the public, a corporation, or another person or
entity.
   ENGINEER, REGISTERED means an engineer registered by the State of Ohio.
   ENGINEERING CONSTRUCTION PLANS means the plans and supporting information
accompanying a subdivision and showing the specific location and design of
improvements to be installed in the subdivision.
   EROSION means the wearing away of the land surface by running water, wind,
ice, or other geological agents, including such processes as gravitational
creep and/or detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by wind, water,
ice, or gravity.
   ESCROW means a deposit of cash with the municipality in lieu of an amount
required and still in force on a performance or maintenance bond.
   ESCROW FUND means cash placed by the developer in an account to be held by a
financial institution in favor of the municipality to guarantee the
installation of improvements according to the provisions of the Subdivision
Regulations.
   EXCAVATION means the removal or recovery by any means whatsoever of soil,
rock, mineral substances, or organic substances other than vegetation, from
water or land on or beneath the surface thereof, or beneath the land surface,
whether exposed or submerged, whether by mechanical or manual means.
   FINAL PLAT means the plat of a proposed subdivision, drawn on durable
material as specified in this document and intended for recording, meeting all
the requirements as herein enumerated.
   FIRE CHIEF means the Fire Chief of the applicable township fire department.
   FISCAL OFFICER means the Fiscal Officer of the Village of Commercial Point.
   FLOOD, BASE means the flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. The base flood may also be referred to as the 1% chance
annual flood or 100 year flood.
   FLOODWAY means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that have been reserved in order to pass the base flood discharge.
   FRONTAGE means that portion of a lot abutting on a dedicated right-of-way.
   GRADE means the slope of any surface specified in percentage terms.
   GRADE, EXISTING STREET means the grade of the street measured from the
centerline to the edge of the street.
   GRADE, FINISHED means the grade of the surface of the ground of any parcel
of land after construction of buildings, parking, driveways, streets, the
completion of all landscaping, and any other improvements.
   GRADE, NATURAL means the grade of the undisturbed surface of any land.
   HILLSIDE means an area with an average grade of more than 15%.
   IES means Illuminating Engineering Society.
   IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC means any roadside ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalks,
pedestrian way, tree lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, public
utility, or other facility for which Commercial Point may ultimately assume the
responsibility for operation and maintenance or which may affect an improvement
for which Commercial Point is responsible.
   IMPROVEMENTS means street pavement or resurfacing, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, water lines, sewer lines, storm drains, street lights, flood control
and drainage facilities, utility lines, landscaping, grading, and other related
matters normally associated with development of raw land into building sites.
   INFRASTRUCTURE means facilities and services such as water, storm water and
sanitary sewer lines, and streets needed to sustain industry, residential,
commercial, and all other land use activities.
   IN-LIEU FEES means fees paid by a private individual or party to Commercial
Point to compensate for the mandatory dedication provisions, if such provisions
exist, of the Commercial Point Zoning Code when said land dedication is waived
by Council.
   INSPECTION FEE means the cost to the municipality of monitoring
construction, to be paid by the developer.
   LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT means a landscape architect registered by the State of
Ohio.
   LAW DIRECTOR means the Law Director or Solicitor of Commercial Point, Ohio.
   LOT means a tract, plat, or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land
intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership or for building development.
   LOT, CORNER means a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE means a lot, other than a corner lot, with frontage on
more than one street.
   LOT IMPROVEMENT means any building, structure, place, work of art, or other
object or improvement of the land on which they are situated constituting a
physical betterment of real property or any part of such betterment.
   LOT, INTERIOR means a lot with only one frontage on a street.
   LOT, IRREGULAR means a lot that is neither square nor rectangular.
   LOT, MINIMUM AREA means the area of a lot as is computed exclusive of any
portion of the right-of-way of any public or private street.
   LOT, MEASUREMENT. A lot shall be measured as follows:
      (1)   The depth of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between
the mid-points of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot
lines in the front to the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.
However, the straight line connecting the rearmost side lot lines shall not be
less than one-half of the length of the straight line connecting the foremost
points of the side lot lines.
      (2)   The width of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between
straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot,
measured at the building setback line.
   LOT OF RECORD means a lot that is part of a subdivision recorded in the
appropriate County Recorder's Office, or a lot or parcel described by metes and
bounds, the description of which has been recorded.
   LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE means a double frontage lot located along a collector
or arterial that derives access from an interior local street.
   MANDATORY LAND DEDICATION means the required dedication of private land to
Commercial Point for the purpose of providing space for park, recreation, open
space and other public uses.
   MAP INDEX means a map supplied with street improvement plans showing the
street and storm system at a scale of 1" = 200'.
   MAP LOCATION means a map supplied with the plat that shows legibly, by
dimension and/or other means, the proposed subdivision and enough area beyond
the bounds of the proposed subdivision to locate and orient the subdivision and
show the relationship of the site to the community facilities that serve or
influence the property, at a scale of 1" = 1,000'.
   MAYOR means the Mayor of Commercial Point, Ohio.
   MUNICIPAL ENGINEER means the municipal engineer or engineering firm
contracted by the municipality.
   MUNICIPALITY means the Village of Commercial Point, Ohio.
   NET DEVELOPABLE ACRES means the land area within a subdivision excluding the
minimum open space requirements, all areas designated for public and private
streets and alleys, open bodies of water including streams, creeks and ditches,
and all other dedicated rights-of-way.
   NET DEVELOPABLE SITE means the remainder of a parcel of land following the
subtraction of all areas designated for public and private streets and alleys,
open bodies of water including streams, creeks and ditches, and all other
dedicated rights-of-way.
   NO BUILD ZONE means an area or portion of a lot that is designated by deed
or plat not to contain any buildings, structures or other built improvement on
a permanent basis.
   ODOT means the Ohio Department of Transportation.
   OEPA means the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency.
   OFF-SITE means any premises not located within the area of the property to
be subdivided or improved, whether or not in the same ownership of the
applicant for subdivision.
   OWNER means the legal owner of the land proposed to be subdivided.
   PERFORMANCE AND INDEMNITY BOND OR SURETY BOND means an agreement by and
between a subdivider and a bonding company in favor of Commercial Point for the
amount of the  estimated construction cost guaranteeing the completion of
physical improvements according to plans and specifications within the time
prescribed by subdivider's agreement.
   PLANNING AND ZONING ADMINISTRATOR means the Planning and Zoning
Administrator of the municipality.
   PRELIMINARY PLAN means a map of a subdivision of land showing required
features that is submitted to the platting authority for purposes of
preliminary consideration and approval.
   RESERVES means parcels of land within a subdivision set aside for future
subdivision or set aside for other purposes, as noted on the plat.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY means the surface of any space above and below any public
street, public road, public highway, public freeway, public lane, public path,
public way, public alley, public court, public sidewalk, public boulevard,
public parkway, public drive or any public easement now or hereafter held by
the municipality.
   SEDIMENT means solid material both mineral and organic that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by
surface water, and has come to rest on the earth's surface above or below
ground level.
   SEDIMENT BASIN means a barrier, dam, or other suitable detention facility
built across an area of water-flow to settle and retain sediment carried by
run-off waters.
   SETBACK, FRONT means the minimum distance between the right-of-way and a
building facing said right-of-way, as required by the Zoning Code.
   SETBACKS, PLATTED means the minimum distance between a building and the
right-of-way line, the rear lot line, and the side lot lines as required by the
Zoning Code and shown on the recorded plat of the subdivision.
   SETBACK, REAR means the minimum distance between the rear lot line and a
building, as required by the Zoning Code.
   SETBACK, SIDE AND CORNER SIDE means the minimum distance between the side
lot line and a building, as required by the Zoning Code.
   STREET, ARTERIAL means a street that accommodates traffic to and from the
expressways or to or through major commercial districts. Traffic volumes are
generally greater than 10,000 ADT (average daily traffic).
   STREET, CUL-DE-SAC means a local street having only one outlet and a paved
terminal for safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
   STREET, DEAD END means a local street having only one outlet without a safe
and convenient means for reversal of traffic.
   STREET, INDUSTRIAL means a street intended to provide access to other
streets from industrial properties, generally being a volume of traffic that
includes a relatively large amount of vehicles other than passenger
automobiles.
   STREET, EXPRESSWAY means a street entirely devoted to the movement of large
volumes of traffic at relatively high speeds. Access is completely controlled,
not intended to serve abutting property.
   STREET, LOCAL means a street intended to provide access to other streets
from individual properties, generally bearing a volume of traffic no greater
than 800 ADT.
   STREET, MAJOR COLLECTOR means a street that carries traffic from the minor
collector system to the arterial. Traffic usually has origin and destination
within the community and does not exceed 10,000 ADT.
   STREET, MINOR COLLECTOR means a street that carries internal traffic within
a given neighborhood, connecting local streets to the major collectors or to
the arterial system and generally bearing volume of traffic no greater than
4,000 ADT.
   STRUCTURE means that which is constructed having a location on, above or
below the surface of land or water or attached to that having a location on,
above or below the surface of land or water. Containerized cargo boxes, freight
transport trailers and similar items are prohibited for use as structures in
all districts.
   SUBDIVIDER means the person who intends to build/construct the subdivision.
   SUBDIVIDER'S AGREEMENT means an agreement by and between a subdivider and
Commercial Point that sets forth the manner in which the subdivider agrees to
proceed with the construction of public improvements and the disposition of
lots in the subject subdivision.
   SUBDIVISION means any or all of the following:
      (1)   The division of any parcel of land shown as a unit or as contiguous
units on the last preceding tax roll, into two or more parcels, sites, or lots
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership,
provided, however, that the division or partition of land into parcels of more
than five acres not involving any new streets or easements of access, and the
sale or exchange of parcels between adjoining lot owners, where such sale or
exchange does not create additional building sites, shall be exempted; or
      (2)   The improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential,
commercial or industrial structures or groups of structures involving the
division or allocation of land for the opening, widening or extension of any
street or streets, except private streets serving industrial structures; the
division or allocation of land as open spaces for common use by owners,
occupants or lease holders or as easements for the extension and maintenance of
public sewer, water, storm drainage or other public facilities.
   SUBDIVISION, MINOR or LOT SPLIT, means any subdivision that does not result
in the creation of more than five lots out of a single tract or does not
require the construction of new streets, roads, public water or sewer
facilities, sidewalks or similar facilities.
   SURETY means a certificate of deposit, performance bond, irrevocable letter
of credit or cash escrow account in favor of the municipality designed to
guarantee the construction of required improvements.
   SURVEYOR means a surveyor registered by the State of Ohio.
   TECHNICAL REVIEW GROUP means the municipality's review body of engineering
construction plans for private and public development projects.
   THOROUGHFARE PLAN means the system of streets for the municipality adopted
by the municipality, on file in the Planning and Zoning Administrator's office,
together with all amendments thereto subsequently adopted including the Land
Use Plan adopted May 2, 2011.
   TREE means any tree, shrub, or other woody plant.
   TREE LAWN means the strip of land between the back of curb and sidewalks
and/or planting easement.
   TREE, LARGE means any tree species having a trunk caliper of six inches or
more.
   TREE, SIGNIFICANT means any individual tree that is of cultural, historical,
biological, or horticultural value as determined by the Urban Forester.
   UTILITY PLANT SUPERINTENDENT means the Utility Plant Superintendent of
Commercial Point, Ohio.
   ZONING CODE means the Zoning Code of the municipality.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1105
Administration, Enforcement and Penalty
1105.01   Enforcement by Planning and Zoning Administrator.
1105.02   Waivers by the Technical Review Group.
1105.03   Variances by the Council.
1105.04   Plat adjustments.
1105.05   Request to vacate a recorded plat or portion thereof.
1105.06   Notice of violation.
1105.07   Violations and penalties.
1105.08   Appeals.
§ 1105.01 ENFORCEMENT BY PLANNING AND ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   It shall be the duty of the Planning and Zoning Administrator to enforce
these Subdivision Regulations in accordance with the administrative provisions
of these regulations. All departments, officials, public employees, and
representatives of the municipality, vested with the duty or authority to issue
permits or licenses, shall conform to the provisions of these Subdivision
Regulations and shall issue no permit or license for any use, building or
purpose in conflict with the provisions of these regulations. Any permit or
license issued in conflict with the provisions of these Subdivision Regulations
shall be null and void.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1105.02 WAIVERS BY THE TECHNICAL REVIEW GROUP.
   A waiver may be granted by the Technical Review Group where it finds
extraordinary and unnecessary hardship may result from strict compliance with
Chapter 1115, Required Improvements. The extraordinary and unnecessary hardship
shall be a result of topographic or other physical condition(s) of the subject
property. Granting a waiver shall not (1) conflict with the preliminary plan
approval nor the final plat approval by Council, (2) violate the intent of
these Subdivision Regulations, and (3) be detrimental to the public interest.
Under no circumstances shall a waiver be granted under this section to any
requirement of the Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1105.03 VARIANCES BY THE COUNCIL.
   (a)   Where the Council finds that extraordinary hardships may result from
strict compliance with the Subdivision Regulations and/or the purposes of the
Subdivision Regulations may be served to a greater extent by an alternative
proposal, it may approve variances to the Subdivision Regulations so that
substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured. Approving such
variance shall not have the effect of nullifying any intent or purpose of these
Subdivision Regulations. In addition, the Council shall consider the following
factors in deciding whether to grant a variance under the Subdivision
Regulations:
      (1)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other property;
      (2)   The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are
unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable
generally to other property;
      (3)   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience,
if the strict letter of these Subdivision Regulations are carried out; and
      (4)   Variances contrary to other applicable guidelines and ordinances
shall not be granted.
   (b)   In approving variances, the Council may require such conditions as
will, in its judgment, substantially secure the objectives of the standards or
requirements of these Subdivision Regulations.
   (c)   Public Notification. At least one notice shall be given at least 30
calendar days prior to the public hearing in one or more newspapers of general
circulation in the municipality. Such notice shall include the date, time and
place of the public hearing and nature of the appeal. Written notice of the
appeal shall be mailed by the municipality, certified mail, at least 20
calendar days prior to the date of the public hearing to abutting property
owners. Such notice shall include the date, time and place of the public
hearing and nature of the appeal.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1105.04 PLAT ADJUSTMENTS.
   No changes shall be made to any final plat after approval by Council except
that minor technical adjustments or corrections, which do not significantly
change the plat as approved by Council, may be made with the approval of the
Planning and Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1105.05 REQUEST TO VACATE A RECORDED PLAT OR PORTION THEREOF.
   A subdivider may file a request to vacate a recorded plat or portion
thereof. A written request shall be filed with the Planning and Zoning
Administrator. The request shall be heard by Council, which shall have a
maximum of 60 calendar days from receipt of the request to make a decision. If
approved by Council, the subdivider shall submit the proper recording
instrument(s) to the Law Director for review and approval. Once the recording
instrument(s) is/are approved by the Law Director, the subdivider is
responsible for recording it with the appropriate County Recorder's Office.
This recording shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the original
plat, or portion thereof, so vacated.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1105.06 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall notify by certified mail the
property owners and those violating these Subdivision Regulations and any
related ordinances of any non-compliance situations and shall order actions to
correct or remedy said violations. This notification shall order the
discontinuance of any illegal action and shall order actions to correct or
remedy said violation(s). The Planning and Zoning Administrator may also issue
a stop work order and request the Law Director to institute the appropriate
action or proceeding at law or equity to restrain, correct, remove or prosecute
such violation(s).
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1105.07 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with a notice of
violation order, or violates any of these Subdivision Regulations or R.C.
Chapter 711, shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in said R.C.
Chapter 711.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1105.08 APPEALS.
   (a)   Appeal of Planning and Zoning Administrator Decision or Technical
Review Group Decision. Whoever is aggrieved or affected by the decision of the
Planning and Zoning Administrator or the Technical Review Group shall have the
right to file an appeal with Council. A written appeal shall be filed with the
Planning and Zoning Administrator within ten calendar days of the decision of
the Planning and Zoning Administrator or Technical Review Group. At the time of
filing the appeal, the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall turn over to
Council the application and any relevant background information. Council shall
have a maximum of 75 calendar days from receipt of an appeal to hold a public
hearing, consider the appeal and make a decision on the appeal. To reverse or
modify the decision of the Planning and Zoning Administrator or the Technical
Review Group, a simple majority vote of the full membership of Council shall be
required.
   (b)   Public Notification. At least one notice shall be given at least 30
calendar days prior to the public hearing in one or more newspapers of general
circulation in the municipality. Such notice shall include the date, time and
place of the public hearing and nature of the appeal. Written notice of the
appeal shall be mailed by the municipality, certified mail, at least 20
calendar days prior to the date of the public hearing to abutting property
owners. Such notice shall include the date, time and place of the public
hearing and nature of the appeal.
   (c)   Council, in reversing or modifying the decision of the Planning and
Zoning Administrator may prescribe additional conditions and safeguards in
conformity with these Subdivision Regulations. Violations of such conditions
and safeguards, when made a part of said approval, shall be deemed a violation
of these Subdivision Regulations and punishable as prescribed in §
1105.07, and shall result in revocation of said approval.
   (d)   Recourse from Council shall be to the Franklin County or Pickaway
County Court of Common Pleas, as appropriate, as provided under the Ohio
Revised Code.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1107
Boundary Line Adjustment and Minor Subdivisions
1107.01   General requirements.
1107.02   Boundary line adjustment.
1107.03   Minor subdivision exemption.
§ 1107.01 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The following rules and regulations shall govern request for boundary line
adjustment and minor subdivision (lot split) approvals.
   (a)   Prior to submittal of the exemption request, the applicant should meet
with the Planning and Zoning Administrator to determine whether the request
meets the exemption criteria and to explain the procedure and submittal
requirements. If it is determined that the applicant's proposal does not meet
the exemption criteria, the applicant shall be required to comply with
Chapter 1109 of these Regulations.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1107.02 BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT.
   Boundary Line Adjustment Exemption. The boundary line adjustment process is
an administrative process conducted by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
Boundary line adjustments cannot be used to create new parcels of record.
   (a)   Criteria. An application must meet, at a minimum, all of the criteria
below:
      (1)   Resulting parcels comply with the adopted standard platting
conditions and any other conditions determined applicable by the Planning and
Zoning Administrator or municipal engineer.
      (2)   Resulting parcels comply with all applicable zoning, building,
fire, and health codes, rules and regulations.
   (b)   Submittal Process. The submittal process below shall apply to all
boundary line adjustments:
      (1)   The applicant shall file two complete copies of the exemption
request to the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   The submittal shall be reviewed in a timely manner for completeness
by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. The applicant shall be notified in
writing of any inadequacies, missing or incomplete documentation. No
application for boundary line adjustment shall be reviewed by village officials
until all required information has been received by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator.
      (3)   Once the submittal is determined complete, the Planning and Zoning
Administrator will conduct a site characteristics analysis and perform a site
visit to verify characteristics and determine if the application meets the
criteria for a boundary line adjustment. The Planning and Zoning Administrator
may consult with the municipal engineer and other municipal officials as
necessary.
      (4)   If the Planning and Zoning Administrator denies the exemption
request, the applicant shall have the right to appeal it to Council in
accordance with § 1105.08 of these Subdivision Regulations. If the request is
approved on appeal, the applicant shall submit the final exemption documents.
   (c)   Submittal Requirements. In addition to the submittal requirements
listed below, the Planning and Zoning Administrator may request other materials
or information as deemed necessary, before or during the process.
      (1)   Application form, as provided by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator, signed by the property owner(s).
      (2)   A fee as stipulated by
Chapter 1117, paid by the applicant, shall be included with all application
filings.
      (3)   Preliminary drawing: drawing of the properties involved submitted
at a scale no less than 1-inch equals 100-feet. The drawing shall, at a
minimum, depict the following:
         A.   The title shall be placed at the top of the sheet and shall
include: the name of the proposed exemption and a general legal description.
         B.   The drawing shall include: the preparation date; a north arrow; a
written and graphic scale; the name, address, and phone number of the person
who prepared the exhibit.
         C.   The proposed boundaries of the subject properties shall be
depicted in a heavy solid line and any boundaries proposed to be deleted
depicted with a dashed line.
         D.   Boundaries of adjacent properties or portions of those boundaries
that are in immediate proximity of the subject properties shall be depicted in
a lighter line weight.
         E.   Other elements that may be required are: existing roads; existing
structures; utilities; site modifications and easements.
   (d)   Final Exemption Documents. Upon approval of the preliminary drawing by
the Planning and Zoning Administrator, a boundary survey for all affected
properties, prepared by a certified land surveyor duly registered by the State
of Ohio, shall be submitted along with legal descriptions of said properties.
The boundary survey shall be at a scale no less than 1" = 100'. New legal
descriptions are not valid until the final approved documents, including new
deeds, are signed and recorded with the applicable County Auditor's Office and
County Recorder's Office. If the new legal descriptions are not recorded within
30 calendar days of approval, the descriptions deemed to be null and void.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1107.03 MINOR SUBDIVISION EXEMPTION.
   The minor subdivision exemption process is to change real property
boundaries to create five or fewer new parcels.
   (a)   Criteria. An application must meet, at a minimum, all of the criteria
below.
      (1)   Creates no more than a total of five parcels.
      (2)   Resulting parcels comply with all applicable zoning, building,
fire, and health codes, rules and regulations.
      (3)   All of the parcels created comply with the minimum lot size
requirements in the applicable zoning district.
      (4)   Resulting parcels are accessed, at a minimum, by a public right-of-
way that meet, or with improvements can meet, Municipal Road Design Standards.
      (5)   All of the parcels can comply with Municipal and Health Department
Sewage Disposal Requirements.
      (6)   The owner(s) shall provide for the construction to extend all
utilities to the site and other public infrastructure as may be required at no
cost to the municipality.
   (b)   Submittal Process. The submittal processes below shall apply to all
minor subdivision exemptions:
      (1)   The applicant shall file two complete copies of the exemption
request and appropriate documentation to the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   The submittal shall be reviewed in a timely manner for completeness
by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. The applicant shall be notified in
writing of any inadequacies, missing, or incomplete documentation. No
application for minor subdivision shall be reviewed by village officials until
all required information has been received by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator.
      (3)   The Planning and Zoning Administrator may consult with the
municipal engineer or other municipal officials as necessary.
      (4)   The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the exemption based on the information presented and
compliance with the adopted standards, regulations and policies of the
municipality.
      (5)   If the Planning and Zoning Administrator denies the exemption
request, the applicant shall have the right to appeal it to Council in
accordance with § 1105.08 of these Subdivision Regulations. If the request is
approved on appeal, the applicant shall submit the final exemption documents.
   (c)   Submittal Requirements. In addition to the submittal requirements
listed below, the Planning and Zoning Administrator may request other materials
or information as deemed necessary, before or during the process.
      (1)   Application form, as provided by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator, signed by the property owner(s).
      (2)   A fee as stipulated by
Chapter 1117, paid by the applicant, shall be included with all application
filings.
      (3)   Preliminary drawing: drawing at a scale not less than 1" = 100'.
The Plan shall depict the following:
         A.   The title shall be placed at the top of the sheet and include the
name of the proposed exemption and a general description.
         B.   The drawing shall include: the preparation date; a north arrow
designated at true north; a written and graphic scale; the name and address of
the owner and person who prepared the exhibit.
         C.   The boundaries of the proposed parcels shall be depicted in a
heavy solid line.
         D.   Boundaries of adjacent properties or portions of those boundaries
that are in immediate proximity of the parcels proposed for subdivision shall
be depicted in a lighter line weight.
         E.   Depict all existing roads, structures, utilities, earthwork, site
modifications and easements as applicable.
         F.   Depict all lots providing accurate dimensions for each.
   (d)   Final Exemption Documents. Upon approval of the exemption request a
full certified land survey for all affected parcels shall be submitted
including new legal descriptions. The survey shall be at a scale not less than
1" = 100'. New legal descriptions are not valid until the final approved
documents are signed and recorded with the applicable County Auditor and
Recorder. If the new legal descriptions are not recorded within 30 calendar
days of approval, the descriptions shall become null and void.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1109
Subdivision Application Procedure and Appeal Process
1109.01   Preliminary subdivision plan, submittal and review.
1109.02   Technical Review Group.
1109.03   Engineering construction plans, submittal and review.
1109.04   Final subdivision plats, submittal and review.
§ 1109.01 PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAN, SUBMITTAL AND REVIEW.
   (a)   It is strongly recommended that, prior to filing a preliminary
subdivision plan application, the developer submit a conceptual plan to the
Planning and Zoning Administrator for review. Depending on the particulars of
the proposed development, the Planning and Zoning Administrator may request
input from the Technical Review Group.
   (b)   A preliminary subdivision plan application shall be filed with the
Planning and Zoning Administrator. Eight 11" by 17" size copies and two full
size copies of all preliminary subdivision plans and supporting information
shall be included with the application submittal. In addition, plan sheets
shall be submitted in electronic form in either jpeg or tif formats. Upon the
filing of a preliminary subdivision plan application, the Planning and Zoning
Administrator shall review the application for compliance with §
1113.02 of these Subdivision Regulations. Should any information not be
included with the application, it shall be returned to the developer with a
written explanation of what information is missing. No preliminary subdivision
plan application shall be reviewed by village officials until all required
information has been received by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
   (c)   A fee as stipulated by ordinance, paid by the developer, shall be
included with the preliminary subdivision plan application filing.
   (d)   All preliminary subdivision plans shall be prepared by a certified
land surveyor duly registered by the State of Ohio.
   (e)   Council shall review the preliminary subdivision plan and act thereon
within 60 calendar days from receipt of a complete application. Council may
approve the plan as submitted or modified, it may conditionally approve the
plan and stipulate the conditions of such approval, or it may disapprove the
plan and express the reasons therefore. The developer shall be advised as to
the decision of Council by letter and/or legible markings and notes on the
plan.
   (f)   All updated preliminary subdivision plans and supporting information
submitted to Council for review shall include all revisions requested at
Council's prior meeting. Upon the submittal of updated preliminary subdivision
plans and supporting information, the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall
review the submittal for compliance with the requested revisions. Should any
information not be included with the updated submittal, it shall be returned to
the developer with a written explanation of what information is missing. No
updated submittal shall be reviewed by village officials until the requested
revisions have been made.
   (g)   Approval of a preliminary subdivision plan shall not constitute
approval of the final subdivision plat nor required improvement plans, but
rather shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout as a guide to
preparation of the engineering construction plans and final subdivision plat.
   (h)   Review of the preliminary plan is based on conformance with present
zoning, general conformance with the required improvement as stipulated herein,
and compatibility to adjacent land use, adjacent zoning and to appropriate
plans for the area, including but not limited to the comprehensive plan.
   (i)   Whether it is proposed to develop the property in one section or in
multiple sections, the layout of the entire tract is required.
   (j)   Public notification for the review of a preliminary subdivision plan
shall consist of listing on the Council's meeting agenda posted in accordance
with the all applicable laws and rules.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1109.02 TECHNICAL REVIEW GROUP.
   (a)   The Technical Review Group is established as the municipality's review
body of engineering construction plans for private and public development
projects and consists of, as necessary, but not be limited to, the Planning and
Zoning Administrator, Municipal Engineer, Village Administrator, and Mayor. The
Technical Review Group will meet on an as needed basis to provide for a forum
at which proposed developments at any state in the regulatory process may be
discussed. These meetings are intended to minimize conflicts with various
regulatory requirements and to provide coordination of various requirements and
procedures. The Technical Review Group also provides Council technical
expertise in matters that come before Council.
   (b)   The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall chair the Technical Review
Group and shall coordinate the review process. The developer shall be advised
by the Planning and Zoning Administrator as to the decision of the Technical
Review Group by letter and/or legible markings and notes on the plans.
   (c)   Approval of engineering construction plans by the Technical Review
Group shall expire 12 months from the date of such approval, unless
construction work has started. A single extension, not to exceed six months,
may be given by the Technical Review Group upon written request by the
developer.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1109.03 ENGINEERING CONSTRUCTION PLANS, SUBMITTAL AND REVIEW.
   (a)   Engineering construction plans shall only be accepted for review after
Council has approved the preliminary subdivision plan or, in the case of a site
plan development, the site plan has been approved by Council. All required
improvements shall be installed at the cost of the developer in accordance with
design and construction standards of the municipality.
   (b)   Submittal Procedure: The developer shall prepare and submit five full-
size copies of the engineering construction plans and supporting information to
the Planning and Zoning Administrator. If complete, they are distributed and
reviewed by the Technical Review Group. If the submittal is incomplete, it is
returned to the applicant with a written explanation of what information is
missing. No engineering construction plans shall be reviewed by the Technical
Review Group until all required information has been received.
   (c)   Preliminary Review Procedure:
      (1)   Civil engineering construction plan review with Technical Review
Group within one week of submission.
      (2)   Review any approval conditions by Council.
      (3)   Review general notes.
      (4)   Review compliance with
Chapter 1115, Required Improvements.
      (5)   Hold preliminary engineering construction plan meeting with the
Technical Review Group within two weeks of distribution to compile comments to
be forwarded to the developer for revision and/or clarification.
   (d)   Final Review Procedure:
      (1)   All updated engineering construction plans and supporting
information submitted for review shall include all revisions and/or
clarifications as previously requested. The developer also shall return all
annotated review plans along with a Mylar cover sheet for signatures and
construction cost estimate. No updated submittal shall be reviewed by the
Technical Review Group until all requested revisions have been made and/or
clarifications have been provided.
      (2)   Civil engineering construction plan review with the Technical
Review Group within one week of submission.
      (3)   Review revisions from preliminary engineering construction plan
review.
      (4)   Hold final engineering construction plan meeting with the Technical
Review Group within two weeks of distribution to compile comments to be
forwarded to the developer for revision and/or clarification. If there are
additional comments, forward to the developer for revision and/or
clarification.
   (e)   When there are no additional comments, return signed Mylar to the
developer.
   (f)   Pre-Construction Meeting Required: Infrastructure improvements for the
area proposed under the subdivision, or site plan development, may proceed
following the required pre-construction meeting with the municipality. The
property owner or applicant is responsible to contact the Village's Municipal
Engineer to schedule and review the pre-construction meeting requirements
including, but not limited to, submitting signed engineering construction
plans, bonding, insurance and inspection fees in accordance with
Chapter 1117.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1109.04 FINAL SUBDIVISION PLATS, SUBMITTAL AND REVIEW.
   (a)   Final subdivision plats shall be subsequent to and substantially in
conformance with a previously approved preliminary subdivision plan. A final
subdivision plat shall constitute only that portion of the development that is
proposed for recording and development at the current time.
   (b)   The final subdivision plat, or the final subdivision plat of the first
phase of a subdivision, shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Administrator within 12 months after approval of the preliminary subdivision
plan but not until the engineering construction plans have been approved by the
Technical Review Group. Otherwise, said preliminary subdivision plan approval
shall become null and void unless an extension of time has been granted by
Council upon the developer showing justified cause to the satisfaction of
Council. Only one extension of time may be granted for a period not to exceed
12 months.
   (c)   A final subdivision plat application shall be filed with the Planning
and Zoning Administrator at least 30 calendar days prior to the Council meeting
date. Eight 11" by 17" size copies and two full size copies of all final
subdivision plats and supporting information shall be included with the
application submittal. In addition, plan sheets shall be submitted in
electronic form in either jpeg or tif formats. Upon the filing of a final
subdivision plat application, the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall
review the application for compliance with §
1113.03 of these Subdivision Regulations. Should any information not be
included with the application, it shall be returned to the developer with a
written explanation of what information is missing. No final subdivision plat
application shall be reviewed by village officials until all information has
been received by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
   (d)   A fee as stipulated by ordinance, paid by the developer, shall be
included with the final subdivision plat application filing.
   (e)   Final subdivision plats shall be prepared by a registered surveyor
duly certified by the State of Ohio.
   (f)   Council shall review the final subdivision plat application within 60
calendar days from receipt of a complete application. Council may approve the
final plat as submitted or modified, it may conditionally approve the final
plat and stipulate said conditions, or it may disapprove the final plat and
express the reasons thereof. The developer shall be advised as to the decision
of Council by letter and/or legible markings and notes on the plat.
      (1)   Before any final subdivision plat application is considered for
approval or conditional approval by Council, the developer shall give notice to
the Ohio State Director of Transportation of the proposed improvements and
obtain a letter from the Ohio State Director of Transportation stating that:
This property is not within 300 feet of the centerline of a proposed new
highway, or within 500 feet of the centerline of a highway for which changes
are proposed; or this property is within these limits but that acquisition of
the land at this time is not in the public interest. If the Ohio State Director
of Transportation notifies Council that the state shall proceed to acquire the
land needed, then Council may refuse to approve the plat, according to
provisions of R.C. § 5511.01.
      (2)   At the request of the subdivider, Council may give conditional
approval and allow the developer to proceed with completion of the plat.
However, it shall be clearly at the subdivider's own risk and the conditional
approval shall be withdrawn if the Ohio State Director of Transportation
proceeds to acquire the land.
      (3)   If the State Director of Transportation notifies Council that
acquisition at this time is not in the public interest, or upon expiration of a
120 calendar day period from date of notice to the Ohio State Director or any
extension thereof agreed upon by the Ohio State Director of Transportation and
the property owner, Council shall, if the final plat is in conformance with all
provisions of these Subdivision Regulations, approve of the final subdivision
plat application.
      (4)   The developer shall provide a copy of all correspondence to the
Ohio State Director to the Planning and Zoning Administrator. The
correspondence to the Ohio State Director shall indicate the 120 calendar day
notification deadline.
   (g)   If the final subdivision plat application is disapproved by Council,
it shall be returned to the Planning and Zoning Administrator and the Developer
with recommendations for modification.
   (h)   Upon approval by Council, the Mayor and Fiscal Officer shall sign the
final plat for recording with the appropriate County Auditor's Office and
County Recorder's Offices. The municipality shall record the signed plat with
the respective county. The developer shall be responsible for all recording
costs. The approved final plat shall be placed on record within 30 calendar
days from the date of Council's approval, or said approval shall be deemed null
and void. Provided, however, the said recording time may be extended by Council
for good cause.
   (i)   The subdivider shall submit a full size copy of the approved final
plat, as recorded, to the Planning and Zoning Administrator. Upon completion of
the subdivision, four full size copies of as-built plans, prepared by the
developer's engineer and based on the municipality's construction inspection
records, shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Administrator. As-built
plans shall also be submitted in electronic format as specified by the Planning
and Zoning Administrator.
   (j)   No building permits for lots within the platted (recorded) subdivision
shall be issued until after the public infrastructure has been constructed and
said improvements have been accepted by the municipality.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1111
Amendments
1111.01   Initiation.
1111.02   Application required.
1111.03   Criteria for review of a proposed amendment.
1111.04   Review procedure of a proposed amendment.
§ 1111.01 INITIATION.
   The provisions of these Subdivision Regulations may be amended,
supplemented, changed or repealed to meet changing conditions or to better meet
good development practices. Amendments may be initiated in one of two ways: (1)
by adoption of a resolution by Council; or (2) by filing of an application by
the owner(s) of the property affected by the proposed amendment to these
Subdivision Regulations.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1111.02 APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   (a)   A complete written application shall be filed with the Planning and
Zoning Administrator at least 30 calendar days prior to the Council meeting
date. Eight copies of all supporting information including, but not limited to,
information listed in division (c) of this section shall be included with the
application filing. Upon the filing of the application, the Planning and Zoning
Administrator shall review the application for compliance with this chapter.
Should any information not be included with the application, it shall be
returned to the owner with a written explanation of what information is
missing. No application shall be reviewed by village officials until all
required information has been received by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator.
   (b)   A fee of five hundred dollars ($500), paid by the owner(s), shall be
included with the application filings.
   (c)   The application shall contain as a minimum:
      (1)   Name, address and phone number of the owner(s) and agent, and if
available the subdivider if different from the owner.
      (2)   A written description of the proposed amendment to these
Subdivision Regulations.
      (3)   A written explanation of why the proposed amendment should be
adopted and how the proposed amendment relates to the implementation of the
municipality's Community Plan and other related adopted plans.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1111.03 CRITERIA FOR REVIEW OF A PROPOSED AMENDMENT.
   All amendments to these Subdivision Regulations must be consistent with the
adopted comprehensive plan. Council shall, at minimum, consider the following
factors in the review of the application:
   (a)   Compatibility of the proposed amendment to adjacent land use, adjacent
zoning and to appropriate plans for the area, including but not limited to the
comprehensive plan.
   (b)   Relationship of the proposed amendment to access and traffic flow and
utility services including sanitary sewer, water, and storm drainage, as
outlined in the transportation thoroughfare plan, comprehensive plan and/or
other adopted plans for the area.
   (c)   Relationship of the proposed amendment to the public health, safety,
convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare, including impact on
infrastructure and municipal services.
   (d)   Relationship of the proposed use to the adequacy of available services
and to general expansion plans and planned capital improvements.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1111.04 REVIEW PROCEDURE OF A PROPOSED AMENDMENT.
   (a)   Council shall act on proposed amendments presented to it within a
reasonable time. The owner or agent shall be advised as to the decision of
Council by letter.
   (b)   Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment within
60 calendar days of receipt of the amendment proposal. Nothing in this section
shall prevent the Council from granting a continuance of the public hearing.
   (c)   At least one notice of Council's public hearing shall be given at
least 30 calendar days prior the scheduled public hearing date in one or more
newspapers of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice shall
include the time and place of the public hearing and the nature of the proposed
amendment.
   (d)   Within 45 calendar days after the public hearing, Council shall
approve or disapprove the proposed amendment, or adopt the proposed amendment
with modifications.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1113
Preliminary Plan and Final Plat Requirements
1113.01   General requirements.
1113.02   Preliminary plan requirements.
1113.03   Final plat requirements.
§ 1113.01 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Preliminary plans, final plats, and supporting information submitted to the
municipality for review shall be in accordance with the requirements contained
in this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1113.02 PRELIMINARY PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   Preliminary subdivision plans shall be on sheet(s) no larger than 24-inches
by 36-inches and prepared at a scale not smaller than one inch equals 100 feet.
The entire project shall be displayed on a single sheet when possible. If more
than two sheets are required, an index sheet must be included. Where
information is required for items off-site, and access to such areas is not
available to the registered surveyor preparing the preliminary plan, required
information may be an approximate nature, based on an existing recorded plat(s)
of surrounding parcels and must be so noted. Preliminary subdivision plans
shall include the following:
   (a)   A location map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to
the surrounding area.
   (b)   The name of the subdivision, the name and address of the developer,
the name and registration number of the registered surveyor, a north arrow,
scale, and date the plan was prepared.
   (c)   The location by section, range, and township or other surveys.
   (d)   Soils information, presented on a separate drawing, identical in scale
to the preliminary plan. Street and lot layout shall be superimposed upon the
soils information sheet. Data shall be derived from the United States
Department of Agriculture Soil Survey.
   (e)   The current names and locations of all adjoining property owners and
adjacent subdivisions within 150 feet of the proposed subdivision.
   (f)   The current zoning of the property to be subdivided and of the
contiguous properties.
   (g)   The location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the property
expressed in feet and decimals of a foot, and the approximate acreage of the
land to be subdivided.
   (h)   The location of existing water bodies, streams, drainage ditches,
stands of trees and trees with a diameter breast height (DBH) more than six
inches in diameter, and other pertinent features within 500 feet of the
proposed subdivision.
   (i)   The location, width, names, and classification of all existing and
proposed streets, rights-of-way, and easements, and where pertinent, their
designated use within 500 feet of the proposed subdivision.
   (j)   Approximate location of all existing buildings within 500 feet of the
proposed subdivision.
   (k)   Location and illustration of existing storm and sanitary sewers,
culverts, drainage tiles, water lines, gas lines, CATV, utility poles, and
utility lines within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
   (l)   The location of all existing wells within 300 feet of the proposed
subdivision.
   (m)   The approximate location, dimensions, and numbering of all proposed
lots.
   (n)   The approximate location, dimensions, and area of all land proposed to
be set aside for required parks and open space, and other public or private
reservation, with designation of the purpose and proposed ownership and
maintenance thereof.
   (o)   Topography with a maximum contour interval of two feet. Elevations
shall be based on mean sea level datum obtained from benchmarks established by
the NGS Control.
   (p)   Indication of the proposed use of any lots other than residential.
   (q)   Lots within the subdivision including future additions shall be
numbered consecutively beginning with "one", and the total number of lots and
their combined acreage shown on the plat.
   (r)   Preliminary proposals for connection to existing water supply and
sanitary sewer systems and for the collection and discharge of surface water
drainage including the location and size of existing and proposed water mains,
sanitary sewers and drainage facilities.
   (s)   Delineation of the drainage areas involved, with a plan for draining
the total upstream watershed through the development. The major storm routing
path shall be delineated.
   (t)   The 100-year floodplain and floodway of any watercourse identified as
having a flood hazard area and delineated on the most current flood insurance
rate maps.
   (u)   Written indication from the Utility Plant Superintendent that capacity
for both water and sanitary sewer service is available.
   (v)   Preliminary street lighting plan showing proposed locations of street
lights and the typical street light fixture to be used in the subdivision.
   (w)   Where it is proposed to develop the property in multiple sections, a
tentative delineation of the sections including an estimated time frame for
construction and build out.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1113.03 FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
   Final subdivision plats shall be on sheet(s) no larger than 24-inches by 36-
inches and prepared at a scale not smaller than one inch equals 100 feet, drawn
in black India ink on reproducible Mylar. The entire project on a single sheet
when possible. If more than two sheets are required, an index sheet shall be
included. The reproducible Mylar shall meet the size requirements of the
applicable County Auditor's Office and County Recorder's Office. Where
information is required for items off-site, and access to such areas is not
available to the registered surveyor preparing the final plat, required
information may be an approximate nature, based on an existing recorded plat(s)
of surrounding parcels and must be so noted. Final subdivision plats shall
include the following:
   (a)   A location map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to
the surrounding area.
   (b)   The name of the subdivision, name and address of the developer, the
name and registration number of the registered surveyor, a north arrow, scale,
and date the plat was prepared.
   (c)   The location by section, range, and township or other surveys of the
subdivision.
   (d)   The current names and locations of all adjoining property owners and
adjacent subdivisions within 150 feet of the proposed subdivision.
   (e)   The current zoning of the property to be subdivided and of the
contiguous properties.
   (f)   The location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the property
being subdivided with accurate distance and bearings, including section,
municipal corporation, and county lines.
   (g)   Accurate dimensions for all lots, reserve parcels, rights-of-way, and
all known easements.
   (h)   The numbering of the lots in the final subdivision plat application.
All lots within the entire subdivision, including any future sections or
additions, shall be numbered consecutively starting with the first plat to be
recorded and beginning with the number 'one'.
   (i)   The location, width, names and classification of all existing and
proposed streets, rights-of-way and easements, and where pertinent, their
designated use, within 500 feet of the proposed subdivision.
   (j)   Curve data for all proposed streets including the radii, arcs, chords,
chord bearings, tangent and central angle.
   (k)   Accurate location of all required monuments.
   (l)   A summary of the area of land used for each of the following: (1)
lots, (2) rights-of-way, and (3) parks, open space, and other public or private
reservation, with designation of the purpose and purposed ownership and
maintenance thereof.
   (m)   Location of setback lines from all rights-of-way, public or private,
and the building envelope shown on all lots.
   (n)   An acknowledgment by and bearing the signature of the owner that the
subdivision plat was prepared with the owner's consent and approval and
dedicating the public streets and the appropriate areas to Commercial Point.
   (o)   A statement signed by the owner setting forth the rights associated
with the easements and reserve parcels shown on the subdivision plat.
   (p)   Certification by the registered surveyor who prepared the subdivision
plat that the information contained on the plat is true and correct and
conforms to the requirements of these Subdivision Regulations.
   (q)   A signature block for the endorsement of an approved final subdivision
plat by the Mayor and Fiscal Officer upon the approval by Council. The
signature block and associated final subdivision plat wording is shown in
Appendix B.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1115
Required Improvements
1115.01   General.
1115.02   Monuments.
1115.03   Streets.
1115.04   Street lighting.
1115.05   Traffic control and street signs.
1115.06   Water.
1115.07   Sanitary sewers.
1115.08   Drainage.
1115.09   Bridges.
1115.10   Erosion and sedimentation control.
1115.11   Landscaping.
1115.12   Hillside regulations.
1115.13   (Reserved)
1115.14   Platted easements.
1115.15   Location of private utilities.
§ 1115.01 GENERAL.
   (a)   Prior to final plat approval by Council, the subdivider shall have
installed the required improvements.
   (b)   All items of work covered and stipulated in the construction plans,
including altering or any extra work shall be performed in accordance with the
lines, grades, typical cross sections and dimensions shown on the construction
plans. All areas within the rights-of-way and easements shall be graded in
accordance with the grading plan. All other areas shall be rough graded such
that building construction (including basement excavation) will satisfy final
grading in accordance with the grading plan. The setting and marking of all
lines, profile and grade stakes necessary for the layout of the work in
accordance with the improvement plans shall be performed under the supervision
of a registered surveyor. Should any misunderstanding arise as to the intent or
meaning of the construction plans, or any discrepancy appear in same, or in the
proper method of setting and marking of the construction stakes, the decision
of the Municipal Engineer in such cases shall be final. All surveys and
construction plans shall be based on the Pickaway County Horizontal and
Vertical Control System. An index of control points is available from the
Pickaway County Engineer.
   (c)   The construction material specifications and standard drawings of
Commercial Point, along with the City of Columbus, Ohio and ODOT, shall govern
the required improvements except as modified within these Subdivision
Regulations.
   (d)   (1)   All engineering construction plans shall be prepared, signed and
sealed by a registered professional engineer. Construction plans shall include
title sheet, index map, location map, typical sections, plan and profile view,
benchmarks, miscellaneous engineering details, and estimate of quantities.
Cross sections shall be submitted upon request by the Municipal Engineer. All
typical sections and major engineering details to be used on any particular
street shall be approved in advance before completion of the engineering
construction plans.
      (2)   The title sheet of the engineering construction plans must contain
the name of the subdivision, road or street names, county and location map.
Space shall be provided on the title sheet or the first sheet of the plan for
signature of the Mayor; Utility Plant Superintendent; and Municipal Engineer.
The following statement shall be above the village's signature block:
"Signatures below signify only concurrence with the general purpose and general
location of the project. All technical details remain the responsibility of the
engineer preparing the plans."
      (3)   The necessity of guard rail, seeding, erosion control, type of
backfill or other special conditions shall be determined with the assistance of
the Municipal Engineer before completion of the construction plans.
      (4)   The engineering construction plans shall show the drainage area and
design flow for all major culverts in 12 inches and greater.
      (5)   The engineering construction plans shall be made with India ink on
matte Mylar material. Freehand linear drawings will not be accepted. No shading
or coloring shall be allowed. The sheets upon which the engineering
construction drawings are made shall measure 24" x 36", with 1/2" margin border
on three sides and a 1-1/2" to 2" binding margin on the short left side. A
poorly drawn or illegible plan is sufficient cause for rejection.
      (6)   Submittal requirements include improvement plans, sanitary sewer
calculations, storm drainage calculations, grading plans, landscaping plans,
erosion and sedimentation control plans, and lighting plans. See §
1109.03 for time frames for submittal to the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
      (7)   Resubmittals of engineering construction plans shall clearly show
all revisions made thereto by notes in the "revision" block with each revision
clearly outlined on the appropriate sheet(s). A lack of properly addressing all
Technical Review Group comments is sufficient cause for rejecting the
resubmittal.
      (8)   After all improvements have been constructed, a complete set of as-
built plans on reproducible Mylar and electronic copy of the same in either pdf
or tif format shall be submitted to the Municipal Engineer for municipal files.
   (e)   Testing to ensure compliance with the standards contained herein shall
be required by the Municipal Engineer, and shall be at the expense of the
subdivider.
   (f)   (1)   Plan view on improvement plans must include the following:
         A.   Right-of-way line, centerline, departing lot lines, lot numbers,
subdivision limits, and limits of construction.
         B.   Centerline curve data and centerline tangent data, including
delta, radius, arc, chord, and tangent.
         C.   Radius of all curb returns to face of curb.
         D.   Approved street name.
         E.   Stations at every 100 feet on centerline. Indicate stations at
points of curve and tangent at the beginning and end of all returns at
centerline intersection, and at subdivision or section limits.
         F.   Street widths are based on face of curb to face of curb for full
length.
         G.   When proposed streets intersect with or join existing streets or
traveled way, indicate both edges of existing pavement, surface, or curb and
gutter for a minimum of 100 feet, or the length of connection, whichever
distance is the greater.
         H.   All existing or proposed easements.
         I.   All water mains, their sizes, valves, and fire hydrants, and
location of mains to centerline of street.
         J.   All sanitary sewers and appurtenances. Identify sanitary sewer
appurtenances by type. All appurtenances shall be numbered.
         K.   The location of all or any natural springs whether within or
draining to street right-of-way and indicate proposed treatment of it. All
springs will be capped and piped in a minimum six-inch diameter perforated pipe
encased in washed gravel, and connected into the nearest storm manhole or curb
inlet.
         L.   Proposed stream or channel relocations. Show existing and
proposed locations. Furnish detailed typical section and type of stabilization
to be provided. Any proposed stream or channel relocation, excluding road side
ditch, shall comply with the requirements of the Army Corp of Engineers.
         M.   Guard posts or barricade at the end of streets that are to be
extended in the future. A temporary T-turnaround shall be provided for dead end
streets exceeding 200 feet in length.
         N.   Protection of ends of curb and gutter by providing for erosion
control and temporary drainage where required.
         O.   Where a special typical section is approved, provides detail on
plan.
         P.   Notes that may be necessary to explain the intent and purposes of
the plan.
         Q.   Symmetrical transition of pavement at intersection with existing
street.
      (2)   Profile view on improvement plans must include the following:
         A.   Elevations at beginning and end of all vertical curves.
         B.   Length of vertical curves with elevations and stations of
vertical points of intersections (VPI).
         C.   Elevations computed every 50 feet on all tangent sections, and
grades computed every 25 feet in all vertical curves.
         D.   Elevations along all curbs and curb returns on intersecting
streets. The grades of intersecting streets shall match at the intersection of
the extensions of the respective curbs. In other words, a hypothetical curb
P.I. must be established.
         E.   Elevations at all curb inlets.
         F.   Extension of centerline profile 300 feet beyond property line or
boundary on all streets that provide for access to adjoining property.
         G.   Existing centerline profiles for 200 feet minimum distance to
insure proper grade tie, when proposed street is an extension of, or connects
with an existing street or road.
         H.   Centerline profile of existing street or road 300 feet minimum
distance to right and left of proposed connection, when a proposed street
intersects with an existing street or road.
         I.   All proposed water mains, sanitary sewer mains, storm drains, and
appurtenances.
         J.   All crossings of existing utilities.
         K.   Notes that may be necessary to explain the intent and purposes of
the profile.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1115.02 MONUMENTS.
   Iron pins and permanent markers shall be set under the direction of a
surveyor registered by the State of Ohio at all changes in direction of all
outside boundary lines of the platted property and at all changes in direction
of the right-of-way lines. Iron pins shall be 13/16-inch inside diameter, 30
inches long with a plastic plug placed in the top bearing the initials of the
surveyor. Permanent markers shall be one-inch in inside diameter, material 30-
inches long, buried one-foot in depth below final grade with a plastic plug
placed in the top bearing the initials of the surveyor. A minimum of four
permanent markers shall be set. The placing of all monuments shall meet the
minimum standards for boundary surveys in the State of Ohio.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1115.03 STREETS.
   (a)   Design and Construction. Streets shall be designed and constructed so
as to meet the following criteria:
 
MINIMUM COMPOSITION
              Deep Strength   Concrete Base Conc . Pvmt . Roller Com Concrete
              304 301 402 404 305 402 404   452           SS1523 402 404
Local Street  4"  5"      1½"6"  1½"1½"  6"            7"     1½"1½"
Collector     4"  6"  1½"1½"6"  1½"1½"  6"            7"     1½"1¼"
Street
Collector/    4"  8"  1½"1½"6"  1½"1½"  8"            8"     1½"1½"
Arterial St
Arterial/     4"  8"  1½"1½"8"  1½"1½"  9"            9"     2"  1½"
Industrial St
 
** A tack coat (Item 407) (0.10 gallon per square yard) will be required
between the 305 and 404 course.
Note:   The number in parenthesis is the design traffic number and is the
minimum number of 18,000 lbs. equivalent loads per day. When it is possible
that this will be exceeded, the developer's engineer is required to check with
the Village Engineer about changing design.
Legend
      301 = Bituminous Aggregate Base
      304 = Aggregate Base
      305 = Plain Portland Cement Concrete Pavement (5 Bag)
      402 = Asphalt Concrete
      SS1523 = Roller Compacted Concrete
      404 = Asphalt Concrete
      407 = Tack Coat (RC-70 or RS-1)
      408 = Prime Coat (RC-30, MC-70, (RT-2, RS-1, RS-2)
      452 = Plain Portland Cement Pavement Class C, - ODOT Specifications
      (1)   Curb and gutter with under-drains shall be constructed in
accordance with village standards.
      (2)   Sub-base shall be free of topsoil, vegetation, soft clay, or other
objectionable material for a minimum depth of two feet below finished sub-
grade. The sub-base shall be rolled, shaped, and compacted to a minimum depth
of one foot below sub-grade and to a minimum width of 18 inches beyond the back
of curbs. Compaction shall be not less than 100% of maximum dry density.
      (3)   The minimum radius at intersections measured at the face of curb
shall be 20 feet for cul-de-sacs and local streets, 35 feet for collector
streets, and 50 feet for arterial intersections.
         A.   Right-of-way and pavement widths shall be drawn in accordance
with the following table. Pavement widths shall be measured face of curb to
face of curb. Turnarounds on cul-de-sacs shall have a minimum 100' diameter
right-of-way. There shall be no center islands in the turnaround of a cul-de-
sac.
 
Street Type       Minimum Right-of-Way Minimum Pavement Width
Arterial w/median 100                  61
Arterial          100                  52
Collector         70                   36
Local             60                   30
Cul-de-sac                             R = 38 ft.
 
         B.   The typical sections contained in the Village of Commercial Point
Specifications, Materials and Standard Drawings Manual shall be utilized.
         C.   Minimum pavement composition shall be determined by existing soil
conditions and an AASHTO pavement design. All new pavement design shall include
an aggregate base having a minimum thickness of six inches. The design engineer
shall also consider future construction traffic. For new and reconstruction of
streets and roads within the corporation limits of Commercial Point, Ohio with
ADT's less than 400, the current "AASHTO Guidelines For Geometric Design of
Very Low Volume Local Roads" shall govern.
         D.   The minimum radius at intersections measured at the face of curb
shall be 20 feet for cul-de-sacs and local streets, 35 feet for collector
streets, and 50 feet for arterial intersections.
         E.   Horizontal and vertical alignment shall meet the following
minimum standards:
 
                           Arterial   Major      Minor      Cul-de-sac or Local
                                      Collector  Collector
Centerline Radius          1,050 ft.  650 ft.    400 ft.    250 ft.
Minimum Gradient           0.5%       0.5%       0.5%       0.5%
Monuments Maximum Gradient 6%         6%         7%         8%
Minimum Street             90-degrees 90-degrees 90-degrees 80-degrees
Intersection Angle
 
         F.   Clear sight distance (length along each approach leg) shall
follow ODOT's Location and Design Manual, Table 201-5 E Vol. 1.
         G.   Intersection centerline offsets shall meet the following minimum
requirements:
Local/local           150 feet
Local/collector       200 feet
Local/arterial        300 feet
Collector/collector   300 feet
Collector/arterial    1,320 feet
Cul-de-sac/cul-de-sac 150 feet
Cul-de-sac/local      150 feet
Cul-de-sac/collector  200 feet
Cul-de-sac/arterial   not permitted
 
         H.   Vertical curves shall be provided at any change of vertical grade
where the algebraic difference on grades is 1% or greater, unless otherwise
directed by the Municipal Engineer. Sight distance shall be measured as the
line of sight from a height of 3.75 feet to 0.5 feet above the pavement. The
length of vertical curve shall meet the length as set by the ODOT requirement
for crest and vertical segment. The ODOT Location and Design Manual Vol. 1,
latest edition, or the AASHTO guidelines for low volume roads shall govern.
         I.   The maximum profile grade approach to intersections shall be 2%.
         J.   Sidewalks shall be installed inside the right-of-way along all
streets, constructed of Portland cement concrete and located one foot off the
right-of-way, unless otherwise approved by the Technical Review Group.
Sidewalks shall be a minimum width and thickness as indicated below. At
driveways and other points of vehicle crossing, the thickness shall be six
inches. Sidewalks shall extend to the curbs at all intersections and include
wheelchair ramps compliant with current ADA requirements. ADA detectible
warning devices on ramps shall be "brick red."
 
Type of Street Sidewalk Width Sidewalk Thickness
Cul-de-sac     4 feet         4 inches
Local          4 feet         4 inches
Collector      4 feet         4 inches
Arterial       8 feet*        4 inches
 
*Or may be a leisure path, may be asphalt or concrete.
         K.   Driveway aprons, six inches thick minimum for residential and
eight inches thick minimum for non-residential, shall be provided from the
sidewalk to the curb at all driveway locations in accordance with the municipal
standard drawing. The maximum grade of a driveway apron shall not exceed 10%.
   (b)   Street Layout. The arrangement, character, extent, width, and location
of all streets shall conform to the master street plan of Commercial Point and
to the following:
      (1)   Streets shall be so arranged as to provide for the continuation of
existing streets.
      (2)   Connections shall be provided to adjoining properties for future
access.
      (3)   Local residential streets shall be laid out so as to discourage
through traffic while providing for interconnection of neighborhoods,
reasonable safety, and access by emergency vehicle services.
      (4)   Cul-de-sacs shall be provided with a bulb type turnaround.
      (5)   Permanent cul-de-sacs shall not exceed 600 feet except where a
variance to this requirement is specifically granted by Council. Temporary cul-
de-sacs may exceed 600 feet where they are part of an overall street network.
      (6)   The following regulations shall govern the design and layout of
blocks:
         A.   Irregularly shaped blocks, those intended for cul-de-sacs or loop
streets, and those containing interior parks or playgrounds, will be evaluated
by Council and may be approved by Council if properly designed and located, and
if the maintenance of interior public spaces is covered by notation on the
plat.
         B.   No block shall be longer than 1,500 feet and the block width
shall accommodate two tiers of lots, except where unusual topography or other
exceptional physical circumstances exist.
         C.   Where blocks are over 900 feet in length, a crosswalk easement no
less than ten feet in width at or near the halfway point may be required to
provide proper access to schools, recreational areas, shopping centers, and
other facilities.
      (7)   Street names shall be approved by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator and shall not duplicate or be similar to names of existing
streets within the municipality or its postal zip code.
   (c)   Lots should be designed so as to accomplish the following:
      (1)   Each lot shall have frontage on a public or private street as
specified in the Zoning Code, or zoning text as may be applicable.
      (2)   The depth and width of commercial and industrial lots shall be
adequate to provide for the required off-street loading and parking spaces.
      (3)   Corner lots shall have extra width to permit appropriate building
set back from and orientation to both streets.
      (4)   Double frontage, reverse frontage and irregularly shaped lots shall
be avoided.
      (5)   Lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to
street lines.
      (6)   No lot shall have an average depth that is more than three and one-
half times its average width unless otherwise allowed by Council.
      (7)   Pipe roof drain: roof drains shall either be to the street pavement
via two cored-holes per lot, or tied directly to the curb under drain as
determined by the Technical Review Group.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1115.04 STREET LIGHTING.
   (a)   Street lighting shall be required, designed and installed by the
subdivider. Street lights every 200 feet on opposite sides of street.
Illumination provided shall be uniform and compatible with adjacent light
sources. Energy efficient lamps, controlled by dusk-to-dawn photocells, are
required unless otherwise directed by the Municipal Engineer.
   (b)   Council shall approve the selection of lighting fixtures that are to
be used in the subdivision.
   (c)   The developer shall be required to set up an assessment on each lot to
cover the cost of operation of street lights within the subdivision.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1115.05 TRAFFIC CONTROL AND STREET SIGNS.
   (a)   All traffic and street name signs shall be installed by the subdivider
and shall conform to the requirements as set forth by the Municipal Engineer. A
schedule of traffic signs conforming to the current Ohio Manual of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices shall be submitted for review and approval by the
Municipal Engineer.
   (b)   For all required traffic control signals, the subdivider shall install
mast arms.
   (c)   All traffic control devices shall conform to Commercial Point
standards.
   (d)   The developer may be required to provide painted cross walks and stop
bars at intersections and other places as may be appropriate to facilitate
pedestrian traffic.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1115.06 WATER.
   Adequate public water service shall be provided for all lots in conformance
with the following criteria:
   (a)   All water mains shall be PVC AWWA C-900 or C-905, AWWA C-909 CL-150 or
HDPE, AWWA C-906, DIPS, DR-11 minimum.
   (b)   All water mains and appurtenances shall be constructed in accordance
with the rules, standards, and specifications of Commercial Point and shall be
reviewed, tested, and approved by the Municipal Engineer prior to acceptance by
the village.
   (c)   Service connections shall be HDPE DR-9 with stiffeners at every
coupling, installed at the time the water main is installed.
   (d)   The minimum size of mains shall be eight-inches, unless prior approval
from the Technical Review Group.
   (e)   Minimum cover shall be 48 inches.
   (f)   New waterlines, along with sanitary sewers and storm drains shall be
placed within the roadway right-of-way and meet the required horizontal and
vertical separations as set forth by the OEPA.
   (g)   The following requirements shall be met for fire protection:
      (1)   In a residential single-family area, there shall be a minimum
distribution of fire hydrants on a ratio of one to each 120,000 square feet of
area. The distance between fire hydrants shall not exceed 400 feet, and one
hydrant shall be placed at the dead-end of a cul-de-sac.
      (2)   In commercial, business, industrial, and multi-family areas, there
shall be a distribution of public and/or private fire hydrants on a ratio of
one to each 80,000 square feet of area. A minimum of one hydrant shall be
provided within 300 feet of every building or part thereof with a minimum of
one additional hydrant within 500 feet of every building or part thereof.
      (3)   Fire hydrants shall be placed two feet clear behind the back of
curb, whenever possible, or eight feet clear behind the edge of pavement in
uncurbed streets. Fire hydrants shall be placed a minimum of 40 feet from
buildings protected whenever possible.
      (4)   Computations may be required to verify that the minimum fire
hydrant flow in the proposed improvement meets the requirements for the
appropriate insurance ratings. The computations shall be based on a Hazen
Williams coefficient of 100. For residential, (single family) areas, the fire
flow should be 1,000 gpm at 20 pounds per square inch (psi). For industrial,
multi-family, or commercial areas, the fire flow should be a minimum of 2,000
gpm at 30 psi. Higher flows may be required depending on the type of use. Fire
flows shall be provided in addition to maximum daily requirements.
      (5)   Fire hydrants shall conform to AWWA C502 and shall be Mueller
Company A423 Super Centurion or American Darling B84B fire hydrants. All
hydrants shall be supplied with five inch 30-degree Stortz fitting. A maximum
of one extension shall be permitted per hydrant. The hydrants shall have a six-
inch mechanical joint inlet connection, a five and one-quarter-inch main valve
opening, two two and one-half-inch hose nozzles, and one four-inch pumper
nozzle with coarse thread (four per inch). All outlet nozzles shall have
National Standard threads. Hydrants shall be furnished with a five-foot bury
depth unless otherwise shown on the plans. Hydrants shall be self-draining. A
drainage sump two feet in diameter and two feet deep shall be excavated below
each hydrant and filled with coarse gravel or stone, compacted in place, under
and around the shoe of the hydrant and to a level of six inches above the waste
opening. No drainage sump shall be connected to a sanitary sewer. The operating
nut shall be pentagon. Fire hydrants shall be factory painted grenadier red.
One hydrant wrench shall be furnished with each five hydrants.
   (h)   Valves shall be placed outside of pavement wherever practical. In
general, two valves shall be installed at every main line tee, and three valves
shall be placed at every main line cross. The distance between main line valves
shall be in accordance with the OEPA's Ten-State Standard.
   (i)   At high points in water mains where air can accumulate, provisions
shall be made to remove the air by means of air/vacuum release valve or fire
hydrant as determined by Commercial Point.
   (j)   All tees, bends, plugs, and hydrants shall be provided with reaction
blocking and an approved restraining system designed to prevent movement.
Restraining systems shall be epoxy coated.
   (k)   Meters shall be supplied by the municipality and paid for by the
customer.
   (l)   The subdivider shall provide the municipality with all required OEPA
approvals and pay all OEPA and associated review fees.
   (m)   Fire Department connections to a building fire sprinkler system shall
be a five-inch Stortz-type connection.
   (n)   Location of the connections set forth in division (m) of this section
will be determined by the local fire authority.
   (o)   All valves and hydrants shall include factory installed stainless
steel trim bolts and nuts.
   (p)   Curb boxes shall be Ford arch pattern type boxes with an extension
road provided.
   (q)   All water fitting appurtances shall be American made.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1115.07 SANITARY SEWERS.
   Each lot shall be served by an adequate sanitary sewage collection and
disposal system.
   (a)   (1)   All sanitary sewer pipe shall be PVC sewer pipe ASTM D-3034, SDR
35 and ASTM F-679 or HDPE minimum DR-17. All pipes shall have sufficient
strength to withstand an HS-20 live load. If PVC pipe is used, a mandrel test
is required just prior to expiration of the one-year guarantee to assure
maximum deflection of 5% has not been exceeded. Any pipe that fails this test
will be replaced at the subdividers expense.
      (2)   PVC pipe, shall be shop tested in accordance with the City of
Columbus Construction Inspection Division's quality control program at the
subdivider's expense. A report of the material tests shall be provided to the
Municipal Engineer.
   (b)   New sanitary sewers, along with waterlines and storm drains, shall be
placed within the roadway right-of-way and meet the required horizontal and
vertical separation as set forth by the OEPA. All sanitary sewage collection
systems shall be constructed in accordance with the rules, regulations,
standards and specifications of Commercial Point, OEPA's Ten-State Standards
and the Ohio Department of Health.
   (c)   A map must be provided delineating the contributing area in acres to
the sanitary sewer system. All sanitary sewer manholes shall be numbered,
consistent with the numbering on the improvement plans. A copy of the location
map may be used for this purpose.
   (d)   Sanitary sewers shall be designed in accordance with the latest
edition of OEPA's "Ten States Standards."
   (e)   The subdivider shall provide the municipality with all required OEPA
approvals and pay all OEPA and associated review fees.
   (f)   Minimum collection line size shall be eight inches.
   (g)   All sanitary sewer manholes and covers shall conform to Commercial
Point Standard Drawings.
   (h)   Service shall be provided to each lot. If basement service is not
provided, it shall be so noted on the sanitary sewer improvement plans and on
the final plat. Risers shall be provided where the service is greater than 12
feet deep, provided that basement service will still be provided.
   (i)   All sanitary sewers shall be videotaped in DVD format after
construction prior to acceptance of the sewers by the municipality. The DVD
shall remain the property of the municipality. The DVD shall clearly identify
the location of the camera within the sewer, date and time of DVD, and be of
sufficient quality to determine the condition of the sewers.
   (j)   The top of the manhole cover shall be flush with the finished grade of
the surrounding area. Covers are not permitted to be buried nor be above final
grade.
   (k)   Plan view on sanitary sewer plans must include the following: (TBC by
engineer).
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1115.08 DRAINAGE.
   An adequate storm drainage system shall be provided for each subdivision/
development. The design of said system shall be prepared using the Rational
method and shall be based on a minimum of two year frequency. Rainfall
intensity, runoff coefficients, and concentration time used in computing flows
and structures sizes shall be in accordance with the tables, charts, and the
data established by the Municipal Engineer for such calculations. All areas
which contribute storm water to the proposed drainage system must be considered
on the determination of the sizes of structures and channels. Detention basins
that are properly maintained by their owners or property owners' associations
are important to protect the integrity of the public storm sewer system.
   (a)   (1)   A separate grading plan shall be submitted at a scale of 1" =
50' or l" = 100'. The grading plan shall indicate ground elevations with
existing and proposed contours shown at intervals of not more than five feet
where the slope is greater than 10% and not more than two feet where the slope
is less than 10%. Sufficient proposed elevations must be shown such as at all
lot corners, etc. in order to explain the proposed grading. First floor
elevations of all existing and proposed structures shall be included. Routing
of the major storm shall be shown. Sanitary sewer and storm sewer top of
castings must be shown on the grading plan.
      (2)   The minimum building elevation adjacent to the 100-year routing
path shall be set a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood elevation. No
basement entrances, windows, or basement level garages shall be permitted
adjacent to and below the 100-year routing path.
      (3)   Swales necessary to carry surface water must have a minimum
gradient of 1.0%.
   (b)   Storm Sewer Requirements.
      (1)   Minimum cover for storm sewer pipe shall be one foot clear from the
bottom of the curb and gutter or from the bottom of the under-drain to the
outside top of the pipe except as approved by the Village Engineer. Maintain a
minimum of two feet of cover from the finished ground surface to the outside
top of the pipe for any storm sewer system located beyond the limits of street
right-of-way.
      (2)   Standard headwalls are to be constructed at the inlet and outfall
of all storm sewers, and shall be shown on the plan and profile.
      (3)   The invert of the first storm sewer appurtenance shall be above the
computed floodplain elevation, unless otherwise permitted by the Village
Engineer.
      (4)   Pipe for storm sewers shall not be less than 12 inches in diameter.
All storm sewer piping shall be extra strength vitrified clay, reinforced
concrete, or ductile iron. Other materials may be approved at the direction of
the Village Engineer. All piping shall have sufficient strength to withstand an
HS-20 live load.
      (5)   All drainage calculations, drainage area outlines, and contributing
areas used in drainage design shall be furnished on a print of the grading
plan.
      (6)   The inverts of all curb inlets, manholes, yard inlets, and other
appurtenances shall be formed to reduce turbulence to a minimum.
      (7)   Manholes shall be provided at all changes in alignment and grade of
storm sewers and at such other locations as necessary to maintain a maximum
interval of 500 feet between manholes or storm sewers.
      (8)   Storm inlet or catch basin grates shall be of a type to permit safe
crossing by bicycles as approved by the Village Engineer.
      (9)   The maximum distance for overland flow shall be 300 feet before
entering a surface yard inlet or 400 feet before entering a curb inlet. Except,
that the maximum overland drainage area tributary to any yard inlet or curb
inlet shall not exceed 1.5 acres. The maximum spacing for curb inlets shall not
exceed 400 feet unless approved by the Village Engineer. The maximum spread of
flow during a two-year storm shall not exceed eight feet for 30-foot wide
streets and nine feet for streets wider than 30 feet. Spread calculations may
be required, at the discretion of the Village Engineer.
      (10)   All storm water runoff shall be conducted through storm drainage
systems up to and including the equivalent of a 72-inch diameter pipe.
      (11)   The flow lines of pipes shall be set such that either the crown,
or the 0.8 depth points, at junctions, are at the same elevation. However, the
crown of the outlet pipe may be lower.
      (12)   Where an open watercourse is permitted, an easement shall be
provided at least equal to the area required for the 100-year rainfall. Also,
the easement shall be shown on the final plat as a "Watercourse and Utility
Easement." Restrictions as to the use of this easement shall be shown on the
final plat.
      (13)   No water will be allowed to cross a street intersection unless it
is carried in storm sewer.
   (c)   Storm Sewer Design Criteria.
      (1)   The method outlined herein will provide a general guide as to the
criteria and procedures to be used for storm sewer design.
         A.   The rational method shall be used for all storm water drainage
design for areas up to 200 acres. Storm sewers shall be designed to carry a
two-year storm flowing full Q=CIA, in which
            Q = Quantity of storm water runoff in cubic feet per second.
            C = Coefficient of runoff (0.4 for single-family residential
areas).
            I = Average rainfall intensity in inches per hour for the period of
concentration to the point under consideration. The minimum length of time of
concentration is ten minutes to a curb inlet or l5 minutes to a ditch catch
basin.
            A = Drainage area in acres tributary to the point of concentration.
         B.   For drainage areas over 200 acres, the method explained in "Urban
Hydrology for Small Watershed, Technical Release No. 55" (can be obtained from
the Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture) shall be used.
      (2)   The minimum time of concentration to the first curb inlet shall be
ten minutes. The minimum time of concentration to the first catch basin shall
be l5 minutes.
      (3)   Storm sewer pipe sizes are to be determined by using Manning's
Formula with a minimum coefficient of roughness of n = .013.
      (4)   The minimum allowable velocity shall be three feet per second (fps)
in pipe. The maximum allowable velocity shall be seven fps.
      (5)   A hydraulic grade line check based on a five-year storm may be
required, at the discretion of the Village Engineer.
   (d)   Open Watercourses.
      (1)   Access to storm drainage ditches and channels shall be assured by
means of maintenance easements. Such maintenance easements shall be not less
than 20 feet in width, measured horizontally from the top of the bank,
exclusive of the width of the ditch, or channel, and shall be provided on each
side of the ditch. Maintenance easements are to be kept free of obstructions.
Detailed provisions regarding the entities to be responsible for maintenance of
the facility shall be submitted in text form with the subdivision plat. As
applicable, notes regarding maintenance shall be made on the plat.
      (2)   Design storm frequency for open channels shall be based on bank
full for ten-year storm, with a one foot freeboard.
      (3)   A.   The minimum velocity for open channels shall be two feet per
second. The maximum velocity is dependent on the type of channel protection
provided. The desirable minimum grade for open channel is 1.0%.
         B.   The Manning "n" values shall be as follows:
            Sod or jute mat lining      0.05
            Paving lining            0.015
            Rock Protection         0.08
         C.   The Municipal Engineer on a case-by-case basis will review
Manning "n" values for other lining materials.
         D.   The minimum side slope shall be 3:1 for unprotected slopes and 2:
l for slopes protected with riprap. Flatter slopes are more desirable. Steeper
slopes for materials other than riprap will be reviewed on a case-by-case
basis.
      (4)   If the proposed improvements are located in a floodplain area as
identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the limits of this
floodway and floodway fringes must be shown on the improvement plans.
   (e)   Storm Water Detention.
      (1)   If the post-development runoff volume is greater than the
predevelopment runoff volume, storm water detention must be provided in
accordance with the following table:
 
Increase in 2-year Volume of Runoff Control Design Frequency (Critical Storm)
1 - 2 Times                         10-year
2 - 3 Times                         25-year
3 - 4 Times                         50-year
Over 4 Times                        100-Year
 
      (2)   The maximum allowable release rate shall be based on the two-year
storm under pre-developed site conditions, for all rainfall events up to and
including the critical storm. The maximum allowable release rate for storms
greater than the critical storm shall not exceed the pre-developed rate for the
same frequency storm, for storms up to and including the 100-year storm.
      (3)   "Total Runoff Volume Computations Worksheet," in the Village of
Commercial Point Specification, Materials, and Standard Drawings Manual should
be used to determine predeveloped and post developed runoff volumes, runoff
volumes for critical storm, and required detention volume calculations.
      (4)   Detention basins shall be lined with riprap or other bank
protection as approved by the Village Engineer, extending at least three feet
horizontally and two feet vertically from the established water table line.
Soils information shall be provided to demonstrate that the retention basis
will be impervious.
      (5)   All wet basins shall have fountains approved by Council. Dry basins
must have concrete channels to handle low flows.
      (6)   Detention basins shall have a minimum 1% slope.
      (7)   All control facilities shall be designed with overflow provisions
to handle the developed 100-year discharge.
      (8)   The maintenance of detention basins and all outlets thereto shall
be the responsibility of the property owner or property owners' association, as
applicable and not the Village of Commercial Point. Such maintenance shall
ensure that water in each detention basin through the detention basin outlet
does not restrict the flow of the public storm sewer system.
   (f)   Wet basins are to include one fountain for every three-quarter of an
acre of surface area. In addition, the basin must include an air diffuser below
the fountain to improve water circulation and quality. The infrastructure to be
installed that is necessary to provide power to the fountain and aerator shall
be installed in a manner to coincide with the overall basin landscaping
aesthetics. Wet basins with a surface area of less than three-quarter of an
acre are required to include one fountain and air diffuser. Fountains and
aerators must be operated from April 1 to October 31 each year.
Fountain and Aerator Requirements
Basin Surface Area (Acre) Number of Fountains and Aerators
Fountain and Aerator Requirements
Basin Surface Area (Acre) Number of Fountains and Aerators
0.75                      1
0.75 -- 1.5               2
1.5 -- 2.25               3
2.25 -- 3.0               4
3.0 -- 3.75               5
3.75 -- 4.5               6
> 4.5 discuss with Technical Review Group
 
   (g)   Trash racks. At a minimum, all outlet structures shall have a grate to
prevent large debris from passing through. Trash racks are to be constructed
from galvanized metal and shall meet the specifications provided below.
      (1)   Catch basin riser structures shall have a trash rack at all window
openings with a height of 1-foot or greater, spacing not to exceed 4-inches,
and a pre-fabricated grate top.
      (2)   Pipe and headwall structures shall have a fabricated galvanized
metal grate of the type similar to that shown on Exhibit A, upon review, the
technical review group may approve other types and forms of trash racks
presented by the design engineer as part of the construction plan submittal.
(Ord. 2021-28, passed 8-16-2021; Am. Ord. 2025-01, passed 3-3-2025)
§ 1115.09 BRIDGES.
   Bridges over walkways or watercourses shall be designed to ODOT standards.
Calculations shall be submitted to the Municipal Engineer to demonstrate that
these standards have been met.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1115.10 EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL.
   (a)   Measures shall be taken to minimize erosion and its impact during
subdivision construction activity. Prior to construction, a copy of the Notice
of Intent (NOI) to use the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency's General
Construction Permit, as well as the storm water pollution prevention plan
prepared as part of the NOI, shall be submitted with the improvement plans for
review by the municipality. All erosion control devices shall be in place at
the start of construction and maintained by the subdivider at all times, and
other measures implemented according to the approved time schedule. Such
erosion control devices, techniques and other measures shall not be removed
and/or disturbed until earth disturbing activities on the site have been
concluded.
   (b)   Erosion control plans shall be based upon controlling erosion on-site,
with the object of eliminating or minimizing erosion or sedimentation impacts
off-site. Erosion and sedimentation control plans shall follow the OEPA NPDES
Phase II Permit and be approved by the municipal engineer.
   (c)   Erosion and sedimentation control techniques will be inspected by the
municipality to ensure compliance with the State's General Construction Permit.
The cost for this inspection shall be stipulated by ordinance. Failure to
maintain erosion and sedimentation control measures as approved by the
municipality is a violation of these Subdivision Regulations.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1115.11 LANDSCAPING.
   (a)   All improved areas within dedicated street rights-of-way shall be
graded, friable soil, and seeded in accordance with current standards of the
municipality and in a manner approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
   (b)   The number, type and location of trees to be planted, excluding the
dedicated street right-of-way, shall be based upon the existing trees preserved
on the site and shall be shown on a landscaping plan to be submitted with the
final plat. Landscaping plans shall be in accordance with a master tree plan.
Where such plans do not exist, the subdivider shall provide the following per
lot: One shade tree (maple family, 1-1/2 - 2 inch), two shrubs 3-4 feet
(pyramidal Evergreens), two shrubs 2-3 feet (flowering shrubs), four shrubs 18-
24 inch (spreading evergreens), and 12 bags of mulch.
   (c)   The subdivider shall be responsible for the establishment of required
plantings and such responsibility shall extend one year from the date of
original planting. A bond shall be posted to ensure the planting and
replacement of trees, and may be reduced as trees are planted. Council may
require tree buffers or landscaped mounds between adjoining properties.
   (d)   An irrigation system shall not be allowed within the dedicated public
street right-of-way.
   (e)   All tree and shrub planting shall follow ANSI A300, latest edition,
Part 6 "Transplanting Standard".
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1115.12 HILLSIDE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Cuts and Fills. No land shall be graded, cut or filled so as to create
a slope exceeding a vertical rise of one foot for every two and one-half feet
of horizontal distance between abutting lots, or between adjoining tracts of
land, unless a retaining wall of sufficient height and thickness is provided to
retain the graded bank, or other acceptable control measures are provided.
   (b)   Compaction of Fill. All fill outside the right-of-way shall be
compacted to a density of 98% dry density or greater, to within four inches of
finished grade.
   (c)   Retaining Walls. Retaining walls may be required whenever topographic
conditions warrant or where necessary to retain fill or cut slopes within the
right-of-way. Such improvements shall require the approval of the Municipal
Engineer.
§ 1115.13 RESERVED
§ 1115.14 PLATTED EASEMENTS.
   The following standards shall govern the provision of easements:
   (a)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way,
channel, storm conduit or stream, there shall be provided to the municipality,
a storm drainage easement or drainage right-of-way on forming substantially
with the lines of such water course and containing additional width as required
for maintenance.
   (b)   Easements, a minimum of ten feet in width shall be provided adjacent
to each side of and contiguous with all proposed rights-of-way. Such easements
shall be used for any and all public or private underground utilities, street
trees and other public facilities.
   (c)   Utility or drainage easements across lots or alongside or rear lot
lines shall be a minimum 20 feet in width. The Municipal Engineer may require
additional width where appropriate, based on the proposed usage. If a proposed
utility is outside the right-of-way, a minimum of 7% feet of clearance must be
provided between the centerline of the proposed utility and the edge of the
easement. If a proposed utility is within the right-of-way, an easement must be
provided adjacent to the right-of-way if the utility is less than seven and
one-half feet from the right-of-way line.
   (d)   Where subdivisions are adjacent to schools, parks, or other public
facilities, access easements shall be provided to those facilities where deemed
appropriate by Council. Such access easement shall be a minimum of 20 feet in
width and side yard setbacks for adjacent lots shall be measured from the
easement.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1115.15 LOCATION OF PRIVATE UTILITIES.
   All utilities (including, but not limited to, gas, electric, telephone, and
CATV cables) shall be located underground throughout the subdivision. Wherever
existing utility facilities are above ground, unless otherwise stipulated by
the Municipal Engineer, they shall be placed underground.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1117
Bonds, Insurance, Fees and Inspection Process
1117.01   General requirements.
1117.02   Bonding requirements.
1117.03   Indemnity insurance.
1117.04   Fees.
1117.05   Construction inspection process.
§ 1117.01 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Prior to final approval of any plat, the following bonds, deposits and
insurance policies shall be provided to the municipality by the subdivider.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1117.02 BONDING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Purpose. A performance bond shall be posted by the subdivider to
guarantee to the municipality that in the event the required public
improvements and utilities, which were an integral part of the approved final
plat, are not installed, the municipality may install such required public
improvements and utilities at the expense of the subdivider.
   (b)   Performance Bond Requirements. The required bond shall be so worded as
to ensure the completion of the improvements, to the extent required by the
Subdivision Regulations or which may be required by Council, including the
construction of all streets and bridges, all sidewalks and curbs and the
installation of a storm drainage system, all sanitary sewage facilities, water
services, and the setting of all monuments.
      (1)   The applicant shall file with the Fiscal Officer a surety bond in
favor of Commercial Point. Such bond must be executed by a surety company
authorized to enter into such bonds under the laws of the State of Ohio. The
bond shall be in such amount and in such form and contain such conditions as
the municipality may require.
      (2)   Should a subdivision be approved in sections, the above
requirements may be applied by section, rather than to the subdivision as a
whole at the option of the subdivider unless specifically required by Council.
Requirements by Council may include thoroughfare and infrastructure
improvements that are deemed appropriate for the large development and
necessary for incremental development of the section.
   (c)   Term of Performance Bond Extension. The Planning and Zoning
Administrator may extend the term of the performance bond upon a written
request from the subdivider when good cause for delay is shown and the surety
company agrees to the extension.
   (d)   Maintenance Bond.
      (1)   Prior to the release of a performance bond, the subdivider shall
present a maintenance bond in an amount as stipulated by ordinance based on the
value of the public and private improvements required by the approved
improvement plans and the subdivision regulations. The developer or designated
representative shall contact the Planning and Zoning Administrator to schedule
a meeting with municipal officials during the 11th month of the first year of
the maintenance bond to perform an inspection of the improvements. Any
deficiencies shall be documented in writing and provided to the developer who
shall take appropriate action in addressing said deficiencies.
      (2)   After all deficiencies, if any, have been addressed to the
satisfaction of the municipality, the maintenance bond may be reduced in an
amount determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator to cover street
improvements for an additional four years.
      (3)   No certificate of zoning compliance or building permit shall be
issued in the approved subdivision, or section thereof, until the required
maintenance bond is accepted.
   (e)   Release of Performance Bond and "As Built" Drawings. Request for the
release of a performance bond upon completion of all required improvements
including "punch list" items must include "as built" drawings to include any
changes from the approved improvement plans, including grading plan for storm
drainage. Two hard copies of the "as built" drawings must be submitted and in
electronic format (CD/DVD) in either jpeg or tif format, with GPS/GIS files.
The "as built" drawings shall be reviewed and approved by the Municipal
Engineer, showing the location of said improvements, as constructed, in both
plan and profile. The "as built" drawings and revised grading plan shall be
respectively signed by a licensed engineer or surveyor licensed in the State of
Ohio.
   (f)   Bond Instructions.
      (1)   The bond form obtainable from the Planning and Zoning Administrator
is the only one acceptable to the municipality.
      (2)   The bond must be for the total amount required by the municipality.
      (3)   Power of attorney of person signing on behalf of the surety company
must be attached to the bond if not already on file with the municipality.
      (4)   If the person acting as attorney for the surety company is not a
licensed resident agent of the State of Ohio, then a licensed Ohio resident
agent of the company shall countersign this bond.
      (5)   The signatures of two witnesses are required on the bond.
      (6)   If the subdivision applicant is a corporation, then the corporate
seal must be shown in addition to the seal of the bonding company.
      (7)   The bond must show the bond number and the name of the bonding
company's local agent.
      (8)   Commercial Point requires a completion date of two years
(performance bonds only).
   (g)   Cash Bond. The municipality may, at its discretion, require the
posting by the developer of a cash bond in lieu of any or all of the provisions
of this section. Interest on such bond shall accrue to the developer, but in no
event shall be payable thereto until performance has been completed in
accordance with all of the provisions of the Regulations. The Municipal
Engineer shall determine the amount of such bond.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1117.03 INDEMNITY INSURANCE.
   A policy of indemnity insurance for personal liability and property damage,
in the amount as stipulated by ordinance, protecting the municipality against
any claims for damage to person or property resulting from or by reason of the
construction of the required improvements, shall be furnished to the
municipality and maintained in force by the subdivider. The insurance policy
shall remain in full force and effect until all improvements are completed and
maintained to the satisfaction of the Council.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1117.04 FEES.
   (a)   Subdividers shall be responsible for payment of the following fees,
which shall be submitted with the plats, unless otherwise noted. These fees are
subject to review and revision by Council.
      (l)   For processing of a preliminary subdivision plat, the sum of $400,
plus $5 per lot for each plat.
      (2)   For processing of a final subdivision plat and final improvement
plans, the sum of $200, plus $10 per lot, plus 2% of the estimated construction
cost.
      (3)   For processing of minor subdivision plats that require improvement
plans, 2% of the estimated construction cost ($600 minimum).
      (4)   For processing of minor subdivision plats that do not require
improvement plans, the sum of $400 plus $10 per lot.
      (5)   Processing of resubmitted final plats are subject to a fee of $5
per lot, and are subject to a fee of up to 50% of the original fees.
      (6)   A retainer for all inspection fees, supervision, and testing of
materials, in the amount of 5% of the cost of construction of the required
improvements based upon the subdivider's detailed estimate of said cost as
approved by the Municipal Engineer. Said fee to be paid prior to the beginning
of construction. If the inspecting, supervision, and testing fees are
anticipated to exceed the retained amount, an additional amount will be
required to be deposited. Any of these amounts remaining at the completion of
construction will be returned to the subdivider.
      (7)   Tests performed for the village by commercial laboratories to
verify compliance with construction standards shall be billed to the subdivider
at the rates charged by the laboratories.
      (8)   If the fees collected for processing of plats exceed the costs
incurred by the village, the balance will be returned to the subdivider.
      (9)   For re-zoning of a planned district, the sum of $500.
      (10)   Site development plan fees:
         A.   Major: $500 processing fee and $10,000 review retainer fee.
         B.   Minor: $100 processing fee and $2,000 review retainer fee. If the
amount incurred by the village in reviewing any site development plan exceeds
the review retainer fee, then an additional amount will be charged to the
developer and required to be deposited. This amount shall not exceed the actual
amounts incurred by the village in reviewing the site development plan. Any
review retainer fee(s) remaining at the completion of the review shall be
returned to the developer.
      (11)   Flood plain development permit fee, the sum of $500.
   (b)   In addition to the required fees for processing a subdivision
application, said fees as stipulated by ordinance, the subdivider shall be
responsible for the following:
      (1)   Payment to the municipality of a retainer for inspection,
monitoring and the testing of materials consisting of an amount as stipulated
by ordinance of the construction cost of the required improvements based on the
subdivider's engineer's detailed estimate of said costs as reviewed by the
municipal engineer. Any retainage remaining at the completion of the
construction will be returned to the subdivider. If the inspection, supervision
and testing fees are anticipated to exceed the original retainage amount, the
subdivider shall be required to deposit additional fees to the municipality.
The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall inform the subdivider if this
situation should occur. The municipality may temporarily stop construction work
until additional retainage has been provided.
      (2)   A water tower maintenance fee of $1,000 per each platted lot. This
fee will be paid in phases at the time each phase is approved for construction.
      (3)   A.   For all commercial, industrial, and warehousing subdivisions,
a utilities facilities construction impact fee of $0.25 per square foot of
building of principal and accessory structures to be developed within the
subdivision. The utilities facilities construction impact fee shall be
collected at the time a subdivider submits a written site plan application per
Chapter 1141. If an accessory structure is not included in the written site
plan application and the subdivider later submits an application to obtain a
Certificate of Zoning Compliance per §§
1135.02 and
1135.03 for an accessory structure, the utilities facilities construction
impact fee for the accessory structure shall be collected at the time the
subdivider submits an application for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance.
         B.   The utilities facilities construction impact fee shall be
refundable only if Council denies approval of the major site plan application.
If the site plan is approved but approval has expired per §
1141.07(e), a subdivider shall not be required to pay the same utilities
facilities construction impact fee more than once. If the site plan approval
has expired, then the subdivider shall be given a credit for the utilities
facilities construction impact fee already paid. If site plan approval expires
and the subdivider submits a new written site plan application that differs
from the originally approved site plan application, the subdivider shall be
responsible for payment of additional fees if the building square footage
contained in the new site plan application is greater than the previously
approved building square footage.
         C.   A credit for payment of the utilities facilities construction
impact fees already paid shall, upon request by the subdivider who submitted a
written site plan application per
Chapter 1141, be given to any transferee, assignee, or future owner of the
property that is described in the site plan application. If the credit is not
sufficient to cover the square footage of any written site plan application re-
submitted per
Chapter 1141, the transferee, assignee, or future owner shall be required to
deposit additional fees to the municipality.
         D.   Utilities facilities construction impact fees shall be collected
only on the basis of building square footage. The square footage of structures
such as parking lots shall not be considered when calculating the overall
impact fee owed.
         E.   All moneys generated pursuant to the utilities construction
impact fee under this division shall be divided 90% among the Water Fund and
10% among the Sewer Fund.
      (4)   A.   For all residential subdivisions, a utilities facilities
construction impact fee of $0.25 per square foot of building of principal
structures to be developed within the subdivision. No utilities facilities
construction impact fee shall be collected for accessory structures within a
residential subdivision. The utilities facilities construction impact fee shall
be collected at the time a subdivider submits an application to obtain a
certificate of zoning compliance per §§
1135.02 and
1135.03.
         B.   All moneys generated pursuant to the utilities facilities
construction impact fee under this division shall be divided 90% among the
Water Fund and 10% among the Sewer Fund.
      (5)   Other applicable fees as stipulated by ordinance.
(Ord. 2022-07, passed 2-8-2022)
§ 1117.05 CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION PROCESS.
   (a)   Pre-construction Meeting Required. Prior to the construction of
improvements, a pre-construction meeting shall be required between the
subdivider and/or designated representative(s) and the municipality's Technical
Review Group. The purpose of this meeting is to review the construction
schedule and related details, as well as the inspection process. The subdivider
shall contact the municipality's engineer to schedule this meeting. The
required performance bond, retainage fees for inspection, monitoring and
testing, and municipal engineering review fees shall be submitted to the
municipality no later than the preconstruction meeting.
   (b)   Construction Inspection Process. Following completion of improvements,
the municipality's Municipal Engineer will conduct a walk-through of the
project and, if necessary, prepare a detailed punch list of items that are not
in compliance with municipal standards and regulations. The Technical Review
Group shall review this punch list for accuracy before the list is released to
the subdivider. The subdivider is responsible for addressing all items on the
punch list. Municipal Engineer, upon notice by the subdivider, will reinspect
said items and inform the Planning and Zoning Administrator when completed.
   (c)   Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing division to the contrary,
erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be maintained throughout all
land disturbing activities, in accordance with the approved storm water
pollution prevention plan.
   (d)   Compliance Inspections. Periodic inspections of a land disturbing
activities' erosion and sedimentation control measures will determine either
partial compliance or non-compliance with erosion and sedimentation control
regulations. Partial compliance is defined as erosion and sedimentation control
measures that are found to be in need of repair or maintenance or when
practices fail to provide their intended function. Non-compliance is defined as
erosion and sedimentation control measures are not installed or implemented or
when partial compliance schedules are not adhered to.
      (1)   Should land disturbing activities be found to be in partial
compliance, a notification will be issued by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator that will require full compliance within three working days,
unless it is found that the practices fail to provide their intended function,
in which case there will be ten calendar days to submit a revised storm water
pollution prevention plan and implement new control measures.
      (2)   Should land disturbing activities be found to be non-compliant, a
notification will be issued that will require full compliance within ten
calendar days, including weekends and holidays.
      (3)   If the aforementioned time frames are not met, the site will be
found to be in violation of the Code of the Village of Commercial Point and
subject to penalty in accordance with §
1105.07.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1130
Planning and Zoning Residential Standards
1130.01   Architectural diversity (same house models next to each other).
1130.02   Building envelope.
1130.03   Chimneys.
1130.04   Driveways.
1130.05   Four-sided architecture.
1130.06   Garages.
1130.07   Front loaded garages.
1130.08   Side loaded garages.
1130.09   House size and setbacks.
1130.10   Landscaping, required.
1130.11   Lot coverages.
1130.12   Parks and green space.
§ 1130.01 ARCHITECTURAL DIVERSITY (SAME HOUSE MODELS NEXT TO EACH OTHER).
   All single-family residential developments shall incorporate architectural
diversity whereby (a) the same house model and elevation shall not be directly
across the street and (b) a minimum two-lot separation shall be required
between the same house model on the same side of the street or diagonal from
each other.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1130.02 BUILDING ENVELOPE.
   The dimensional space within which a building or structure is permitted to
be built on a lot and that is defined by minimum yard setbacks.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1130.03 CHIMNEYS.
   (a)   Cantilevered and shed type chimneys are permitted only if located on
the rear of the house and not visible from the street. A chimney built "inside"
the exterior wall or built inside the house or residential unit shall be exempt
from this requirement.
   (b)   All chimneys shall be constructed out of masonry or stucco. Except for
cantilevered and shed chimneys, chimneys shall extend the full height of the
abutting vertical wall plane.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1130.04 DRIVEWAYS.
   Driveways for residential and non-residential developments shall consist of
concrete, asphalt, or brick pavers. Council may permit a similar construction
material as an alternative only upon prior approval. All driveway aprons shall
be concrete. All driveways shall be a flat, earth tone color.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1130.05 FOUR-SIDED ARCHITECTURE.
   (a)   The purpose of requiring four-sided architecture on all residential
dwellings is to avoid large areas of blank exterior walls. Each side or rear
elevation must contain at least two design elements and each front elevation
must contain at least three design elements. On two-story dwellings, it is
preferable that each story on a single elevation contains at least one design
element. Typical design elements are included below, but this list is not all-
inclusive.
   (b)   The eligible design elements are as follows:
      (1)   A door of at least 17 square feet in area.
      (2)   A window of at least six square feet in area. Windows closer than
ten feet shall be considered as one element. A set of adjacent windows, such as
double or bay windows, shall be considered as one element.
      (3)   A chimney.
      (4)   An articulated gable vent of at least four square feet in area.
      (5)   Porches, decks or similar structure.
      (6)   A similar significant permanent architectural feature consistent
with the style of the house only upon prior approval by Council.
      (7)   The use of three-tab type roof shingles is not permitted.
      (8)   Twenty percent of all platted lots shall have partial natural
finishes, of stone, stucco, or brick on the front elevation.
      (9)   Additionally, 10% of all platted lots shall have natural finishes
of stone, stucco, or brick.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1130.06 GARAGES.
   All single-family residential developments may have a mix of front loaded
and side loaded garages. There is no minimum of lots that must be designed for
a standard side entrance garage. Side loaded garages may be used on lots where
side-entry garages can be accommodated, typically 65 feet wide and wider lots.
For corner lots, the garage shall be oriented towards the "lower" defined
street classification as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
Garage doors shall be a maximum ten feet height. If there is a living area
above the garage, the maximum height of the garage shall be 35 feet. Otherwise,
the maximum height of the garage is 18 feet.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1130.07 FRONT LOADED GARAGES.
   (a)   May not project or be set back more than four feet from the front line
of the livable area of the home. A covered or uncovered porch shall not be
considered a livable area of a home.
   (b)   Garage doors shall not exceed 50% of the house width (frontage). Where
more than a standard two car front loaded garage is provided, the additional
garage bay(s) shall be offset from and architecturally designed to appear
separate and distinct from the two car garage.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1130.08 SIDE LOADED GARAGES.
   (a)   Side loaded garages may be loaded from an inside court area.
   (b)   The garage elevation facing the street must incorporate design
features also found in the front elevation of the home including, but not
limited to, windows.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1130.09 HOUSE SIZE AND SETBACKS.
Dwelling Type Ground Floor Area (sq. ft.) Finished Floor Area (sq. ft.)
Dwelling Type          Ground Floor Area (sq. ft.) Finished Floor Area (sq.
                                                   ft.)
1 Story                1,500                       1,500
1½ Story              1,250                       1,700
2 Story                950                         1,900
Split Level            1,500                       1,500
Min. Lot Area          14,375
Max. Lot Coverage      30%
Min. Lot Width & Depth 80 ft. by 180 ft.
Lot Width on Curving   45 ft. at ROW
Street or Cul-De-Sac   80 ft. at building lint
Front Yard Setback     30 ft.
Side Yard Setback      10 ft. each side
Rear Yard Setback      30 ft.; 8 ft. for accessory bldg.
Max. Building Height   35 ft. or 2 stories
 
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020; Am. Ord. 2025-02, passed 3-3-2025)
§ 1130.10 LANDSCAPING, REQUIRED.
   All residential and non-residential lots shall have a minimum of 200 total
square feet of landscaping in the front and side yards, consisting of shrubs
and perennial flowers and at least one tree, in accordance with a landscaping
plan approved by the village. If block is used for the foundation, any fully
exposed block above final grade shall be of a premium or upgraded decorative
material compatible with adjacent natural materials.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1130.11 LOT COVERAGES.
   Lot coverage shall mean the ratio of the horizontal area measured from the
exterior surface of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and
accessory buildings or structures on a lot to the total lot area. Included in
this ratio are porches, decks, patios, and outdoor pools.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1130.12 PARKS AND GREEN SPACE.
   All residential developments are required to address parkland and green
space needs. Council shall determine whether a parkland is to be an active park
or a passive park, green space, or some combination. A parkland is to be
developed according to the approved plan at the beginning of the residential
development. Only 40% of a required parkland acreage can be located within the
100-year floodplain.
   (a)   Active Park: Active park land shall contain usable areas reasonably
dry most of the time for future buildings and structures. The developer is
required to install the park's play equipment as determined by Council. A park
development plan that includes the type and location of play equipment shall be
approved by Council.
   (b)   Passive Park: The developer is required to install the park's
furniture as determined by Council. A park development plan that includes the
type and location of play equipment shall be approved by Council.
   (c)   Developer Providing Land for Village Utilities in Lieu of Parkland or
Green Space: If the village determines that space in a development is needed
for utility improvements, including but not limited to a water tower, booster,
lift station or such, that space shall be donated and deeded to the village and
may be considered part of the required green space or parkland.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-20020)
APPENDIX A
Final Plat Language
The following wording shall be shown on the final plat:
   Situated in the Village of Commercial Point, County of                 ,
State of Ohio, and being of Section            , Township Range (Land Grant -
U.S. Military Lands, etc) containing          acres and being the same tract as
conveyed to                      and described in deed recorded in Deed Book
      , Page        , Recorder's Office,                 County, Ohio.
   We, the undersigned, being all the owners and lien holders of the land
platted herein, certify that the attached final plat correctly represents our
                     , a subdivision of lots        to        inclusive, do
hereby accept this final plat of same, and do voluntarily consent to the
execution of said final plat. (NOTE: If any new streets are platted, the
following statement must be included). All streets shown hereon will not be
accepted for public use until such time as construction is complete and said
streets are formally accepted as such by the Village of Commercial Point.
   In Witness thereof                       have hereunto set their hands this
      day of                , 20      _ .
   Witness                         Signed                            
   Easements are reserved for the construction, operation and maintenance of
all public and private utilities proposed above and beneath the surface of the
ground, and where necessary, are for the construction, operation and
maintenance of service connections to all lots and lands, and for stormwater
drainage. Structures are not permitted within easements. No landscaping shall
interfere with the right to construct, operate and maintain utilities and
service connections, and shall not interfere with stormwater drainage.
   In Witness thereof                          have hereunto set their hands
this     day of                , 20_    .
   Witness                         Signed                             
Surveyed and Platted by                               
   Civil Engineer and/or Surveyor
   We do hereby certify that we have surveyed the premises and prepared the
attached plat and that said plat is correct and meets the minimum standards for
boundary surveys in the State of Ohio. The dimensions of the lots and streets
are shown in feet and decimal parts thereof. Dimensions on curves are chord
measurements.
   By                              
   Registered Surveyor
   State of Ohio
Before me a Notary Public for said State personally came
                            who acknowledged the signing of the foregoing
instrument to be their voluntary act and deed (and voluntary corporate on
partnership act and deed) for uses and purposes therein expressed.
   In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and affixed my official seal
this       day of        , 20_.
                                              Notary Public
Approved this          day of                     ,
20                                                         
                     Planning and Zoning Administrator
Approved this        day of               ,
20                                                             
                     Municipal Engineer
This        day of                  , 20_, rights-of-way for all roads,
boulevards, etc., herein dedicated to public use are hereby approved and
accepted as such for the Village of Commercial Point.
                                                                                                                    
Mayor, Village of Commercial Point   Fiscal Officer, Village of Commercial
Point
NOTE: This plat shall not be transferred or recorded until all above required
signatures are placed on this final plat. This plat shall be recorded
by                                           , 20_. Transferred this      day
of              , 20    .
                                               
County Auditor
Filed for record this       day of                        , 20_, at
                       M. Recorded this        day of                     ,
20_, in Plat Book         , Page No.           Slot         for Pickaway
County.
                                                                        
County Recorder      Deputy Recorder
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
APPENDIX B
Subdivider's Agreement
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT
   This Agreement entered into this      day of               , 20_, by and
between                             with address at
                                           (hereinafter the "Owner") and the
Village of Commercial Point with address at 10 West Scioto Street, Commercial
Point, Ohio (hereinafter the "Village") for the                 , a subdivision
of the Village (hereinafter called the "Project").
   WHEREAS, certain ordinances of the Village in force on the date of this
Agreement (hereinafter the "Subdivision Regulations") require the Owner to
enter into an agreement with the Village.
   NOW, THEREFORE, the Owner and the Village, in consideration of the mutual
covenants set forth herein, agree that:
I.   OWNER RESPONSIBILITIES:   The Owner shall:
   1.1   Develop or cause the development of the Project in accordance with the
Subdivision Regulations, Construction and Material Specifications and the
construction plans approved by the Village.
   1.2   Unless specifically stated otherwise, be responsible for the entire
cost associated with developing the Project, including engineering and
construction, fees and deposits.
   1.3   Construct the following improvements contained in the Project
(hereinafter the "Improvements") and provide to the Village plans,
specifications and supporting data describing the Improvements:
      (a)   Streets and parking areas, graded full width and paved including
drainage structures, bridges, curbing and other improvements all as shown on
the Village Standard Drawings;
      (b)   Sanitary sewers, including manholes, services and all
appurtenances;
      (c)   Water distribution system including mains, services, valves, fire
hydrants and all appurtenances;
      (d)   Storm sewers, retention ponds including manholes, inlets and all
appurtenances;
      (e)   Monuments, stakes and all survey control required.
      (f)   Street signs designating the name of each street at each
intersection within the Project. Street signs shall conform to the standards
established by the Village;
      (g)   All other public improvements shown on the plan and plat as
approved by the Village, including street lights.
      (h)   Dedication or granting of land necessary for all rights of way and
dedication or granting of all easements necessary for the Improvements.
   1.4   Await the Village's approval of the plans and specifications before
beginning any construction work.
   1.5   Guarantee that the labor, material and equipment used to develop the
Project meet the Village requirements by providing a performance bond equal to
one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated construction costs of the
Improvements, if the plat is to be signed.
   1.6   Provide the Village at least three (3) day notice prior to beginning
any construction work and will keep the Village advised of the work schedule
throughout the development of the Project.
   1.7   Prior to conditional acceptance of the Project by the Village,
guarantee all labor, material and equipment incorporated in the improvements
that will become public against defects and deficiencies, for at least one
year, by providing either:
      (a)   A maintenance bond equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the
construction cost for the Improvements; or
      (b)   A certification to the Village by a financial institution or
corporation acceptable to the Village Solicitor;
         That funds equal to ten percent (10%) of the estimated construction
cost for Improvements have been set aside in an escrow account;
         That these funds cannot be released without a release by the Village;
         That the institution or corporation holding the funds shall release to
the Village any and all of the funds so escrowed for the purpose enumerated
herein; and
         That the escrow account will not be closed out without the approval of
the Village with the final acceptance of the public improvements by the Village
constituting release of the escrow account lacking any formal release by the
Village.
   1.8   Provide a written request for the maintenance guarantee release upon
completion of at least one year maintenance period during which the
Improvements are maintained in a satisfactory condition and all expenses
incurred by the Village pursuant to this Project have been paid in full.
   1.9   Cause the work described in the approved construction drawings,
specifications and supporting data, as required herein, to be completed within
a year of the approval of the construction plans unless approved otherwise by
the Village.
   1.10   Remove or cause to be removed such dirt, debris and foreign matter
from all public rights-of-way and/or easement areas as were deposited, left or
resulted from the construction of the Improvements or from the development of
the Project, within twenty-four hours after being notified by the Village that
such work is required. Such removal shall be done to the satisfaction of the
Village Engineer.
   1.11   Prior to acceptance or conditional acceptance of the Project by the
Village, the Owner will:
      (a)   Provide the Village with the original signed plans, with two sets
of prints, annotated to reflect the "as-constructed" conditions, the original
recorded plat, and a copy of the "as-constructed" plans on a compact disc
AutoCAD and PDF format, and GIS plan    indicating all project utilities;
      (b)   Have all sanitary sewers cleaned and provide a bond guaranteeing
that after two years or after the last home in this phase is completed,
whichever is longer, all sanitary sewers will be re-cleaned and televised and a
CD provided to the Village.
      (c)   Provide a Bill of Sale transferring ownership of all Improvements
to the Village. The Bill of Sale shall be in a form acceptable to the Village
II.   GENERAL TERMS:
   2.1   When there appears to be, or there is in fact, a conflict between this
Agreement and the Subdivision Regulations, the more stringent shall govern.
   2.2   No conveyance shall be made of any lot or parcel smaller in frontage
or area than indicated on the plat except for the purpose of increasing the
area of another lot or expanding the width or length of a public right of way.
   2.3   The Owner shall hold the Village free and harmless from any and all
claims for damage of every nature arising or growing out of the construction of
the Improvements or resulting from the Improvements and shall defend, at
Owner's own cost and expense, any suit or action brought against the Village by
reason thereof, except such liability of the Village resulting from its sole
negligence.
   2.4   Upon violation of, or failure to comply with, any of the terms of this
Agreement by the Owner, the Village may take any of the following actions:
      a.   Stop all work on the Project forthwith;
      b.   Continue any unfinished work or replace any unaccepted work to a
point that any Improvements do not appear to create a health or safety hazard
or create maintenance or repair expense to the Village because of their state
of completion by:
         1.   Holding the bonding company responsible,
         2.   Using the certified check, or proceeds thereof, or
         3.   Using the funds in the escrow account.
   2.5   This Agreement represents the entire and integrated agreement between
the Owner and the Village for the Project and supersedes all prior
negotiations, representations or agreements, either written or oral. This
Agreement may be amended only by written instruction signed by both Owner and
Village.
   2.6   The Owner and Village each binds himself/herself and his/her partners,
successors, executors, administrators and assigns to the other party of this
Agreement and to the partners, successors, executors, administrators and
assigns of such other party, in respect to all covenants of this Agreement.
Except as set forth in this section 2.6, neither the Owner nor the Village
shall assign, sublet, or transfer his interest in this Agreement without the
written consent of the other. Nothing herein shall be construed as creating any
personal liability on the part of any officer or agent of any public body which
may be a party hereto, nor shall it be construed as giving any rights or
benefits hereunder to anyone other than the Owner and the Village.
   2.7   Notices: Any notice required by this Agreement shall be conclusively
presumed to have been received if in writing and if delivered personally or
sent by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, to the party to be
notified at the party's last address on file with the party sending the notice.
   2.8   Legal Interpretation: This Agreement shall be construed and
interpreted in accordance with the laws of the State of Ohio.
   IN CONSIDERATION WHEREOF, the Village hereby grants the Owner the right and
privilege to make the improvements stipulated herein.
   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have set their hand and seals, and
have executed this Agreement on the day and year first above written.
                  VILLAGE OF COMMERCIAL POINT
ATTEST:
               By                                                            
                                                      
                  OWNER
ATTEST:
               By                                                            
                                                     
                  Its                                                            
ACCEPTED AS TO FORM:
TITLE THREE - Zoning Administration
               
Chap. 1131.   General Provisions.
               
Chap. 1133.   Definitions.
               
Chap. 1135.   Administration, Enforcement and Penalty.
               
Chap. 1137.   Planning and Zoning Administrator.
               
Chap. 1139.   (Reserved)
               
Chap. 1141.   Site Development Plans.
               
Chap. 1143.   Amendments.
               
Chap. 1145.   Conditional Uses.
               
Chap. 1147.   Variances.
               
Chap. 1149.   Nonconforming Lots, Uses and Structures.
CHAPTER 1131
General Provisions
1131.01   Title.
1131.02   Authority.
1131.03   Jurisdiction.
1131.04   Effective date and amendments.
1131.05   Purpose.
1131.06   Relationship to existing Zoning Code.
1131.07   Relationship to comprehensive planning.
1131.08   No use or sale of land or buildings except in conformity with this
Zoning Code.
1131.09   Severability.
1131.10   Conflicting ordinances.
1131.11   Amendments; effective date and referendum.
1131.12   Relationship to public works and buildings.
§ 1131.01 TITLE.
   (a)   Titles Three, Five and Seven of this Part Eleven - Planning and Zoning
Code shall be known and may be designated and cited as "The Commercial Point,
Ohio, Zoning Code," and heretofore may be referred to as the Zoning Code, or
Code.
   (b)   Unless otherwise provided herein or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this Zoning Code as those governing the interpretation of the
Ohio Revised Code.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1131.02 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in R.C. Chapter
711 and 713.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1131.03 JURISDICTION.
   This chapter shall be effective throughout the municipal planning
jurisdiction. The municipal planning jurisdiction comprises the area within the
corporate boundaries of Commercial Point.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1131.04 EFFECTIVE DATE AND AMENDMENTS.
   The provisions of this Zoning Code including the 2018 Construction
Specifications, Materials, and Standard Drawings are hereby adopted by this
Ordinance 2020-10, dated December, 2020.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020; Am. Ord. 2020-30, passed 1-4-2021)
§ 1131.05 PURPOSE.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Zoning Code
shall be held to be minimum requirements unless otherwise stated herein;
adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience, comfort,
prosperity and the general welfare by regulating and restricting the location
of buildings and other structures and of premises to be used for trade,
industry, residences and other specified uses; by regulating and limiting the
height of buildings and other structures hereafter erected or altered; by
regulating the bulk and location of buildings or other structures hereafter
erected or altered, the percentage of lot occupancy, setback building lines and
the area of yards, courts and other open spaces; and, for all of the purposes
hereinbefore described, by dividing the municipality into districts as herein
provided, which districts are deemed and determined best suited to carry out
such purposes.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1131.06 RELATIONSHIP TO EXISTING ZONING CODE.
   This Zoning Code is adopted in whole and is a replacement of the Zoning Code
of Commercial Point, codified by Ordinance 2018-2, dated August 6, 2018 and
effective September 6, 2018.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1131.07 RELATIONSHIP TO COMPREHENSIVE PLANNING.
   It is the intention of Council that this Zoning Code shall implement the
planning policies adopted by Council for Commercial Point, as reflected in a
comprehensive plan, land-use plan, and all other planning documents formally
adopted by the Council. While the Council reaffirms its commitment that this
Zoning Code and any amendment to it be in conformity with adopted planning
policies, the Council hereby expresses its intent that neither this Zoning Code
nor any amendment to it may be challenged on the basis of any alleged
nonconformity with any planning document.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1131.08 NO USE OR SALE OF LAND OR BUILDINGS EXCEPT IN CONFORMITY WITH THIS
ZONING CODE.
   Subject to
Chapter 1149, no person may use, occupy, or sell any land or buildings or
authorize or permit the use, occupancy, or sale of land or buildings under his/
her control except in accordance with all of the applicable provisions of this
Zoning Code. For purposes of this section, the "use" or "occupancy" of a
building or land relates to anything and everything that is done to, on, or in
that building or land.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1131.09 SEVERABILITY.
   Each chapter, section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or other
divisible part of this Zoning Code is hereby declared to be severable and if
any such chapter, section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or other
divisible part is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court
of competent jurisdiction in a valid judgment or decree, such
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining
chapters, sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases, or other divisible
part of this Zoning Code since the same would have been enacted without the
incorporation into this Zoning Code of such unconstitutional or invalid
chapter, section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or other divisible part.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1131.10 CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.
   Where conflicts exist between requirements of this Zoning Code and
ordinances adopted by Council, the strictest interpretation shall apply and
thereby supersede the less strict requirements.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1131.11 AMENDMENTS; EFFECTIVE DATE AND REFERENDUM.
   (a)   Amendments, as per
Chapter 1143, adopted by Council shall become effective 30 calendar days after
the date of such adoption unless adopted as an emergency. Such amendment fails
to become effective if within 30 calendar days after the passage of the
ordinance there is presented to the Fiscal Officer a petition, signed by a
number of qualified voters residing in the municipality equal to but not less
than 10% of the total vote cast in such area at the last preceding general
election at which a Governor was elected, requesting Council to submit such
ordinance to the electors of the municipality for approval or rejection at the
next general election.
   (b)   No amendment for which such referendum vote has been requested shall
be put into effect unless a majority of the votes cast on the issue is in favor
of the amendment. Upon certification by the applicable County Board of
Elections that the amendment has been approved by the voters it shall take
immediate effect.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1131.12 RELATIONSHIP TO PUBLIC WORKS AND BUILDINGS.
   Nothing in this Zoning Code shall be construed to prevent Commercial Point
from constructing, repairing or maintaining public works or public buildings in
the municipality.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1133
Definitions
1133.01   General interpretation.
1133.02   General definitions.
1133.03   Definitions.
§ 1133.01 GENERAL INTERPRETATION.
   (a)   Except where specifically defined herein, all words used in this
Zoning Code shall carry customary meanings. Words used in the present tense
include the future tense; the plural includes the singular and the singular
includes the plural; the word LOT includes the words PARCEL and PLOT; the word
BUILDING includes the word STRUCTURE; the word SHALL is a mandatory
requirement, the word MAY is a permissive requirement, and the word SHOULD is a
preferred requirement; the words USED or OCCUPIED include the words INTENDED,
DESIGNED, OR ARRANGED TO BE USED OR OCCUPIED; and the word PERSON includes a
firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation as
well as an individual.
   (b)   Words not particularly defined herein shall be defined as found in The
New Illustrated Book of Development Definitions, Center for Urban Policy
Research, Rutgers University. If not defined therein, words shall be defined as
found in Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary on CD-ROM.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1133.02 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine
and neuter genders. Words in the singular shall include the plural and words in
the plural shall include the singular. A general term following specific
enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless
expressly so limited. The word DAY shall mean a calendar day unless otherwise
specified.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1133.03 DEFINITIONS.
   ACCESS DRIVE means a way or means of approach to provide physical entrance
to a property, as in driveway or curb cut.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING means any building located on the same lot as a principal
structure and has a use that is incidental and subordinate to the principle
structure's use.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE means any structure located on the same lot as a
principal structure and has a use that is incidental and subordinate to the
principle structure's use.
   ACCESSORY USE means the use or partial use of a structure or land that is
incidental and subordinate to the principle use of that structure or that land.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USES means any use of a sexual nature, including retail
establishments selling publications and other material of a sexual nature,
adult motion picture theater used for presenting films and other material of a
sexual nature, and adult only entertainment establishment featuring services of
a sexual nature.
   AGRICULTURE means the production, keeping or maintenance, for sale, lease or
personal use of plants and animals useful to humans, including but not limited
to: forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy
products, poultry and poultry products; livestock, including beef cattle,
sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules, or goats, or any mutations or hybrids
thereof, including the breeding and grazing of any or all of such animals; bees
and apiary products; fur animals; trees and forest products; fruits of all
kinds, including grapes, nuts and berries; vegetables; nursery, floral,
ornamental, and greenhouse products; or lands devoted to a soil conservation or
forestry management program.
   ALLEY or LANE means a public or private way not more than 30 feet wide
affording only secondary means of access to abutting property.
   ALTERATION means any change or rearrangement in the supporting members of an
existing building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or interior
partitions, as well as any change in doors or windows, or any enlargement to or
diminution of a building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically, or
the moving of a building or structure from one location to another.
   ANIMAL HOSPITAL means a place which animals or pets are given medical or
surgical treatment and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care
incidental to the hospital use.
   ARTISAN STUDIO means a building or portion thereof used for the creation of
original handmade works of art or craft items by no more than ten artists or
artisans, either as a principal or accessory use.
   ARTISAN WORKSHOP means a use primarily involving the limited on-site
production of goods by hand manufacturing which involves only the use of hand
tools or mechanical equipment that does not exceed two horsepower each or a
single kiln not exceeding eight cubic feet in volume and the incidental direct
sale to consumers. Typical production includes: custom furniture, ceramic
studios, glass blowing, candle making, custom jewelry, stained and leaded
glass, woodworking, custom textile manufacturing and crafts production.
   ATTENTION GETTING DEVICE means a device designed or intended to attract by
noise, sudden intermittent or rhythmic movement, physical change or lighting
change, such as banners, flags, streamers, balloons, propellers, whirligigs,
search lights, and flashing lights.
   ATTIC means that part of a building which is immediately below and wholly or
partly within the roof framing.
   AUTOMOBILE means a self-propelled free moving vehicle, with four or more
wheels, primarily for conveyance on a street or roadway.
   AUTOMOBILE CAR WASH means any building or premises or portions thereof where
mechanical devices are used for washing, detailing, or vacuuming automobiles.
   AUTOMOBILE CONVENIENCE MARKET means a place where gasoline, motor oil,
lubricants, or other minor accessories are retailed directly to the public on
the premises in combination with the retailing of items typically found in a
convenience food market or supermarket.
   AUTOMOBILE PARKING LOT OR GARAGE means establishments primarily engaged in
the parking or storage of motor vehicles on surface lots, garages, or other
means where no other service is provided.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR AND SERVICES means establishments primarily engaged in the
repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles or parts thereof,
including collision service, painting, tire dealers, battery dealers and other
accessory dealers.
   AUTOMOBILE SALES or TRAILER SALES means the use of a building, land area or
other premises for the display, sale, and rental of new or used automobiles,
panel trucks or vans, trailers, motorcycles, or recreation vehicles and where
no warranty repair work and other repair service is conducted.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION means an establishment where gasoline and other
petroleum products are sold as the principal use of the property. Light
maintenance activities such as engine tune-ups, lubrication, and minor repairs
may also be provided if incidental to such principal use. Service stations do
not include premises where retail sales space exceeds 25% of the total building
area or 500 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is less. Service
stations do not include premises where heavy automobile maintenance activities,
such as engine overhauls, automobile painting, and bodywork, are conducted.
   BASEMENT means a space having one-half or more of its floor-to ceiling
height below the average level of the adjoining ground and with a floor-to-
ceiling height of not less than six and one-half feet.
   BEDROOM means a private room planned and intended for sleeping, separable
from other rooms by a door, and accessible to a bathroom without crossing
another bedroom or living room.
   BEST EFFORTS means the best reasonable efforts under the circumstances,
taking into consideration, among other appropriate matters, safety, expedition,
available technology, human resources and cost.
   BOARDING HOME FOR SHELTERED CARE means a profit or nonprofit boarding home,
rest home, or other home for the sheltered care of adult persons which, in
addition to providing food and shelter to four or more persons unrelated to the
proprietor, also provides any personal care or service beyond orphans, foster
children, the elderly, and battered persons.
   BUFFER STRIP means a land area used to visibly separate one use from another
or to shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisances.
   BUILDABLE AREA means the area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard and
open space requirements of the Zoning Code have been met.
   BUILDER means a person who builds or contracts to build a building or
structure within Commercial Point.
   BUILDING means any structure securely affixed to land having a roof
supported by columns or walls, entirely separated on all sides from any similar
structure or entirely separated on all sides by walls in which there are no
communicating doors, windows or similar openings and intended for the shelter,
housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods or
materials of any kind or nature.
   BUILDING COVERAGE means the horizontal area measured within the outside of
the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and accessory buildings
on a lot.
   BUILDING HEIGHT means the vertical distance of a building measured from the
average elevation of the finished grade within 20 feet of the structure to the
highest point of the roof.
   BUILDING LINE means a line parallel to the street line at a distance there
from equal to the depth of the front yard required for the zoning district in
which the lot is located.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL means a building in which is conducted the principal use
of the lot on which it is located.
   BUILDING ENVELOPE means the area designated by the developer or builder for
the construction of the principal building(s) upon the site in accordance with
the following:
      (1)   In platted residential subdivisions or residential site
condominiums. The buildable area remaining on the lot, parcel or unit after
complying with zoning setback and maximum lot or site coverage requirements, or
such smaller building area designated by the developer for construction of
building upon a lot, parcel or unit within the development.
      (2)   In all other developments. The building area(s) plus ten feet
around the perimeter of the building(s) provided such areas do not encroach
into any required setback.
   CALIPER (TREE) means a tree's diameter in inches measured four and one-half
feet above the ground.
   CARPORT means a roofed structure providing space for the parking or storage
of motor vehicles and enclosed on not more than three sides.
   CARRY-OUT RESTAURANT means an establishment which by design of physical
facilities or by service or packaging procedures permits or encourages the
purchase of prepared ready-to-eat foods intended primarily to be consumed off
the premises, and where the consumption of food in motor vehicles on the
premises is not permitted or not encouraged.
   CEMETERY means property used for the interring of the dead.
   CENSUS TRACT means areas into which communities are divided by the U.S.
Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, for statistical purposes.
   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT shall be defined as the old town properties
designated on the 2004 zoning map as B-1 district.
   CERTIFIED ARBORIST means any individual certified by the National Arborist
Association.
   CHIMNEY means a structure lesser in function than a smoke stack and
containing one or more flues for drawing off emissions from stationary sources
of combustion.
   CHURCH or HOUSE OF WORSHIP means a building or structure or groups of
buildings or structures which by design and construction are primarily intended
for the conducting of organized religious services and accessory uses
associated therewith.
   CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT means a development design technique that concentrates
buildings in specific areas on the site to allow the remaining land to be used
for recreation, common open space, and preservation of environmentally
sensitive features.
   CLUSTER SUBDIVISION means a wholly or principally residential subdivision
that permits a reduction in lot area, setback, or other site development
regulations, provided there is no increase in the overall density permitted for
a conventional subdivision in a given zoning district, and the remaining land
area is used for common open space.
   COMMERCIAL NURSERY OR TREE FARM means a plant or tree nursery or farm in
which trees are planted and grown for sale to the general public in the
ordinary course of business.
   COMMERCIAL USE means any activity carried out for pecuniary gain.
   COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION or HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION means an association
organized to own, maintain, and operate common facilities and to enhance and
protect their common interests.
   COMMUNITY PLAYHOUSE means any building or portion thereof that is designed,
constructed or used for theatrical productions, youth programs or classes in
the performing arts.
   CONDOMINIUM means a building or group of buildings in which units are owned
individually and the structure, common areas, and facilities are owned by all
the owners on a proportional, undivided basis.
   CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION means the community association which administers
and maintains the common property and common elements of a condominium.
   CONGREGATE HOUSING means a dwelling providing shelter and services for the
elderly which may include meals, housekeeping, and personal care assistance.
   CONSTRUCTION means on-site erection, fabrication, installation, alteration,
demolition, or removal of a structure, facility, or addition thereto, including
all related activities, but not restricted to clearing of land, earth moving,
blasting and landscaping.
   CONVENIENCE FOOD MARKET means a retail establishment offering for sale
limited food, beverage and related consumer products with or without on
premises preparation of food and beverages.
   COUNCIL means the Council of the Village of Commercial Point.
   CRAWL SPACE means a space with more than one-half of its floor-to-ceiling
height below the average level of the adjoining ground and with a floor-to-
ceiling height of less than six and one-half feet.
   CUSTOMARY AGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS. See AGRICULTURE.
   DAY CARE CENTER means a private establishment enrolling children and where
tuition, fees, or other forms of compensation for the care of the children is
charged, and which is licensed or approved to operate as a day care center.
   DECORATIVE FEATURES means any approved natural or constructed feature,
including mulch, gravel, stone, brick, sculpture, and lighting.
   DENSITY means the number of dwelling units per unit of land. To determine
density divide the total number of dwelling units by the net developable site
as measured in acres (see definition of NET DEVELOPABLE SITE).
   DEVELOPER means a person who installs or contracts for the installation of
improvements such as sewers, streets and water mains in a residential, office,
commercial, or industrial development.
   DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (D.B.H.)" means a tree's diameter in inches measured
four and one-half feet above the ground.
   DRIP LINE means an imaginary vertical line extending downward for the
outermost tips of the tree branches to the ground.
   DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT means a building or portion thereof where food and/or
beverages are sold in a form ready for consumption and where all or a
significant portion of the consumption takes place or is designed to take place
outside the confines of the building, often in a motor vehicle on the site.
   DRIVE-IN USE means an establishment which by design, physical facilities,
service, or by packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive
services, obtain goods, or be entertained while remaining in their motor
vehicles.
   DRIVE-UP WINDOW SERVICE means a building opening, including windows, doors,
or mechanical devices through which occupants of a motor vehicle receive or
obtain a product or service.
   DRIVEWAY ENVELOPE means an area designated by the developer or builder not
more than 20 feet in width to provide vehicular access to the building or
parking areas.
   DWELLING means a structure or portion thereof in which person or persons
reside.
   DWELLING, ATTACHED means a one-family dwelling attached to two or more one-
family dwellings by common vertical walls.
   DWELLING, DETACHED means a dwelling which is not attached to any other
dwelling by any means.
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY means a dwelling containing more than two dwelling
units.
   DWELLING, SEMIDETACHED means a one-family dwelling attached to one other
one-family dwelling by a common vertical wall, and each dwelling located on a
separate lot.
   DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE means a one-family dwelling in a row of at least three
such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside,
no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other
unit by one or more common fire resistant walls.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY means a structure on a single lot containing two
dwelling units, each of which is totally separated from the other by an
unpierced wall extending from ground to roof or an unpierced ceiling and floor
extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a common stairwell
exterior to both dwelling units.
   DWELLING UNIT means one or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for
occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary
facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single
family maintaining a household.
   DWELLING UNIT, EFFICIENCY means a dwelling unit consisting of not more than
one habitable room together with kitchen or kitchenette and sanitary
facilities.
   EASEMENT means a grant of one or more of the property rights by the property
owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation, or another person or
entity.
   EPIPHYTOTIC means the sudden and destructive development of a plant disease,
usually over large areas. Corresponds to an epidemic of a human disease.
   EXCAVATION means the removal or recovery by any means whatsoever of soil,
rock, mineral substances, or organic substances other than vegetation, from
water or land on or beneath the surface thereof, or beneath the land surface,
whether exposed or submerged.
   EXTENDED CARE FACILITY means a long-term care facility or a distinct part of
a facility licensed or approved as a nursing home, infirmary unit of a home for
the aged or a governmental medical institution.
   EXTENSION means a physical expansion of an existing structure.
   FACTORY BUILT HOUSING means a factory built structure designed for long-term
residential use, the components of which are essentially constructed or
assembled prior to its delivery to and installation upon a site. Factory built
housing shall include the following:
      (1)   Manufactured home. A non-self-propelled building unit or assembly
of closed construction fabricated in an off-site facility, and which conforms
with the federal construction and safety standards established by the Secretary
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) pursuant to the "Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, and that has a label or tag
permanently affixed to it certifying compliance with all applicable federal
construction and safety standards. A manufactured home is transportable in one
or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in
width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or
more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis, designed to be
used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation when connected to
required utilities. Calculations used to determine the numbers of square feet
in a structure's exterior dimensions are measured at the largest horizontal
projection when erected on site. These dimensions include all expandable rooms,
cabinets, and other projections containing interior space, but do not include
bay windows."(R.C. § 4501.01) For the purposes of this section, chassis means a
steel frame specifically designed and constructed with wheels or running gear
and towing tongue installed for transportation on public streets or highways
and designed without the need for a permanent foundation arriving at the site
complete and ready for residential occupancy except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations; location on wheels, jacks, blocks, or other
foundation, connection to utilities and the like.
      (2)   Mobile home. A non-self-propelled building unit or assembly of
closed construction that is fabricated in an off-site facility, built on a
permanent movable chassis which is eight feet or more in width and more than 35
feet in length, which when erected on site is 320 or more square feet, that is
transportable in one or more sections and which does not qualify as a
manufactured home or industrialized unit.
      (3)   Industrialized unit. A building unit or assembly of closed
construction fabricated in an offsite facility, that is substantially self-
sufficient as a unit or as a part of a greater structure and that requires
transportation to the site of intended use. Industrialized unit includes units
installed on the site as independent units, as part of a group of units, or
incorporated with standard construction methods to form a completed structural
entity. Industrialized unit does not include a manufactured or mobile home as
defined herein.
      (4)   Modular home. Factory built housing certified as meeting the local
or state building codes as applicable to modular housing. Once certified by the
state, modular homes shall be subject to the same standards as site built
homes. Modular homes are required to be placed upon a solid masonry foundation.
   FAMILY means one or more individuals occupying a dwelling unit and living as
a single household unit.
   FARM means a parcel of land used for agricultural activities.
   FARM ANIMALS means those animals or livestock typically associated with a
farm or agricultural operation.
   FARM STAND means a booth or stall located on a farm from which produce and
farm products are sold to the general public.
   FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT means an establishment whose principal business is the
sale of pre prepared or rapidly prepared food directly to the customer in a
ready-to-consume state for consumption either within the restaurant building or
off premises.
   FENCE means an artificially constructed barrier of any material or
combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
   FLOOR AREA, FINISHED means the sum of the gross horizontal area of all
interior floors of a residential building that are finished and heated,
excluding basements, breezeways, carports, garages, storage areas with only
outside access, porches, and other unheated and/or unfinished areas attached to
the dwelling.
   FLOOR AREA, GROSS means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from
the centerline of a wall separating two buildings, but not including interior
parking spaces, loading space for motor vehicles, or any space where the floor-
to-ceiling height is less than six feet.
   FLOOR AREA, GROUND means the sum of the gross horizontal area of the ground
floor of a residential building, excluding basements, breezeways, carports,
garages, storage areas with only outside access, porches, and other unheated
and/or unfinished areas attached to the dwelling.
   FLOOR AREA, NET means the total of all floor areas of a building, excluding
stairwells and elevator shafts, equipment rooms, interior vehicular parking or
loading; and all floors below the first or ground floor, except when used or
intended to be used for human habitation or service to the public.
   FRANCHISE means the nonexclusive right pursuant to the Constitution and laws
of Ohio and/or the United States, granted by the municipality pursuant to its
current franchise agreement to operate or provide cable television or services
to consumer within the municipality.
   GARAGE means a deck, building or structure, or part thereof, used or
intended to be used for the parking and storage of vehicles.
   GARAGE SALE means the sale or offering for sale to the general public of
over five items of personal property on any portion of a lot in a residential
zoning district, whether within or outside any building.
   GAS STATION. See AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION.
   GLARE means the effect produced by brightness sufficient to cause annoyance,
discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility.
   GROSS DEVELOPABLE ACRES means the land area within a subdivision including
areas dedicated to the public, including parks, open space, public right-of-
ways, and utility easements.
   GROUNDCOVER means low growing shrubs, wood vegetation, wild flowers and
other small herbaceous plants within a woodland area.
   GROUP CARE FACILITY means a facility or dwelling unit housing persons
unrelated by blood or marriage and operating as a group family household.
   GRUBBING means the effective removal of understory vegetation, groundcovers,
shrubs, or trees, but not including the removal of any trees of greater than
three inch d.b.h.
   HOME OCCUPATION means any activity carried out for gain by a resident
conducted as an accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit.
   IN-LIEU FEES means fees paid by a private individual or party to Commercial
Point to compensate for the mandatory land dedication provisions of the Zoning
Code when said land dedication is waived by Council.
   INDUSTRIAL PARK means a large tract of land that has been planned,
developed, and operated as an integrated facility for a number of individual
uses, with special attention to circulation, parking, utility needs,
aesthetics, and compatibility.
   INDUSTRIALIZED UNIT. See FACTORY BUILT HOUSING.
   INOPERABLE VEHICLE means a vehicle that is not mechanically operable.
   INSTITUTIONAL USE means a nonprofit or quasi-public use or institution such
as a church or similar house of worship, library, public or private school,
hospital, or publicly-owned or operated building, structure or land used for
public purpose.
   JUNKYARD means any area, lot, land, parcel, building, or structure or part
thereof used for the storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale, or
abandonment of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal, or other scrap or discarded
goods, materials, machinery, or two or more unregistered, inoperable motor
vehicles or other type of junk.
   KENNEL, COMMERCIAL means any building or buildings and/or land used,
designed or arranged to facilitate the raising, breeding, or boarding and
grooming of such domesticated animals as dogs and cats for profit. Farm animals
such as pigs and fowl or exotic animals, such as snakes, are expressly
prohibited.
   KENNEL, PRIVATE means any building or buildings and/or land used, designed
or arranged for the care of three or more dogs and/or cats belonging to the
owner of the principal use, kept for purposes of show, hunting, or as pets.
   LAND CLEARING means operations which remove trees and vegetation in
connection with the installation of storm or sanitary sewers, public or private
utilities, street, and any other clearing or grading of the property at any
time prior to construction of a building.
   LANDSCAPING means any portion of a parcel of land that includes trees,
shrubs, bushes, planting bed, hedges, earth mounds or other natural or
decorative material or feature.
   LOCATE means to construct, place, insert or excavate.
   LOT means a designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat,
subdivision or as otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit.
   LOT, CORNER means a lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets
at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior
angle of less than 135 degrees.
   LOT COVERAGE means the portion of the lot that is covered by structures.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE means a lot which fronts upon two parallel streets, or
which fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the
lot.
   LOT, BUILDABLE means a lot having the required street frontage as required
by the zoning district on an improved public right-of-way.
   MANDATORY LAND DEDICATION means the mandatory dedication of private land to
Commercial Point for the purpose of providing space for park, recreation, open
space and other public uses.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. See FACTORY BUILT HOUSING.
   MASSAGE PARLOR means an establishment that provides massage treatments
performed by an appropriately licensed masseur or masseuse.
   MAYOR means the Mayor of Commercial Point.
   MINI-WAREHOUSE means a structure containing separate storage spaces of
varying sizes leased or rented on an individual basis.
   MOBILE HOME. See FACTORY BUILT HOUSING.
   MOBILE HOME (TRAILER) PARK means any site or tract of land under single or
multiple ownership, upon which three or more mobile or manufactured homes used
for habitation are parked, either free of charge or for revenue purposes,
including any roadway, structure, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for
use as a part of the facilities of such park. This definition shall exclude any
manufactured home park as defined in R.C. § 3733.01, over which the Public
Health Council has exclusive rule making power.
   MODULAR HOME. See FACTORY BUILT HOUSING.
   NET DEVELOPABLE SITE means the land area within a subdivision excluding the
minimum open space requirements, all areas designated for public and private
streets and alleys, open bodies of water including streams, creeks and ditches,
and all other dedicated right-of-way.
   NO-BUILD ZONE means an area or portion of a lot that is designated by deed
not to contain any buildings, structures or other built improvement on a
permanent basis.
   NONCONFORMANCE means a situation wherein the lawful conditions existing
prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the Zoning Code fail by reason
of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements
of the zoning district.
   NONCONFORMING LOT means a lot, the area, dimensions or location of which was
lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the Zoning Code, but
which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the
present requirements of the zoning district.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN means any sign lawfully existing of the effective date of
the Zoning Code, or an amendment thereto, which renders such sign nonconforming
because it does not conform to all the standards and regulations of the adopted
or amended Zoning Code.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR BUILDING means a structure or building the size,
dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or
amendment to the Zoning Code, but which fails by reason of such adoption,
revision or amendment, to conform to the present requirements of the zoning
district.
   NONCONFORMING USE means a use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of the Zoning Code, but which fails, by reason
of such adoption, revision or amendment, to conform to the present requirements
of the zoning district.
   NURSING HOME means an extended or intermediate care facility licensed or
approved to provide full-time convalescent or chronic care to individuals who,
by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for
themselves.
   OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE means a temporary storage area for a motor vehicle
that is directly accessible to an access aisle, and which is not located on a
dedicated street right-of-way.
   ON-STREET PARKING SPACE means a temporary storage area for a motor vehicle
which is located on a dedicated street right-of-way.
   ONE-AND-A-HALF-STORY means a residential dwelling having a ground floor and
a second floor equal to less than 100% of the finished floor area of the first
floor, under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least
two opposite exterior walls (also known as knee wall) are not more than five
feet above the floor of such story.
   OPACITY means a degree of obscuration of light.
   OPEN SPACE means any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or
enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land
adjoining or neighboring such open space.
   OPEN SPACE, COMMON means land within or related to a development, not
individually owned or dedicated for public use, which is designed and intended
for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development and may
include such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and
appropriate.
   OPERATIONS means locating, moving, depositing, or grading of any material or
any construction, use of activity, or combination of such activities, which
modifies the conditions of property subject to this Zoning Code.
   OUPS means the Ohio Utilities Protection Service.
   OUTDOOR DISPLAY means the temporary outdoor display of material and
merchandise for the purposes of retail sales.
   OUTDOOR STORAGE means the keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk,
material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place.
   OVERLAY DISTRICT means a type of zoning district that applies more
restrictive standards to an underlying zoning district.
   PARISH HOUSE means a residential structure, such as a parsonage, that is
subordinate to a church or other place of worship.
   PARK means a tract of land designated and designed for the use by members of
the public for active and passive recreation.
   PERMITTEE means any person issues a permit pursuant to this Zoning Code.
   PERSON means any person, corporation, partnership, company, contracting firm
or other entity, including those employed by the municipality or under a
contract with the municipality.
   PERSONAL SERVICES means establishments primarily engaging in providing
services involving the care of a person or his or her apparel.
   PLAT means a map representing a tract of land, showing the boundaries and
location of individual properties and streets. A portable structure map of a
subdivision or site plan.
   PORTABLE ON DEMAND STORAGE (PODS) means any portable structure intended to
be used on a temporary basis for the loading of materials out of a location
within Commercial Point and then moved to another location by a contracted
third party or the unloading of materials into a location within Commercial
Point in which the portable structure was brought to the location by a third
party.
   PRINCIPAL USE means the primary or predominant use of any lot.
   PUBLIC USE means a land use that is owned and/or operated by the public and
is accessible to the public.
   REAR OF THE PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE means the area located to the rear of the
wall opposite the primary architectural entrance. The primary entrance usually
faces the street that bears the property's address.
   RECONSTRUCTION means the rebuilding or substantial remodeling of an existing
structure.
   RECREATIONAL AND CAMPING EQUIPMENT means boats, boat trailers, snowmobiles,
snowmobile trailers, utility trailers, recreational and camping vehicles, horse
trailers, and other similar equipment.
   RECREATIONAL AND CAMPING VEHICLES means vehicular-type structures primarily
designed as temporary living quarters for recreation, camping or travel use
which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another
vehicle which is self-powered.
   REGULATION means any rule adopted by and pursuant to the authority of this
Zoning Code.
   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT means any one-family or multiple-family residential
development, including one-family residential subdivisions, one-family cluster
housing, residential condominiums, residential site condominiums and multiple-
family developments.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT means a zoning district in which residential uses are
included as permitted uses.
   RESTRICTIVE COVENANT means a restriction on the use of land usually set
forth in the deed.
   RETAIL SERVICES means establishments providing services or entertainment as
opposed to products.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY means the surface of and the space above and below any public
street, public road, public highway, public freeway, public lane, public path,
public way, public alley, public court, public sidewalk, public boulevard,
public parkway, public drive or any public easement now or hereafter held by
the municipality.
   SATELLITE GROUND STATION means a ground station or other antenna, including
dish antennas, designed to transmit or receive radio or television signals to
or from earth satellites.
   SCENIC EASEMENT means an easement the purpose of which is to limit
development in order to preserve a view or scenic area.
   SCHOOL means any building or portion thereof which is designed, constructed
or used for educational or instruction in any branch of knowledge.
   SETBACK means the distance between the street right-of-way line and the
front line of a building or any projection thereof, excluding uncovered steps.
   SETBACK LINE means that line that is required minimum distance from the
street right-of-way line or any other lot line that establishes the area within
which the principal structure must be erected or placed.
   SIGN means any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof,
situated outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display,
direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization,
business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words,
letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected
images.
   SIGN, BILLBOARD OR OFF-PREMISES SIGN means a sign which directs attention to
a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a
location other than the premises on which the sign is located.
   SIGN, BULLETIN BOARD means a sign which identifies an institution or
organization on the premises of which it is located and which contains the name
of the institution or organization, the names of individuals connected with it,
and general announcements of events or activities occurring at the institution
or similar messages.
   SIGN, FREESTANDING means a non-movable sign supported by or from poles,
posts, pillars, columns, uprights, braces, constructed base, or other
structures on the ground and which are not affixed to a building.
   SIGN, PROJECTING means a sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a
building for support and which projects more than 12 inches from such building.
   SIGN, WALL means a sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building in
such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or forms the
background surface of the sign.
   SIGNIFICANT TREE means any individual tree that is of cultural, historical,
biological, or horticultural value as determined by the Council with the advice
of the Planning and Zoning Administrator and/or Technical Review Group.
   SPECIALTY FOOD AND/OR BEVERAGE FACILITY means a facility wherein food and/or
beverage is produced and is: sold on a wholesale and/or retail basis;
distributed; and/or consumed on the premises. This may include but is not
limited to a brew pub, micro-brewery, distillery, coffee roaster, bakery,
charcuterie, cheese making and/or other facilities producing crafted alcoholic
or non-alcoholic beverages and/or artisan food.
   SPLIT LEVEL means a residential dwelling containing finished floor area on
two or more levels with not less than three feet nor more than six feet
vertical distance between the plane of one floor level and the place of the
next higher level.
   SPOT ZONING means the rezoning of a lot or parcel of land to benefit an
owner for a use incompatible with surrounding uses and not for the purpose or
effect of furthering the comprehensive zoning plan.
   STORY means that portion of a building, including between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there is no floor
above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
   STREET means any vehicular way which: (1) Is an existing state, county,
municipal or village roadway; or (2) is shown upon a plat approved pursuant to
law; or (3) is approved by other official action; or (4) is shown on a plat
duly filed and recorded in the office of the Franklin County Recorder or
Pickaway County Recorder and includes the land between the street lines,
whether improved or unimproved.
   STREET, COLLECTOR means a street which collects traffic from local streets
and connects with minor and major arterial.
   STREET, LOCAL means a street designed to provide vehicular access to
abutting property and to discourage through traffic.
   STREET, MAJOR ARTERIAL means a street with access control, channelized
intersections, restricted parking, and which collects and distributes traffic
to and from minor arterial.
   STREET, MINOR ARTERIAL means a street with access controls, signals at
important intersections and stop signs on the side streets, and which collects
and distributes traffic to and from collector streets.
   STRUCTURE means that which is constructed having a location on, above or
below the surface of land or water or attached to that having a location on,
above or below the surface of land or water. Containerized cargo boxes, freight
transport trailers and similar items are prohibited for use as structures in
all districts.
   SUPERMARKET means food markets, or combination food markets and department
stores with more than 5,000 square feet of floor area.
   SURVEYOR means a surveyor registered by the State of Ohio.
   TRAILER means a structure standing on wheels, towed or hauled by another
vehicle and used for short-term human occupancy, carrying materials, goods or
objects, or as a temporary office.
   TRAVEL TRAILER means a recreation vehicle that is towed by a car or truck.
   TREE means any self-supported, woody plant of a species which normally grows
to an overall height of 13 feet or more, including coniferous and deciduous
trees.
   TREE, LARGE means any tree species which normally attains a full grown
height equal to or greater than 45 feet.
   TREE, MEDIUM means any tree species which normally attains a full grown
height of between 25 and 45 feet.
   TREE, SMALL means any tree species which normally attains a full grown
height of under 25 feet.
   TREE LAWN means that part of a street right-of-way not covered by sidewalk
or other paving, lying between the property line and that portion of the street
right-of-way that is paved and usually used for vehicular traffic.
   TREE REMOVAL means the act of removing a tree by digging up or cutting down,
or the effective removal through damage.
   TREE SURVEY means a minimum 1" = 100' scale drawing that provides the
location of all trees of six inches or greater d.b.h., plotted by accurate
techniques, including the common or botanical name of those trees and their
d.b.h.
   TWO-STORY means a residential dwelling having a ground floor and a second
floor having a finished square footage equal to or exceeding 100% of the
required minimum ground floor finished square footage.
   UNDEVELOPED means a parcel of land which is substantially unimproved with
buildings or structures on the effective date of this Zoning Code.
   USE means the purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed,
arranged or intended, or for which land or buildings are occupied or
maintained.
   VEHICULAR USE AREA means any area used by vehicles.
   VIDEO RENTAL STORE means an establishment primarily engaged in the retail
rental or lease of videotapes, films, DVDs, laser discs, electronic games,
cassettes, or other electronic media. Sales of film, videotapes, laser discs,
DVDs, and electronic merchandise associated with VCRs, DVD players, video
cameras, and electronic games are permitted accessory uses.
   WOODLAND means any property containing one or more acres (excluding existing
rights-of-way) which has been designated as a woodland on the official
woodlands map. The term woodland includes all trees, shrubs, and groundcover
located upon such property (regardless of size).
   WOODLANDS MAP means the map approved by the Council of Commercial Point
identifying all woodland areas in Commercial Point.
   YARD means a required open space that lies between the principal or
accessory building or buildings and the nearest lot line. Such yard is
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be
specifically provided in the Zoning Code.
   YARD, FRONT means a yard extending between side lot lines across the front
of a lot and from the front lot line to the front of the principal building.
For corner lots the front yard shall constitute that area of the lot that is
adjacent to the shorter of the two sides facing the street.
   YARD, REAR means a yard extending between side lot lines across the rear of
a lot and from the rear lot line to the rear of the principal building. For
corner lots the rear yard shall constitute that area of the lot that is
opposite to the shorter of the two sides facing the street.
   YARD, SIDE means a yard extending from the principal building to the side
lot line on both sides of the principal building between the lines establishing
the front and rear yards.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1135
Administration, Enforcement and Penalty
1135.01   Enforcement by Planning and Zoning Administrator.
1135.02   Certificate of zoning compliance.
1135.03   Certificate of zoning compliance application procedure.
1135.04   Certificate of zoning compliance review procedure.
1135.05   Certificate of zoning compliance issuance and expiration.
1135.06   Plan review procedure and permission to build.
1135.07   Certificate of occupancy.
1135.08   Demolition permit.
1135.09   Temporary street closure/village property event permit.
1135.10   Violations and remedies.
1135.11   Complaints.
1135.12   Penalty.
1135.13   Failure to act.
1135.14   Technical Review Group.
§ 1135.01 ENFORCEMENT BY PLANNING AND ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   There is hereby established the office of Planning and Zoning Administrator.
It shall be the duty of the Planning and Zoning Administrator to enforce this
Zoning Code in accordance with the administrative provisions of this Zoning
Code. All departments, officials, public employees, and representatives of the
municipality, vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses,
shall conform to the provisions of this Zoning Code and shall issue no permit
or license for any use, building or purpose in conflict with the provisions of
this Zoning Code. Any permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions
of this Zoning Code shall be null and void.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1135.02 CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE.
   (a)   Use Prohibited Without Certificate. No owner, lessee or tenant shall
use or permit the use of any structure, building or land, or part thereof,
hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or enlarged, wholly or partly,
until a certificate of zoning compliance shows that such building or premises
or a part thereof, and the proposed use thereof, are in conformity with the
provisions of this Zoning Code.
      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall issue a certificate of
zoning compliance provided he/she is satisfied that the structure, building
and/or premises, the proposed use thereof, and the proposed methods of water
supply and disposal of sanitary waste, conform with all requirements of this
Zoning Code, subject to approval of Council where the Zoning Code requires or
deems appropriate.
      (2)   This section shall in no case be construed as requiring a
certificate in the event of a change in ownership or tenancy only, without a
change in use or intended use, provided that no alterations or additions are
proposed for such building.
   (b)   Effect of Approval. Certificates of zoning compliance shall be issued
on the basis of plans, information and application approved by the Planning and
Zoning Administrator and/or Council and shall authorize only the use,
arrangement and construction set forth in such approved plans, information and
application or approved amendments thereto, and no other use, arrangement or
construction. Use, arrangement and construction at variance with that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this Zoning Code and punished as
provided in this chapter.
   (c)   Conformance with Certificate of Zoning Compliance. Any project
requiring a certificate of zoning compliance shall conform to the approved
plans and/or other approved materials. Any project not in conformance with the
approved certificate of zoning compliance shall be considered in violation of
this Zoning Code, per § 1135.10.
   (d)   Approval of Health Officer. In every case where the lot is not
serviced with public water supply and/or the disposal of sanitary wastes by
means of public water and sewers, the application shall be accompanied by
written evidence of approval by the responsible Health Officer as to the
proposed method of water supply and/or treatment and disposal of sanitary
waste.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1135.03 CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Application to be Made. Written application for certificates of zoning
compliance shall be made by the property owner(s) or applicant(s) to the
Planning and Zoning Administrator.
   (b)   Application Fee. A fee as stipulated by ordinance shall be paid by the
applicant, payable to the General Fund.
   (c)   Contents of Application. The application for a certificate of zoning
compliance shall contain as a minimum:
      (1)   Name, address, and phone number of the applicant(s) and
representative(s) if any, and the signature of the property owner(s) or
authorized agent.
      (2)   A current survey of the property prepared by a licensed surveyor.
      (3)   If a change of use is proposed, a plan drawn to scale showing:
         A.   Actual dimensions of the lot including easements.
         B.   Exact size and location of all buildings and structures on the
subject lot.
         C.   Existing and intended use of all parts of the land or buildings.
      (4)   If any new development or construction is proposed, a plan drawn to
scale showing:
         A.   Actual dimensions of the lot including easements.
         B.   Exact size and location of all buildings and structures on the
subject lot.
         C.   Existing and intended use of all parts of the land or buildings.
         D.   Any proposed new construction and or alteration.
         E.   Proposed provisions of water, sanitary sewer facilities, surface
drainage features, and underground storm drainage facilities.
         F.   Location of all other public utilities above or below ground.
         G.   Proposed grades.
         H.   Proposed top of foundation.
         I.   Proposed driveway slope.
      (5)   Such other information to be determined by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator and/or Council as may be necessary to determine and provide for
the enforcement of this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1135.04 CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE REVIEW PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Filing of Application. Two copies of a completed application shall be
filed with the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
   (b)   Action by Planning and Zoning Administrator. Within 30 calendar days
after acceptance of an application for a certificate of zoning compliance, the
Planning and Zoning Administrator shall approve a certificate of zoning
compliance provided he/she is satisfied that the structure, building and/or
premises, and the proposed methods of water supply, treatment and disposal of
sanitary waste, and storm drainage measures conform with all requirements of
this Zoning Code, subject to approval of Council where the Zoning Code
requires; in those cases, Council shall render a decision within 35 calendar
days of holding a public hearing. Denial of an application shall be conveyed to
the applicant in writing with a statement of the reasons for such denial.
   (c)   Appeals. A denial by the Planning and Zoning Administrator of an
application for a certificate of zoning compliance may be appealed to Council.
A written appeal shall be filed with the Planning and Zoning Administrator
within ten calendar days of receipt of notification of denial. Council shall
have a maximum of 60 calendar days for public hearing, consideration and a
decision on the appeal. Denial of an appeal by Council may be appealed to the
Franklin County or Pickaway County Court of Common Pleas, as provided for by
law.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1135.05 CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION.
   (a)   An approved certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued within
ten calendar days of approval. One copy of the plans submitted by the applicant
shall be returned upon approval.
   (b)   All certificates of zoning compliance shall be conditional upon the
commencement of work within one year of issuance. If the work has not been more
than 50% completed within one and one-half years of issuance, the certificate
shall expire and be revoked by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. Written
notice shall be provided to the property owners together with notice that
further work as described in the canceled certificate shall not proceed unless
a new certificate is issued or an extension granted.
   (c)   If a certificate of zoning compliance expires and/or is revoked, and a
new certificate or extension is not granted, it is the property owner's
responsibility to return the property to its original state prior to issuance
of the certificate of zoning compliance within 30 calendar days.
   (d)   Once a certificate of zoning compliance expires or is revoked, only
one additional certificate of zoning compliance shall be approved for the
project. After the second certificate of zoning compliance has expired, the
property shall be subject to the requirements of division (c) of this section.
When the requirements of division (c) of this section have been fulfilled to
the satisfaction of the Planning and Zoning Administrator, a new certificate of
zoning compliance application may be submitted for review.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1135.06 PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURE AND PERMISSION TO BUILD.
   (a)   The following shall apply for all non-residential developments,
residential developments, and residential subdivisions:
      (1)   Planning and zoning review. An application for site development
plan or development plan shall be made per
Chapter 1141 or
Chapter 1173 of this Zoning Code, respectively, in conjunction with any other
planning and zoning applications as deemed necessary by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator.
      (2)   Engineering review. An application for engineering construction
plan review shall be made per
Chapter 1141 of this Zoning Code. All applications required in division (a)(1)
of this section shall receive approval prior to the application, review, or
approval of engineer construction plans.
      (3)   Building review. An application for building plan review shall be
made as required per the Ohio Building Code. All applications required in
division (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section shall receive approval prior to the
application, review, or approval of building plans.
      (4)   Permission to build. Permission to build or conduct any site work
shall not be permitted until all planning and zoning applications have been
approved per division (a)(1) of this section, engineering construction plans
have been approved per division (a)(2) of this section, and building plans have
been approved per division (a)(3) of this section.
   (b)   The following shall apply for all single family residential lots and
residential accessory structures.
      (1)   Planning and zoning review. An application for a certificate of
zoning compliance shall be made per this chapter in conjunction with any other
planning and zoning applications as deemed necessary by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator.
      (2)   Building review. An application for building plan review shall be
made. Chapter 4101:1-1 to 4101:1-35 of the Ohio Administrative Code,
collectively known as the "Ohio Building Code", including all referenced
standards contained therein, shall apply and be enforced within the
municipality of Commercial Point, Ohio. All required planning and zoning
applications shall receive approval prior to the application, review, or
approval of building plans.
      (3)   Permission to build. Permission to build or conduct any site work
shall not be permitted until all planning and zoning applications have been
approved per division (b)(1) of this section and building plans have been
approved per division (b)(2) of this section.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1135.07 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   A certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator or his contract designee, for buildings erected or structurally
altered and land initially occupied or changed in use. Such certificate shall
state that the building and proposed use(s) complies with the provisions of
these Codified Ordinances.
   (a)   Application Required. Application for a certificate of occupancy shall
be made to the Planning and Zoning Administrator on forms provided.
   (b)   Non-Residential and Multi-Family Residential Development Certificate
of Occupancy Issuance for Buildings Erected or Structurally Altered and Land
Initially Occupied.
      (1)   Upon determination that the building, property, and affected
properties comply with all approved plans and provisions of these Codified
Ordinances, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. A certificate of
occupancy shall require the signature of the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Where weather related circumstances warrant, a temporary
certificate of occupancy may be issued with the condition that unfinished
weather related/seasonal improvement, such as landscaping, shall be completed.
A temporary certificate of occupancy with such a condition shall be issued for
a period of no more than six months, during which period any remaining work
shall be completed. A temporary certificate of occupancy shall require the
signature of the Zoning Administrator and shall require the receipt of a bond
equal to twice the cost of the remaining improvements plus a fee as stipulated
by the adopted development fee schedule. Upon completion of all necessary
improvements, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued as previously
indicated in division (b) of this section.
   (c)   Single Family Residential and Multi-Family Residential Unit
Certificate of Occupancy Issuance for Buildings Erected or Structurally Altered
and Land Initially Occupied.
      (1)   Upon determination that the building, property, and affected
properties comply with all approved plans and provisions of these Codified
Ordinances, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. A certificate of
occupancy shall require the signatures of the Residential Building Official and
Planning and Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Where weather related circumstances warrant, a temporary
certificate of occupancy may be issued with the condition that unfinished
weather related/seasonal improvements, such as landscaping, shall be completed.
A temporary certificate of occupancy with such a condition shall be issued for
a period of no more than six months, during which period any remaining work
shall be completed, and shall require the receipt of a fee as stipulated by the
adopted development fee schedule. Upon completion of all necessary
improvements, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued as previously
indicated in division (c) of this section.
   (d)   Change of Use Certificate of Occupancy. Upon determination that a use
complies with all approved plans and provisions of these Codified Ordinances, a
certificate of occupancy shall be issued. A certificate of occupancy shall
require the signature of the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
   (e)   Occupying Without a Certificate of Occupancy. Any person, firm or
corporation who occupies or permits to be occupied, or who sells, leases, or
rents a house, building, building unit or structure for which a certificate of
occupancy has not been issued, or in the case of alterations, additions or
repairs, whoever occupies, or permits to be occupied or utilized or sells,
leases or rents that portion of the house, building, building unit or structure
added, altered or repaired for which an occupancy permit has not been issued,
shall be guilty of violating this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties
provided herein.
   (f)   For all building construction projects, the top of foundation shall be
between six and 12 inches above the approved grading plan and the following
shall be submitted and approved before occupancy is granted:
      (1)   Verification by a registered surveyor of footer location and
elevation at the time of footer inspection and verifying the distance from the
property line if less than six feet.
      (2)   Verification by a registered surveyor of top of block elevation at
the time of foundation inspection and prior to backfill.
      (3)   Verification by a registered surveyor that the finished grade is in
conformance with the approved grading plan before sod is laid. An as-built
survey must be provided to the Zoning Administrator before the certificate of
occupancy can be issued.
   (g)   Application After Effective Date. This section shall apply to all uses
established and/or structures erected or altered after the effective date of
this Code.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1135.08 DEMOLITION PERMIT.
   (a)   A demolition permit may be required for demolition or wrecking of any
building. When someone desires to demolish a building they shall contact the
Planning and Zoning Administrator for the necessity of a permit and fee prior
to the demolition of any structure in the municipality.
   (b)   A building being demolished shall be completely removed from the site
and any open excavation shall be properly backfilled. All debris, waste, and
such shall be disposed of according to applicable regulations.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1135.09 TEMPORARY STREET CLOSURE/VILLAGE PROPERTY EVENT PERMIT.
   The following regulations are necessary to govern the operation of certain
uses that are non-permanent in nature. Application for a temporary street
closure/village property event permit, where applicable, shall be submitted at
the Village Municipal Building. All submissions must contain a site plan
showing a graphic description and map of the streets and/or village property to
be utilized, a description of the proposed use, and any additional information
needed for the Council to consider for the issuance of the temporary street
closure/village property event permit.
   (a)   Street closure information.
      (1)   The village will provide barricades/cones for any street closures.
      (2)   The barricades/cones will be dropped off the day prior to the event
taking place and will be picked up the day after the event.
      (3)   The applicant is responsible for the placement and removal of all
barricades/cones at each entrance point to a closed street.
      (4)   Village barricades/cones are the only objects to be used to block
the streets.
      (5)   It is solely the permit holder's responsibility for the
preservation of the barricades/cones.
   (b)   Event vendor information.
      (1)   Vendors operating under a temporary street closure/village property
event permit are required to sign a village waiver prior to the event. No
vendor shall be allowed to conduct business on a village street or village
owned property without a signed waiver.
      (2)   All food vendors shall obtain a valid food service license from any
Ohio County Board of Health or a temporary license to conduct food service from
the Pickaway County Board of Health.
      (3)   Vendors participating under this temporary street closure/village
property event permit are not required to obtain an itinerant merchant or
peddler license from the village.
   (c)   General information.
      (1)   Applications for a temporary street closure/village property event
permit must be submitted to the Village Municipal Office 60 days prior to the
requested event.
      (2)   The permit holder takes responsibility and ensures that the entire
area will be cleaned up immediately following the event.
      (3)   A copy of each approved temporary street closure/village property
event permit will be forwarded to the Village Police Chief and the Township
Fire Chief.
      (4)   The Council may stipulate such other conditions on the approved
permit as they deem necessary.
      (5)   The Council may revoke an approved permit if it is determined that
any of the information contained within the application is false or
misrepresented, or if any of the stated requirements are not met.
(Ord. 2024-13, passed 11-4-2024)
§ 1135.10 VIOLATIONS AND REMEDIES.
   If any building is or is proposed to be located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, enlarged, changed, demolished, maintained or used, or any land
is or is proposed to be used in violation of this Zoning Code or any amendment
or supplement thereto, Council, the Law Director and/or any adjacent or
neighboring property owner who would be specifically damaged by such violation
may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute appropriate
action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful location, erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, demolition, conversion, maintenance,
or use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy
of such building, structure or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about such premises.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1135.11 COMPLAINTS.
   Whenever a violation of this Zoning Code occurs, or is alleged to have
occurred, any resident, property owner, or lessee of property in Commercial
Point may file a written complaint with the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
Such complaint shall state in full the causes and basis thereof. The Planning
and Zoning Administrator shall record said complaint, immediately investigate
the allegations, and take appropriate action as provided by this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1135.12 PENALTY.
   (a)   The first violation of the provisions of this Zoning Code or failure
to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. Upon conviction thereof any person may be fined not more than
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or imprisoned for not more than 30 days or
both, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case.
   (b)   If the same violation occurs a second time within the same year the
offense shall constitute a misdemeanor of the third degree and upon conviction
the fine shall be not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment
for not more than 60 days or both, and in addition the offender shall pay all
costs and expenses involved in the case. If the same violation occurs a third
time within the same year the offense shall constitute a misdemeanor of the
second degree and upon conviction the fine shall be not more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) or imprisonment for not more than 90 days or both, and
in addition the offender shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case.
   (c)   Each day any such violation continues after receipt of a violation
notice shall constitute a separate offense. The owner or tenant of any
building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder,
contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or
maintains, such violation, may each be found guilty of a separate offense and
suffer the penalties herein provided. Nothing herein contained shall prevent
the municipality from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violations.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1135.13 FAILURE TO ACT.
   The failure of any board, not including Council, to act on an application
before such board within the prescribed time frame, excluding the continuation
of a public meeting or hearing, shall constitute approval of such application.
This shall not apply in cases where an applicant has chosen to indefinitely
table an application or has requested an extension of such application.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1135.14 TECHNICAL REVIEW GROUP.
   The Technical Review Group is established as a technical review body for the
municipality and may consist of, but not be limited to, the Planning and Zoning
Administrator, Municipal Engineer, Village Administrator, and Mayor. The
Technical Review Group will meet on an as needed basis to provide a forum at
which proposed developments at any stage in the regulatory process may be
discussed. These meetings are intended to minimize conflicts with various
regulatory review requirements and to provide coordination of various
requirements and procedures. The Technical Review Group provides Council
technical expertise in evaluating development proposals. The Planning and
Zoning Administrator shall chair the Technical Review Group and shall
coordinate the review process. Prior to the Council meeting, the Planning and
Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant or the applicant's
representative in writing of comments and recommendations made by the Technical
Review Group.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1137
Planning and Zoning Administrator
1137.01   General.
1137.02   Certificate of zoning compliance.
1137.03   Record keeping.
1137.04   Advisor to Council.
1137.05   (Reserved)
1137.06   Inspection and complaints.
1137.07   Enforcement.
§ 1137.01 GENERAL.
   The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall serve as the chief
administrative officer for the Zoning Code and is charged with enforcement of
the related requirements and standards, as per this chapter. The Planning and
Zoning Administrator shall cause to be collected the designated fees
established by the Village Council and collection procedure for all zoning
permits.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1137.02 CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE.
   The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall issue the certificate of zoning
compliance when the standards and requirements of this Zoning Code have been
fully met or as directed by Council. The Planning and Zoning Administrator
shall deny issuing a certificate of zoning compliance in the event of non-
compliance. The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of
all applications and actions.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1137.03 RECORD KEEPING.
   The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall make and keep all records
necessary and appropriate to the office, including record of the issuance and
denial of all zoning certificates, zoning map amendments, variances,
conditional use permits, certificates of appropriateness, receipt,
investigation and enforcement of complaints of Zoning Code violations, and any
other permit or certificate required herein. The Planning and Zoning
Administrator shall prepare an annual summary of all records, and will attend
meetings as may be required.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1137.04 ADVISOR TO COUNCIL.
   The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall advise Council of all matters
other than routine duties pertaining to enforcement of this Zoning Code and any
related ordinance, and shall transmit all applications and records pertaining
to supplements and amendments therein.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1137.05 (RESERVED)
§ 1137.06 INSPECTION AND COMPLAINTS.
   (a)   The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall inspect any building or
land to determine whether any violations of this Zoning Code and other related
ordinances have been committed or exist, and to receive and investigate
complaints and notices of alleged violations. Written complaints of alleged
violations shall be filed with the Planning and Zoning Administrator who shall
investigate said complaints and prepare a report to be submitted to the Law
Director. Said complaints shall be recorded.
   (b)   Regular inspections of the municipality shall be conducted by the
Planning and Zoning Administrator to identify potential violations, situations
of non-compliance, and any potentially illegal situations relative to this
Zoning Code. Necessary action shall be taken by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator to ensure compliance with and enforce this Zoning Code and other
related ordinances.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1137.07 ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall enforce this Zoning Code
and any related ordinances and take all necessary steps to remedy any condition
found in violation by ordering by certified mail the discontinuance of said
illegal uses or illegal work, and recommend to the Law Director appropriate
action.
   (b)   The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall:
      (1)   Notify by certified mail the property owners and those violating
this Zoning Code and any related ordinances of any non-compliance situations
and shall order actions to correct or remedy said violations.
      (2)   Order by certified mail the discontinuance of illegal uses of land,
buildings, or structures in violation therein; shall order by certified mail in
accordance with legal procedures the removal of illegal buildings and
structures or illegal additions or structural alterations; shall order
discontinuance by certified mail of any illegal work under way.
      (3)   Take any other action authorized by the Zoning Code, any related
ordinance, and/or Law Director to ensure compliance and prevent violations,
including issuance of and actions on any zoning permits or certificates and
other similar duties. The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall notify in
writing the Law Director of all violations of this Zoning Code and any related
ordinance.
   (c)   Appeals of the Planning and Zoning Administrator's orders may be filed
with Council. A written appeal shall be filed with the Planning and Zoning
Administrator within ten calendar days of receipt of order. Council shall act
in accordance with §
1135.04(c).
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1139
(Reserved)
CHAPTER 1141
Site Development Plans
1141.01   Purpose.
1141.02   Administration.
1141.03   Procedure for preparing an application submittal.
1141.04   Minor site plan review by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
1141.05   Contents of site plan.
1141.06   Engineering construction plans review by the Technical Review Group.
1141.07   Review procedure; Council.
1141.08   Review procedure; Technical Review Group.
1141.09   Final approval process.
1141.10   Modifying an approved site plan.
1141.11   Appeals.
1141.12   Environmental analysis.
§ 1141.01 PURPOSE.
   (a)   Site plans are intended to insure ample provisions for the efficient
use of land and to promote high standards in the layout, design, landscaping
and construction of development. They are further intended to supplement the
provisions of the Subdivision Regulations and to further the purposes and
provisions of this Code for developments other than subdivision developments.
   (b)   The purposes of this chapter are (1) to state the specific additional
requirements applicable to the development of land in certain zoning districts,
(2) to prescribe the standards for the preparation of submission of site plans,
and (3) to prescribe the standards for the design and construction of required
improvements.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1141.02 ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   No permit shall be issued by any administrative officer for the
construction of any building in any area covered by a site plan except in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and a duly approved site plan.
No building permit shall be issued without an approved site plan, signed by the
Planning and Zoning Administrator in accordance with §
1141.09, when required.
   (b)   An approved site plan is required for the following:
      (1)   Any use or development involving new construction, reconstruction
or expansion of structures in all zoning districts except for single-family
detached dwelling units, duplexes or accessory structures in residential
districts.
      (2)   Any development in which automobile parking spaces are to be used
by more than one establishment.
      (3)   When a change is proposed in the exterior elements of a previously
approved site plan.
      (4)   When an existing residential use is proposed for change to a
commercial, industrial or multi-family residential use.
      (5)   All public and/or semi-public buildings and institutions.
   (c)   Major Site Plans. Any required site plan of 2,000 or greater square
feet of gross floor area shall be considered a major site plan. All major site
plans shall be approved by Council.
   (d)   Minor Site Plans. Required site plans for non-residential developments
of less than 2,000 square feet in gross floor area shall be considered a minor
site plan. Minor site plans may be reviewed and approved by the Planning and
Zoning Administrator. An application for minor site plan review and approval
shall comply with §
1141.05 unless otherwise directed by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. At
the Planning and Zoning Administrator's discretion, an application for minor
site plan may be forwarded to Council for review and approval.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1141.03 PROCEDURE FOR PREPARING AN APPLICATION SUBMITTAL.
   (a)   It is strongly recommended that, prior to submitting a site plan
application, the applicant meet with municipal officials regarding plan
requirements.
   (b)   A written application for site plan shall be filed with the Planning
and Zoning Administrator. For major site plans, 12 11" by 17" size copies and
two full size copies of all plans and supporting information including, but not
limited to, information listed in §
1141.05, as applicable, shall be included with the major site plan application
filing. In addition, plan sheets shall be submitted in electronic form in
either jpeg or tif formats. Upon the filing of a site plan application, the
Planning and Zoning Administrator shall review the application for compliance
with this chapter. Should any information not be included with the application,
it shall be deemed incomplete and returned to the property owner or applicant
with a written explanation of what information is missing. No incomplete site
plan application shall be reviewed by village officials until all required
information has been received by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
   (c)   A fee as stipulated by this Zoning Code, paid by the applicant, shall
be included with all site plan application filings. As required by §
1117.04(c), the utilities facilities construction impact fee of $0.25 per
square foot of building proposed to be developed in such site plan application
shall be paid by the applicant at the time such application is filed. The
utilities facilities construction impact fee is calculated only on the basis of
building square footage and is not calculated on the basis of other structures
such as parking lots.
   (d)   All site plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer duly
registered by the State of Ohio and include a boundary survey, conducted within
two years of the submittal date, by a professional land surveyor duly
registered by the State of Ohio.
   (e)   Site plans and related engineering plans shall be prepared at a scale
not smaller than one inch equals 100 feet. Site plans may be prepared on one or
more sheets to clearly show the information required by this chapter, and to
facilitate the review and approval of the site plan. If prepared on more than
one sheet, match lines shall be used to clearly indicate where the several
sheets join. No sheet shall exceed 42 inches horizontally and 28 inches
vertically in size.
(Ord. 2022-07, passed 2-8-2022)
§ 1141.04 MINOR SITE PLAN REVIEW BY THE PLANNING AND ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall act on minor site plans within
30 calendar days upon receiving a complete application. The Planning and Zoning
Administrator may consult with the Technical Review Group as necessary. The
Planning and Zoning Administrator may attach conditions to the minor site plan
approval as may be reasonably required for the public health, safety and
welfare.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1141.05 CONTENTS OF SITE PLAN.
   Every site plan submitted in accordance with this chapter shall contain the
following information:
   (a)   A boundary survey conducted within two years of the application
submittal.
   (b)   The name of the development, the name and address of the property
owner and developer, north point, date of the plan being submitted, scale and
number of sheets.
   (c)   The name of property owners, zoning, and present use of adjoining
lands.
   (d)   Location of all minimum building setback lines.
   (e)   Location, type, and size of existing vehicular ingress and egress to
the site.
   (f)   Location, names, and dimensions of proposed and existing streets,
buildings, easements and drainage ways.
   (g)   Location, type, size and height of all fencing, screening, and
buffering where required by this Code.
   (h)   Provisions for the adequate control of erosion and sedimentation
indicating the proposed temporary and permanent control practices and measures
which will be implemented during all phases of clearing, grading and
construction.
   (i)   All off-street parking and parking bays, loading spaces, ingress and
egress and walkways indicating type of surfacing and showing the number of
parking spaces provided and the number of parking spaces required.
   (j)   Number of floors, floor area, height and location of each building,
and proposed general use for each building. In a multi-family residential
building, the number, size, and type of dwelling units shall be shown.
   (k)   Building elevations depicting actual composition and architectural
style for all proposed structures.
   (l)   Preliminary plans for the provision of, but not limited to, water,
wastewater and storm water utilities.
   (m)   The location of any proposed refuse removal pads.
   (n)   Location and size of all recreation and open space areas.
   (o)   Special flood hazard area limits established by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency's Flood Insurance Rate Maps on file with the Floodplain
Administrator and/or accepted engineering methods. Special flood hazard area
limits shall be shown on all plan sheets.
   (p)   The location, width, size, and purpose of all existing easements and
rights-of-way and whether they are to be publicly or privately maintained.
   (q)   Such other relevant data as Council or the Planning and Zoning
Administrator may require.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1141.06 ENGINEERING CONSTRUCTION PLANS REVIEW BY THE TECHNICAL REVIEW GROUP.
   In preparing required engineering construction plans, the applicable
provisions of the municipality's Subdivision Regulations shall be followed. All
improvements required by this chapter and by the Subdivision Regulations shall
be installed at the cost of the developer in accordance with design and
construction standards of the municipality. Engineering construction plans
submitted in accordance with this chapter shall contain the information in §
1141.05 in addition to the following:
   (a)   Existing topography with a maximum two foot contour intervals and the
proposed finished grading by contour.
   (b)   Provisions for the adequate disposition of natural and storm water on
and off-site, in accordance with current design criteria and construction
standards of Commercial Point including, but not limited to, the calculation of
the contributing drainage area in acres and the location, size, type and grade
of ditches, catch basins, inlets, pipes, and other drainage structures.
   (c)   All existing and proposed sanitary sewer facilities indicating all
pipe sizes, types, grades, invert elevations, location of manholes, and such
other data as may be deemed necessary by the Municipal Engineer.
   (d)   All existing and proposed water facilities including all water mains,
their sizes, valves and fire hydrant locations. A detailed water connection
plan sheet shall be provided indicating the size and location of the water line
connection into the building(s), back flow prevention and, when applicable, the
size and location of the fire suppression line.
   (e)   A landscaping and lighting plan.
   (f)   The location, width, size, and intended purpose of all easements and
rights-of-way and whether they are to be publicly or privately maintained. A
plan copy, suitable for recording, shall be submitted showing any rights-of-way
and/or easements for public dedication.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1141.07 REVIEW PROCEDURE; COUNCIL.
   (a)   Council shall act on site plans presented to it within 60 calendar
days of receipt of the major site plan from the Planning and Zoning
Administrator. The property owner or applicant shall be advised as to the
decision of Council by letter and/or legible markings and notes on the plans.
   (b)   Public notification for the review of major site plans shall consist
of listing on the Council's meeting agenda posted in accordance all applicable
laws and rules.
   (c)   All updated site plans and supporting information submitted for
Council's review shall include all revisions requested by Council. Upon the
submittal of updated site plans and supporting information, the Planning and
Zoning Administrator shall review the submittal for compliance with the
requested revisions. Should any information not be included with the updated
submittal, it shall be deemed incomplete and returned to the property owner or
applicant with a written explanation of what information is missing. No
incomplete updated submittal shall be reviewed by village officials until the
requested revisions have been made.
   (d)   Council may attach conditions to the site plan approval as may be
reasonably required for the public health, safety and welfare.
   (e)   Approval of a site plan by Council shall expire 12 months from the
date of such approval unless building permits have been obtained for
construction in accordance therewith. A single extension, not to exceed six
months, may be given by Council upon written request by the property owner or
applicant.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1141.08 REVIEW PROCEDURE; TECHNICAL REVIEW GROUP.
   (a)   The Technical Review Group shall act on engineering construction plans
presented to it within a reasonable time. The property owner or applicant shall
be advised as to the decision of the Technical Review Group by letter and/or
legible markings and notes on the plans.
   (b)   All updated engineering construction plans and supporting information
submitted to the Technical Review Group for review shall include all revisions
and/or clarifications as previously requested. Should any information not be
included with the updated submittal, it shall be deemed incomplete and returned
to the property owner or applicant with a written explanation of what
information is missing. No incomplete updated submittal shall be reviewed by
the Technical Review Group until the requested revisions have been made and/or
clarifications have been provided.
   (c)   Approval of engineering construction plans by the Technical Review
Group shall expire 12 months from the date of such approval. A single
extension, not to exceed six months, may be given by the Technical Review Group
upon written request by the property owner or applicant.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1141.09 FINAL APPROVAL PROCESS.
   (a)   Final approval of all site plans shall be shown by the signature of
the Planning and Zoning Administrator on the final plan.
   (b)   Prior to this final approval, any required engineering construction
plans shall be approved and signed by the Technical Review Group.
   (c)   Prior to final approval, there shall be executed by the property owner
or applicant and submitted to the municipality an agreement to construct such
required physical improvements that are located within public rights-of-way or
easements or that are connected to any public facility in form and substance as
approved by the municipality, together with a bond with surety, cashier's check
or escrow account in the amount of the estimated construction cost of the
required improvements as approved by the municipal engineer. The aforesaid
agreement and bond or condition shall be provided for completion of all work
covered thereby within the time to be determined by the Technical Review Group,
which time may be extended upon written agreement. The municipal engineer may
also require a restoration bond. Said bond shall be to insure repair of any
damage done to existing curb, gutter, sidewalk, street pavement, landscaping,
or other items within the right-of-way adjacent to the project. The amount of
the restoration bond shall be as determined by the municipal engineer based on
his estimate of potential damage.
   (d)   The property owner or applicant shall present to the municipality any
dedication or easement documentation for approval prior to recordation. The
property owner or applicant shall provide the municipality with a copy of any
recorded dedication or easement. Upon satisfactory completion of the required
improvements, the municipality shall release any remaining bonds.
   (e)   Site infrastructure improvements for the area proposed under the site
plan may proceed following (1) the approval and signing of the engineering
construction plans by the Mayor and applicable member of the Technical Review
Group, and (2) the holding of a preconstruction meeting with the municipality.
The property owner or applicant is responsible to contact the municipality's
Planning and Zoning Administrator to schedule the preconstruction meeting.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1141.10 MODIFYING AN APPROVED SITE PLAN.
   (a)   Any agreements or changes to an approved major site plan, including
all supporting materials, between the property owner or applicant and a
separate third party shall also be approved by Council. Otherwise, Council may
rescind its site plan approval.
   (b)   An approved site plan may be modified from the original approval in
accordance with this division. Such modification shall be approved by Council,
in the case of a major site plan, and by the Planning and Zoning Administrator,
in the case of a minor site plan. The property owner(s) or applicant(s) shall
file a written application to modify the approved site plan with the Planning
and Zoning Administrator accompanied by a fee as stipulated by ordinance. In
considering a modification, the applicable provisions of this chapter shall
apply. However, minor technical changes to an approved major or minor site
plan, which do not substantially alter the original site plan layout, may be
approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1141.11 APPEALS.
   (a)   Appeal of Planning and Zoning Administrator Decision. Whoever is
aggrieved or affected by the decision of the Planning and Zoning Administrator
involving an application for site plan approval shall have the right to file an
appeal with Council. A written appeal shall be filed with the Planning and
Zoning Administrator within ten calendar days of the decision of the Planning
and Zoning Administrator. At the time of filing the appeal, the Planning and
Zoning Administrator shall turn over to Council the application and any
relevant background information. A public hearing shall be scheduled within 21
calendar days of Council's receipt of the appeal. Council shall have a maximum
of 60 calendar days from receipt of an appeal to hold a public hearing,
consider the appeal and make a decision on the appeal. To reverse or modify the
Planning and Zoning Administrator's decision, a majority vote of the full
membership of Council shall be required.
   (b)   Public Notification. At least one notice shall be given at least 30
calendar days prior to the public hearing in one or more newspapers of general
circulation in the municipality. Such notice shall include the date, time and
place of the public hearing and nature of the appeal. Written notice of the
appeal shall be mailed by the municipality, certified mail, at least 20
calendar days prior to the date of the public hearing to the property owner or
applicant and, if different, the party filing the appeal. Such notice shall
include the date, time and place of the public hearing and nature of the
appeal.
   (c)   In approving a site plan on appeal, Council may prescribe additional
conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Zoning Code. Violations of
such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which said
site plan is approved, shall be deemed a violation of this Zoning Code and
punishable as prescribed in
Chapter 1135, and shall result in revocation of the site plan approval and
respective certificate of zoning compliance.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1141.12 ENVIRONMENTAL ANALYSIS.
   (a)   Purpose and Intent. The environmental analysis is intended to protect
the environmental integrity of land within the municipality and address
identified municipal concerns. This provision is also intended to ensure ample
provisions for the efficient use of land and to promote high standards in
layout and design. The environmental analysis supplements the provisions of the
Subdivision Regulations and site development plans. The purpose of this section
is to state the specific requirements applicable to the development of land in
environmentally sensitive areas, and to prescribe the standards for the
preparation and submission of an environmental analysis.
   (b)   Environmental Analysis Required. Before any use or development
involving new construction, reconstruction or expansion of structures can
begin, an environmental analysis shall be required and shall be submitted if
any portion of the parcel(s) meets one or more of the following criteria:
      (1)   The parcel is located in the 100-year floodplain.
      (2)   The parcel contains one or more wetlands.
      (3)   Fifteen percent or more of the soil is hydric or contains hydric
soil inclusions.
      (4)   The parcel contains a stream or other natural water feature.
      (5)   The parcel contains an agricultural drainage ditch.
      (6)   Twenty-five percent or more of the total area of the parcel has
slopes over 20%.
      (7)   Twenty-five percent or more of the site is woodlands, as defined in
Chapter 1133.
   (c)   Exemptions. No zoning district shall be exempt from this requirement.
   (d)   Preparation. The environmental analysis shall be prepared by persons
professionally qualified to do such work. Every analysis shall consist of a map
identifying all of the features outlined in division (b) of this section and a
report detailing the approximate size of each of the features illustrated on
the map and the mitigation strategies that will be used by the owner/developer
in these areas. The map shall be prepared at a scale of one inch equals 500
feet or less. One copy of the map and report shall be submitted to the Planning
and Zoning Administrator for review.
   (e)   Decision. Once the environmental analysis is submitted to the Planning
and Zoning Administrator, the Planning and Zoning Administrator has ten
calendar days to review the analysis. If the Planning and Zoning Administrator
determines that the analysis is complete, the Planning and Zoning Administrator
shall certify such in writing to the property owner/developer. If the Planning
and Zoning Administrator determines that the environmental analysis is
incomplete or lacks utilization of the most current data, the Planning and
Zoning Administrator shall certify such in writing to the property owner/
developer. The property owner/developer then has ten calendar days to submit a
revised analysis for consideration.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1143
Amendments
1143.01   Initiation.
1143.02   Application procedure.
1143.03   Criteria for review.
1143.04   Review procedure - Council.
§ 1143.01 INITIATION.
   The provisions of this Zoning Code or Zoning Map may be amended,
supplemented, changed or repealed to meet changing conditions or to better meet
good zoning practices. Amendments may be initiated in one of two ways:
   (a)   By adoption of a resolution by Council.
   (b)   By filing of an application by one or more owners or lessees of
property within the area proposed to be changed or affected by amendments of
provisions of this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1143.02 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Application to be Made. Written application for amendment of this
Zoning Code, including all supporting materials, initiated by property owner(s)
or lessee(s) shall be submitted to the Council. This process is separate from
the requirements of Planned Districts (
Chapter 1173).
   (b)   Application Fee. A fee as stipulated by ordinance shall be paid by the
applicant to cover the costs of advertising, review, publishing and reporting
of the application, payable to the General Fund.
   (c)   Application Contents. The application for amendment shall contain as a
minimum:
      (1)   Name, address, and phone number of the applicant(s) and
representative(s) if any, and the signature of the property owner(s).
      (2)   A current and accurate legal description of the property(s) in
question and a current survey prepared by a licensed surveyor.
      (3)   The proposed amendment to the Zoning Code, the proposed use and the
proposed zoning district of the property(s).
      (4)   The present use and present zoning district of the property(s).
      (5)   A list of all property owners within 250 feet from any portion of
the property(s) in question. The list of addresses shall correspond to the
County Auditor's current tax list.
      (6)   A statement of the relationship of proposed change or amendment to
the general welfare of the community, to appropriate plans for the area, and to
the changed or changing conditions behind the request to rezone.
      (7)   A plot plan to show:
         A.   Boundaries and dimensions of the lot and the size and location of
all proposed and existing structures.
         B.   The proposed use of all parts of the lot and structures.
         C.   Traffic access, traffic circulation, existing and proposed
utilities, parking, lighting and illumination, landscaping, signs, and other
such information relevant to the proposed use.
         D.   Such additional information as may be required by this Zoning
Code and/or requested by Council and/or the Planning and Zoning Administrator
to review the application.
      (8)   Any deed restrictions, easements, covenants and encumbrances to be
used to control the use, development and maintenance of land, and proposed
uses, shall be fully denoted by text and map.
      (9)   At the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Administrator, an
engineer's estimate of utility needs of the proposed use of the area being
considered for rezoning, to include sewer, water, and refuse demand may be
required. In addition, an engineer's estimate of potential traffic generation
for the proposed uses and measures proposed by the applicant to mitigate the
impacts resulting from said generation may be required by Council.
      (10)   For all developments over 25 acres, and/or for commercial and
industrial developments over 10,000 square feet and/or for any development that
requires direct access to a major thoroughfare and/or for any development that
is not contiguous with existing water and sewer, a fiscal/economic impact study
will be required to determine if the development will require immediate or
short-term expenditures on the part of the municipality in terms of
infrastructure and/or support services.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1143.03 CRITERIA FOR REVIEW.
   All rezoning activities must be consistent with the adopted comprehensive
plan. Council shall, at the minimum, consider the following factors in the
review of the application:
   (a)   Compatibility of the proposed amendment to adjacent land use, adjacent
zoning and to appropriate plans for the area, including but not limited to the
comprehensive plan.
   (b)   Relationship of the proposed amendment to access and traffic flow and
utility services including sanitary sewer, water, and storm drainage, as
outlined in the transportation thoroughfare plan, comprehensive plan and/or
other adopted plans for the area.
   (c)   Relationship of the proposed amendment to the public health, safety,
convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare, including impact on
infrastructure and municipal services.
   (d)   Relationship of the proposed use to the adequacy of available services
and to general expansion plans and planned capital improvements.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1143.04 REVIEW PROCEDURE - COUNCIL.
   (a)   Filing and Acceptance of Application. A written application for an
amendment and 15 11" by 17" size copies and two full size copies of all plans
and supporting information shall be filed with the Planning and Zoning
Administrator. Upon the filing of the application, the Planning and Zoning
Administrator shall review the application for compliance with this chapter.
Should any information not be included with the application, it shall be deemed
incomplete and returned to the property owner or applicant with a written
explanation of what information is missing. No incomplete amendment application
shall be reviewed by village officials and forwarded along to Council until all
required information has been received by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator.
   (b)   Public Hearing. Council shall hold a public hearing within 60 calendar
days of receipt of an amendment application. Nothing in this section shall
prevent Council from granting a continuance of the public hearing.
   (c)   Public Notice for Hearing. At least one notice shall be given at least
30 calendar days prior to a scheduled public hearing in one or more newspapers
of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice shall include time and
place of the public hearing and the nature of the proposed amendment.
   (d)   Notice to Property Owners. Written notice of the public hearing shall
be mailed by the municipality at least 20 calendar days prior to the date of a
scheduled public hearing to all property owners proposed to be rezoned or
within 250 feet of any portion of such area proposed to be rezoned or
redistricted as listed under § 1143.02(c)(5). The notice shall correspond to
division (c) of this section in content. Notices shall be sent by certified
mail when an amendment proposes to rezone or redistrict ten or less properties.
Notice may be sent by certified mail or regular first class mail when an
amendment proposes to rezone or redistrict 11 or more properties.
   (e)   Action by Council. Within 120 calendar days after the public hearing,
the Council shall approve or disapprove the amendment application or adopt a
modification thereof. If no action is taken by the Council within 120 calendar
days after the public hearing, the amendment application shall be considered
disapproved. Any parcel of land contained in an amendment application to be
rezoned that has been disapproved by the Council shall not be resubmitted to be
rezoned in any other amendment application for a period of six months of the
date of such disapproval by Council.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020; Am. Ord. 2024-05, passed 5-6-2024)
CHAPTER 1145
Conditional Uses
1145.01   Purpose.
1145.02   Application procedure.
1145.03   Criteria for approval.
1145.04   Review procedure.
1145.05   Issuance of permit; expiration.
1145.06   Appeals.
§ 1145.01 PURPOSE.
   Certain uses more intensely affect the surrounding area in which they are
located than permitted uses in the same zoning district and, if properly
controlled and regulated, these uses can be compatible within the zoning
district. To provide this necessary control such uses shall be designated as
conditional uses and allowable only upon review and approval by Council.
Because of the uniqueness or special nature of a conditional use with respect
to location, design, size, and method of operation, each such use that comes
before the review of Council shall be considered individually.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1145.02 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Application to be Made. Written application for a conditional use
shall be made by property owner(s) or lessee(s) to Council.
   (b)   Application Fee. A fee as stipulated by ordinance shall be paid by the
applicant to cover the costs of advertising, review, publishing, and reporting
of the application, payable to the General Fund.
   (c)   Application Contents. The application for a conditional use shall
contain as a minimum:
      (1)   Name, address and phone number of the applicant(s) and
representative(s) if any, and the signature of the property owner(s).
      (2)   A current and accurate legal description of the property(s) in
question and a current survey prepared by a licensed surveyor.
      (3)   A description of existing use, current zoning district, and
proposed conditional use.
      (4)   A list of all property owners within, contiguous to, and directly
across the street from the property(s) in question. The list of addresses may
correspond to the County Auditor's current tax list.
      (5)   A statement of the relationship of the proposed use to the general
welfare of the community, to appropriate plans for the area, and to the changed
or changing conditions behind the request.
      (6)   A statement of the relationship of the proposed use to adjacent
land use in terms of traffic, parking, noise, and other potential nuisances and
general compatibility.
      (7)   A plot plan to show:
         A.   Boundaries and dimensions of the lot and the size and location of
all proposed and existing structures.
         B.   Traffic access, traffic circulation, existing and proposed
utilities, parking, lighting and illumination, landscaping, signs, and other
such information relevant to the proposed use.
         C.   Such additional information as may be required by this Zoning
Code and/or requested by Council and/or Planning and Zoning Administrator to
review the application.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1145.03 CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL.
   The following considerations shall be examined in review of an application
for conditional use:
   (a)   The proposed use is a conditional use of the zoning district and the
applicable development standards of this Zoning Code are met.
   (b)   The proposed use is compatible with adjacent land use, adjacent
zoning, and to appropriate plans for the area.
   (c)   The proposed use will not adversely impact access, traffic flow, and
other public facilities and services.
   (d)   The proposed use will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of
a natural, scenic, or historic feature.
   (e)   The proposed use will not adversely affect the public health, safety,
convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1145.04 REVIEW PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Filing and Acceptance of Application. A written application for a
conditional use and eight 11" by 17" size copies and two full size copies of
all plans and supporting information shall be filed with the Planning and
Zoning Administrator. Upon the filing of the application, the Planning and
Zoning Administrator shall review the application for compliance with this
chapter. Should any information not be included with the application, it shall
be deemed incomplete and returned to the property owner or applicant with a
written explanation of what information is missing. No incomplete conditional
use application shall be reviewed by village officials until all required
information has been received by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
   (b)   Public Hearing. Council shall hold a public hearing within 60 calendar
days of receipt of the conditional use application. Nothing in this section
shall prevent the Council from granting a continuance of the public hearing.
   (c)   Public Notice for Hearing. At least one notice shall be given at least
30 calendar days prior to a scheduled public hearing in one or more newspapers
of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice shall include time and
place of the public hearing and nature of the proposed conditional use.
   (d)   Notice to Property Owners. Written notice of the hearing shall be
mailed by the municipality, certified mail, at least 20 days prior to the date
of a scheduled public hearing to all property owners as listed under §
1145.02(c)(4). The notice shall correspond to division (c) of this section in
content.
   (e)   Procedure at Hearing. Within 35 days of the public hearing, the
Council shall review the application and render one of the following decisions:
      (1)   Approval of conditional use as requested.
      (2)   Approval of conditional use with modifications.
      (3)   Disapproval of conditional use.
   Council shall apply the criteria in Section
1145.03 in reaching its determination. In approving a conditional use, Council
may prescribe additional conditions and safeguards in conformity with this
Zoning Code. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made part of
the terms under which the conditional use is approved, shall be deemed a
violation of this Zoning Code and punishable as prescribed in
Chapter 1135 and shall result in revocation of the conditional use approval and
respective certificate of zoning compliance.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1145.05 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; EXPIRATION.
   Upon approval by Council, and with such conditions attached by Council as
may be necessary to secure the objectives of this Zoning Code, the Planning and
Zoning Administrator shall issue a conditional use permit to the applicant
within ten calendar days. Such permit shall authorize one particular
conditional use and such permit shall automatically expire if, for any reason,
the conditional use shall not be commenced within two years, including any
construction or renovation. Such permit shall expire if a conditional use is
discontinued for more than six months. The conditional use permit serves as a
contract between the municipality and the property owner. The property owner
must follow the conditions outlined in the permit and will be required to sign
an affidavit stating such at the time that the conditional use permit is
granted. If the property is sold, the new owner will be required to sign such
affidavit within 30 calendar days of taking ownership. At that time, additional
conditions may be attached to the conditional use permit by the Planning and
Zoning Administrator. If the property owner does not sign such affidavit within
30 days of taking ownership, the new owner must reapply for a conditional use
permit.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1145.06 APPEALS.
   Whoever is aggrieved or affected by the decision of Council involving an
application for a conditional use shall have the right to appeal Council's
decision as provided for in the Ohio Revised Code.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1147
Variances
1147.01   Purpose.
1147.02   Application procedure.
1147.03   Criteria for approval.
1147.04   Review procedure.
1147.05   Appeals relative to signage and off-street parking.
1147.06   Issuance of zoning certificate.
1147.07   Appeals.
§ 1147.01 PURPOSE.
   The issuance of a variance to permit exceptions to and variance deviation
from the strict interpretation of the applicable regulations contained in this
Zoning Code shall be under the authority of the Council. In no case shall the
granting of a variance allow a use not permitted under the subject district
regulations.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1147.02 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Application to be Made. Written application for a variance shall be
made by the property owner(s) or lessee(s) to Council. (Please see §
1147.04(a)).
   (b)   Application Fee. A fee as stipulated by ordinance shall be paid by the
applicant to cover the costs of advertising, review, publishing, and reporting
of the application, payable to the General Fund.
   (c)   Application Contents. The application for a variance shall contain as
a minimum:
      (1)   Name, address, and phone number of the applicant(s) and
representative(s) if any, and the signature of the property owner(s).
      (2)   A current and accurate legal description of the property(s) in
question and a current survey prepared by a licensed surveyor.
      (3)   The nature of the variance required to include what provisions of
the Zoning Code are affected.
      (4)   A statement pertaining to and explaining the relation of the
variance(s) requested to the criteria for approval as listed under §
1147.03.
      (5)   A list of all property owners within, contiguous to, and directly
across the street from the property(s) in question. The list of addresses may
correspond to the County Auditor's current tax list.
      (6)   A plot plan to show:
         A.   Boundaries and dimensions of the property and the size and
location of all proposed and existing structures.
         B.   The nature of the special conditions or circumstances.
         C.   The proposed use of all parts of the lot and structures.
         D.   The use of land and location of structures on adjacent
properties.
         E.   Such additional information as may be required by this Zoning
Code and/or requested by Council and/or the Planning and Zoning Administrator
to review the application.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1147.03 CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL.
   All relevant factors including but not limited to the following
considerations shall be examined in the review, public hearing, and approval of
an application for a variance:
   (a)   That special circumstances or conditions exist which are not
applicable to other lands or structures in the same zoning district.
   (b)   That a literal interpretation of the provisions of this Zoning Code
would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in
the same zoning district under the provisions of this Zoning Code.
   (c)   That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant.
   (d)   That the granting of the variance will not confer on the applicant any
undue privilege that is denied by this Zoning Code to other lands or structures
in the same zoning district.
   (e)   That the granting of the variance will in no other manner adversely
affect the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general
welfare.
   (f)   That the granting of the variance is not solely based upon the showing
that the property could be put to better economic use than presently permitted
by zoning regulations.
   (g)   That the granting of the variance will not permit a use that is
otherwise not permitted within the respective zoning district.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1147.04 REVIEW PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Filing of Application. A written application for a variance and 12 11"
by 17" size copies and two full size copies of all supporting information shall
be filed with the Planning and Zoning Administrator. Upon the filing of the
application, the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall review the application
for compliance with this chapter. Should any information not be included with
the application, it shall be deemed incomplete and returned to the property
owner or applicant with a written explanation of what information is missing.
No incomplete variance application shall be reviewed by village officials until
all required information has been received by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator.
   (b)   Public Hearing. Council shall hold a public hearing within 60 calendar
days of receipt of a variance application. Nothing in this section shall
prevent Council from granting a continuance of the public hearing.
   (c)   Public Notice for Hearing. At least one notice shall be given at least
30 calendar days prior to a scheduled public hearing in one or more newspapers
of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice shall include the time
and place of the public hearing and the nature of the proposed variance(s).
   (d)   Notice to Property Owners. Written notice of the hearing shall be
mailed by the municipality, certified mail, at least 20 calendar days prior to
the date of a scheduled public hearing to all property owners as listed under §
1147.02(c)(5). The notice shall correspond to division (c) of this section in
content.
   (e)   (Reserved)
   (f)   Procedure at Hearing. Within 35 calendar days of the public hearing,
Council shall review the application and render one of the following decisions:
      (1)   Approval of variance(s) as requested.
      (2)   Approval of variance(s) with modifications.
      (3)   Disapproval of variance(s).
   Council shall apply criteria in §
1147.03 in reaching its determination. In approving a variance(s), Council may
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Zoning
Code. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the
terms under which the variance is approved, shall be deemed a violation of this
Zoning Code and punishable as prescribed herein.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1147.05 APPEALS RELATIVE TO SIGNAGE AND OFF-STREET PARKING.
   An appeal may be filed with Council for relief from the strict enforcement
of Zoning Code requirements relative to nonconforming signs and nonconforming
surface treatment of off-street parking areas, provided the applicant shows:
   (a)   That the unlawful nonconforming situation has existed a minimum of
five years prior to the effective date of this Zoning Code.
   (b)   That special circumstances or conditions exist which are peculiar to
the structure(s) involved and which prevent the applicant from meeting the
requirements of this Zoning Code.
   (c)   That the special circumstances of conditions do not result from the
actions of the applicant.
   (d)   That the granting of an appeal will in no other manner adversely
affect the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general
welfare.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1147.06 ISSUANCE OF ZONING CERTIFICATE.
   Upon approval by Council, and with such conditions attached by Council as
may be necessary to secure the objectives of this Zoning Code, the Planning and
Zoning Administrator shall issue a certificate of zoning compliance for all
approved variances to the applicant within ten calendar days of approval. The
requirements relative to expiration of §
1135.05 shall apply.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1147.07 APPEALS.
   Whoever is aggrieved or affected by the decision of Council involving a
variance application shall have the right to appeal Council's decision as
provided for in the Ohio Revised Code.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1149
Nonconforming Lots, Uses, and Structures
1149.01   General.
1149.02   Nonconforming lots.
1149.03   Nonconforming structures and developments.
1149.04   Nonconforming uses.
§ 1149.01 GENERAL.
   The lawful use of any dwelling, building, or structure and of any land or
premises, as existing and lawful at the time of enacting this Zoning Code or
amendment hereto, may be continued, although such use does not conform with the
provisions of this Zoning Code or amendment hereto, as provided herein. It is
the intent of this Zoning Code to permit these nonconforming situations to
continue until such time that they are removed, but not to encourage their
continued use or expansion except as provided for herein.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1149.02 NONCONFORMING LOTS.
   (a)   The construction of a conforming structure and/or the conduct of a
permitted use shall be allowed on any lot of record which has an area and/or
lot width less than that required for such structure or permitted use in the
zoning district in which the lot is located. Variance of any development
standard other than minimum lot area and/or minimum lot width shall be obtained
only through action of Council in accordance with
Chapter 1147.
   (b)   Such nonconforming lots must be in separate ownership and not of
continuous frontage with other land in the same ownership on the effective date
of this Zoning Code. Otherwise, development shall be permitted only in
accordance with development standards of the zoning district in which such
ownership is located.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1149.03 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND DEVELOPMENTS.
   Structures and/or accessory development, which by reason of size, type,
location on the lot, or otherwise in conflict with regulations of the zoning
district in which they are located may be altered, reconstructed or extended on
appeal to Council, provided the applicant shows that:
   (a)   The nonconforming structure and development was lawful at the time of
enactment of this Zoning Code.
   (b)   Such tax parcel has been under the same ownership for not less than
two years.
   (c)   Such alteration, reconstruction or extension is necessary and
incidental to such existing lawful nonconforming use as demonstrated by the
applicant.
   (d)   Such extension shall not increase the total floor area by more than
50%.
   (e)   No extension shall be requested within two years of the last previous
extension as approved by Council.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1149.04 NONCONFORMING USES.
   The lawful nonconforming use of a lot and/or structure may be continued,
expanded, substituted, changed, or re-established subject to the following:
   (a)   Continuation. The lawful use of any dwelling, building, or structure,
and of any land or premises, as existing at the time of enactment of this
Zoning Code, may be continued. However, if any such nonconforming use is
voluntarily discontinued for a period of six months or more, any future use of
such land shall be in conformity with this Zoning Code.
   (b)   Expansion. A lawful nonconforming use may be expanded within an
existing structure manifestly arranged or developed for such use on appeal to
Council, provided the applicant shows that:
      (1)   The nonconforming use was lawful at the time of enactment of this
Zoning Code.
      (2)   Such tax parcel has been under the same ownership for not less than
two years.
      (3)   Such expansion is necessary and incidental to such existing lawful
nonconforming use as demonstrated by the applicant.
      (4)   No expansion shall be requested within two years of the last
previous expansion as approved by Council.
   (c)   Substitution. On approval of an appeal to Council, the substitution of
a lawful nonconforming use existing at the time of enactment of this Zoning
Code by another lawful nonconforming use may be permitted if no structural
alterations, except those required by law or resolution are made, provided that
any use so substituted shall be of the same or a more restricted
classification, subject to approval of an appeal to Council, provided the
applicant shows that:
      (1)   The nonconforming use was lawful at the time of enactment of this
Zoning Code.
      (2)   Such tax parcel has been under the same ownership for not less than
two years.
      (3)   Such substitution is compatible with adjacent land use, adjacent
zoning, and to appropriate plans for the area.
      (4)   No substitution shall be requested within two years of the last
previous expansion as approved by Council.
   (d)   Re-establishment. A lawful nonconforming use of any structure damaged
by fire, explosion, flood, riot, or act of God may be continued and used as
before any such calamity, provided the building or structure has not been
destroyed to an extent of more than one-half of its fair value, and provided
such reconstruction is started within 12 months of such calamity and is
continued in a reasonable manner until completed.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
TITLE FIVE - Zoning Districts
               
Chap. 1151.   Districts Established.
               
Chap. 1153.   General Zoning Regulations.
               
Chap. 1155.   Limited Density Residential District. (R-1)
               
Chap. 1157.   Low Density Residential District. (R-3)
               
Chap. 1159.   Optional Traditional Neighborhood Development Floating District.
(TND)
               
Chap. 1161.   Old Town Zoning Districts.
               
Chap. 1163.   Multi-Family Residential Districts.
               
Chap. 1165.   Neighborhood Commercial District. (NC)
               
Chap. 1167.   General Commercial District. (GC)
               
Chap. 1169.   Suburban Office and Institution Districts. (SO)
               
Chap. 1171.   Limited Manufacturing District. (LM)
               
Chap. 1173.   Planned Districts. (PRD, PCD, PID, PUD and PCND)
               
Chap. 1175.   Overlay Districts. (LC, LR, S-1 and S-2)
               
Chap. 1177.   Floodplain District. (FP)
               
Chap. 1179.   Exceptional Use District. (EU)
CHAPTER 1151
Districts Established
1151.01   Division into districts.
1151.02   Boundaries: zoning map.
1151.03   Vacated street or alley.
1151.04   Annexations.
§ 1151.01 DIVISION INTO DISTRICTS.
   For the purposes of this Zoning Code, the municipality is hereby divided
into categories of zoning districts. Such districts are designated as follows:
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
      Limited Density Residential District (R-1)
      Low Density Residential District (R-3)
      Multi-Family Apartment Residential District (MF-A)
      Multi-Family Condominium Residential District (MF-C)
      Old Town Zoning Districts (OT-SF, OT-MF, OT-C)
   COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
      Neighborhood Commercial District (NC)
      General Commercial District (GC)
      Suburban Office and Institution District (SO)
   SUPPLEMENTAL DISTRICTS
      Floodplain District (FP)
      Exceptional Use District (EU)
      Optional Traditional Neighborhood Development Floating District (TND)
   PLANNED DISTRICTS
      Planned Residential District (PRD)
      Planned Commercial District (PCD)
      Planned Industrial District (PID)
      Planned Unit District (PUD)
      Planned Conservation District (PCND)
   MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
      Limited Manufacturing District (LM)
   OVERLAY DISTRICTS
      Stream Protection Overlay District (AE)
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1151.02 BOUNDARIES: ZONING MAP.
   (a)   Districts and Boundaries Established. The several districts and
boundaries thereof are hereby adopted and established as shown on the Zoning
Map, which map, together with all notations, references, data, district
boundaries, and other information shown thereon, are hereby made a part of this
Zoning Code. Such Zoning Map, properly attested, shall remain on file in the
Municipal Hall. Such Zoning Map may be amended in accordance with this Zoning
Code.
   (b)   District Boundaries. Except when referenced on such Map to a street or
alley or other designated line by dimensions shown on such Map, the district
boundary lines follow property lot lines, the centerlines of watercourses, or
the centerlines of rights-of-way, both streets and alleys, as they existed at
the time of the adoption of this Zoning Code.
   (c)   Uncertainty as to Boundaries or Textual Provisions; Interpretation.
All questions concerning the exact location of district boundary lines shall be
determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. Appeals of said
determination shall be made as provided under §
1135.04(c).
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1151.03 VACATED STREET OR ALLEY.
   Whenever any street, alley or other public right-of-way is vacated by
official action as provided by law, the zoning district adjoining the side of
such public right-of-way shall be extended automatically, depending on the side
or sides to which such lands revert, to include the right-of-way thus vacated,
which shall thenceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended district
or districts. Prescriptive easements must be considered and documented.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1151.04 ANNEXATIONS.
   (a)   (1)   For land annexed to the municipality following enactment of this
Zoning Code, such land shall automatically become zoned, without payment of a
fee, to Exceptional Use (EU) if such land is undeveloped. The property owner
and/or his/her representative shall in all cases reserve the right to apply for
any desired zoning map amendment of the land following the effective date of
the annexation. If the land is undeveloped, the property owner and/or his/her
representative shall meet with the municipality and begin discussions to amend
the zoning map within 30 calendar days of the effective date of the annexation.
      (2)   In any case where undeveloped land has been annexed under the
previous zoning code and development has not begun, the landowner will be
notified respecting the creation of this new zoning code. The Planning and
Zoning Administrator will meet with the landowner to determine implementation
of this zoning code and modification of the zoning map. If the land is
developed or occupied by a use other than agriculture, the land shall be zoned
under the most compatible zoning district listed in §
1151.01 excluding planned districts.
   (b)   All property annexed to the municipality shall have a zoning of
industrial or commercial when newly annexed to the municipality if property is
owned by the municipality and is approved by Council.
   (c)   Any zoning other than as established herein shall be in accordance
with the zoning rules and regulations.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1153
General Zoning Regulations
1153.01   Conformance required.
1153.02   Prohibited uses.
1153.03   Conversion to dwellings.
1153.04   Accessory structures without main structure.
1153.05   Required area or space cannot be reduced.
1153.06   Unsafe buildings.
1153.07   Pending applications for building permits.
1153.08   Corner lot visibility.
1153.09   Storage of construction materials.
1153.10   Objectionable element or condition.
1153.11   Platting required.
1153.12   Building lines established.
1153.13   Prohibition of mineral extraction.
1153.14   Prohibition of sludge ponds and sludge application.
1153.15   Modification of development standards.
1153.16   Corner lot setbacks.
1153.17   One use per recorded lot.
1153.18   Principal buildings per recorded lot.
1153.19   Multiple non-residential uses permitted.
1153.20   Location of vending machines.
1153.21   Vehicle sales.
1153.22   (Reserved)
§ 1153.01 CONFORMANCE REQUIRED.
   Except as hereinafter specified, no land, building, structure or premises
shall hereafter be used, and no building or part thereof, or other structure,
shall be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered
except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in
which it is located; such regulations include, but without limitation, the
following: the specific use of buildings, structures or land, including
performance standards for the control of any dangerous and objectionable
elements in connection with such use; the height, size and dimensions of
buildings or structures; the size or dimensions of lots, yards and other open
spaces surrounding buildings; the provision, location, size, improvement and
operation of off-street parking, loading and unloading spaces.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1153.02 PROHIBITED USES.
   (a)   Uses not expressly permitted in the Commercial Point Zoning Code,
except as approved when appropriate under the Exceptional Use District (EU),
are hereby prohibited.
   (b)   Adult entertainment uses, as defined herein, shall be prohibited in
the municipality.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1153.03 CONVERSION TO DWELLINGS.
   The conversion of any building into a dwelling or the conversion of any
dwelling so as to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units or
households shall be permitted only within a district in which a new building
for similar occupancy would be permitted under this Zoning Code and only when
the resulting occupancy will comply with the requirements governing new
construction in such district with respect to minimum lot size, lot area per
dwelling unit, percentage of lot coverage, dimensions of yards and other open
spaces, and off-street parking. Each conversion shall be subject also to such
further requirements as may be specified hereinafter to such district.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1153.04 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES WITHOUT MAIN STRUCTURE.
   In any district, no accessory structure shall be erected or constructed
prior to the erection or construction of the principal structure with the
exception of the contractor's temporary building.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1153.05 REQUIRED AREA OR SPACE CANNOT BE REDUCED.
   No lot, yard, court, parking area or other space shall be reduced in area or
dimension so as to make such area or dimension less than the minimum required
by this Zoning Code. No part of a yard, court, parking area or other space
provided about, or for, any building or structure for the purpose of complying
with the provisions of this Zoning Code shall be included as part of a yard,
court, parking area or other space required under this Zoning Code for another
building or structure.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1153.06 UNSAFE BUILDINGS.
   The owners of premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property
in a safe and sanitary condition. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant
or permit another person to occupy premises that are not in a sanitary and safe
condition. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are
responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of
the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they
occupy and control. Likewise, vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant
land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition so as
not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or
safety. R.C. §§ 715.26, 715.261
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020; Am. Ord. 2020-30, passed 1-4-2021)
§ 1153.07 PENDING APPLICATIONS FOR BUILDING PERMITS.
   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the overall layout
plans, construction, size and designated use of any development, building,
structure or part thereof, for which official approvals and required building
permits have been granted before the enactment of this Zoning Code and for
which construction shall have begun prior to the effective date of this Zoning
Code.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1153.08 CORNER LOT VISIBILITY.
   On a corner lot in any residential district, nothing shall be erected,
constructed, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially
to impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet and ten feet above
the center line grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the
street lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along said street
lines 50 feet from the point of the intersection.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1153.09 STORAGE OF CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS.
   In any residential district the storage of construction materials on any one
lot shall be limited to the quantity of material required for the construction,
renovation or enlargement of the dwelling unit or units proposed for said lot,
provided the plans for such dwelling unit or units have been previously
reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Administrator and approved by the Building
Department.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1153.10 OBJECTIONABLE ELEMENT OR CONDITION.
   No land, building or structure in any district shall be used or occupied in
any manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise
objectionable element or condition so as to adversely affect the surrounding
area or adjoining premises provided that any use permitted by this Zoning Code
may be undertaken and maintained if acceptable measures and safeguards are
employed to limit dangerous and objectionable elements to acceptable limits as
determined by the municipal ordinances.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1153.11 PLATTING REQUIRED.
   No use shall be established or altered and no structure shall be constructed
or altered except upon a lot that has been platted in accordance with or which
otherwise meets the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations of Commercial
Point. Development standards of the Commercial Point Zoning Code are minimum
requirements, unless otherwise stated, for the arrangement of lots and spaces
to be achieved in all developments.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1153.12 BUILDING LINES ESTABLISHED.
   (a)   Building Lines Established. Along every street right-of-way a building
line shall be established from the existing right-of-way or proposed right-of-
way as indicated in the Commercial Point Thoroughfare Plan, as amended,
whichever is greater in width that shall constitute the required front yard
setback as established in the applicable zoning district.
   (b)   Required Setback Defined. The required setback is that distance
between the established building line and the actual or proposed right-of-way.
No structure or other use of land, except parking as defined in division (c) of
this section, shall locate in the required setback. In no case shall the
required setback be less than the minimum required in the applicable zoning
district.
   (c)   Parking Within the Required Setback. Open parking or loading spaces
shall be permitted to extend toward the street right-of-way from the
established building line a distance equal to 40% of the required setback
distance as measured from the actual or proposed right-of-way. In no case shall
any part of a parking area be closer than 15 feet to any established or
proposed right-of-way.
   (d)   Reduced Setback. If existing structures or uses on lots adjacent to
each side of a lot have a setback less than the setback line established by
these Regulations, the setback on the center lot shall be the average setback
established on the adjacent lots.
   (e)   Display in Front Set Back Prohibited. Within the front building set
back and side building setbacks adjacent to public right-of-way, there shall be
no storage or display of any materials, equipment, inventory, merchandise or
wares. This provision is applicable in all NC, GC, SO, and LM zoning district.
   (f)   Sidewalk Sales in the Central Business District Exempted. Sidewalk
sales conducted in the Central Business District shall be exempt from this
provision provided a temporary use permit is issued by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator prior to the commencement of such a sale.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1153.13 PROHIBITION OF MINERAL EXTRACTION.
   The extraction of oil, natural gas, coal, limestone, gravel, sand, clay and
other similar minerals, excluding water, shall be prohibited within the Village
of Commercial Point.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1153.14 PROHIBITION OF SLUDGE PONDS AND SLUDGE APPLICATION.
   The storage and/or application of human waste within the Village of
Commercial Point is prohibited. The use of a lagoon, pond, or other storage
feature for animal wastes shall be prohibited within the Village of Commercial
Point.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1153.15 MODIFICATION OF DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   In any district where dwellings are permitted, a permitted residential
dwelling(s) may be erected on any lot of official record on the effective date
of this Zoning Code even though such lot does not comply with the minimum lot
area and minimum width requirements of such district, provided said lot has a
minimum of 40 feet of frontage on an improved public street and further
provided the following conditions are met:
   (a)   If the owner of such lot does not own adjoining property and did not
own such property at the time this Zoning Code became effective:
      (1)   Each required side yard may be reduced by two inches for every foot
that is narrower than the required lot width at the building line, but in no
case shall each required side yard be less than four feet. Such dedications
shall not apply to structures higher than two stories.
      (2)   Required rear yards shall be 25% of the lot depth, but in no case
shall be less than 15 feet.
      (3)   Required building line, see §
1153.12(a).
   (b)   If the owner of such lot owns the adjoining property and owned such
property at the time this Zoning Code became effective then in order to erect a
dwelling(s) that meets district dimensional requirements, such lots shall be
combined to create a parcel that meets said requirements.
   (c)   Administrative Variance. Administrative variances will only be
considered when the proposed project is a supplement to or the reconstruction
of an existing structure. If the approval of an administrative variance
introduces new nonconforming conditions, the application will not be
considered. Administrative variances will only be considered for residential
properties located in the old town (pre-1960) district.
      (1)   Application to be made. Written application for an administrative
variance shall be made by the property owner(s) or lessee(s) to the Planning
and Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Application fee. No fee is required.
      (3)   Application contents. The application for a variance shall contain
as a minimum:
         A.   Name, address, and phone number of the applicant(s) and
representative(s) if any, and the signature of the property owner(s).
         B.   A current and accurate legal description of the property(s) in
question.
         C.   The nature of the variance required including what provisions of
the Zoning Code are affected.
         D.   A plot plan to show:
            1.   Boundaries and dimensions of the property and the size and
location of all proposed and existing structures.
            2.   The nature of the special conditions or circumstances.
            3.   The proposed use of all parts of the lot and structures.
            4.   Such additional information as may be required by this Zoning
Code and/or requested by the Planning and Zoning Administrator to review the
application.
      (4)   Criteria for approval.
         A.   Is the proposed addition/modification architecturally compatible
with the existing structure and the neighborhood?
         B.   Is the proposed addition/modification location compatible with
the existing structure and the structures in the neighborhood?
         C.   Is this a supplement to or the reconstruction of an existing
structure?
         D.   Will the approval of the proposed variance improve existing
conditions within the neighborhood?
      (5)   Review procedure.
         A.   Filing of application. One copy of a completed application must
be filed with the Planning and Zoning Administrator. Upon receipt of the
application, the Planning and Zoning Administrator will review the submittal
and determine whether such application is complete and meets all submittal
requirements. Failure to submit a complete application, as determined by the
Planning and Zoning Administrator, shall result in a rejection of the
application.
         B.   Application review. Upon receipt of a completed application, the
Planning and Zoning Administrator has a maximum of ten business days to review
the application. The Planning and Zoning Administrator must be able to respond
positively to all of the criteria listed in §
1153.14(c)(4) in order to approve the variance request. The Planning and Zoning
Administrator may also approve the variance with modifications or disapprove
the variance. In approving a variance(s), the Planning and Zoning Administrator
may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this
Zoning Code. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of
the terms under which the variance is approved, shall be deemed a violation of
this Zoning Code and punishable as prescribed herein. The Planning and Zoning
Administrator's determination in taking action on a requested variance shall be
accompanied by findings of fact and a statement of the reasons for the decision
reached.
         C.   Issuance of a zoning certificate. Upon approval of the Planning
and Zoning Administrator, a certificate of zoning compliance for all approved
variances shall be issued to the applicant within ten calendar days of
approval. The requirements relative to expiration of §
1135.05 shall apply. As needed, the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall
provide a report to Council outlining the administrative variances granted.
         D.   Appeals. Whoever is aggrieved or affected by the decision of the
Planning and Zoning Administrator involving an application for an
administrative variance(s) shall have the right to file an appeal with Council.
The appeal shall be filed no later than ten calendar days after the decision of
the Planning and Zoning Administrator. At the time of filing, the Planning and
Zoning Administrator shall turn over to Council the application and any
relevant background information.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1153.16 CORNER LOT SETBACKS.
   (a)   In any district the front of a corner lot shall be deemed to be the
shorter of the two sides fronting on streets.
   (b)   The minimum setback on the side facing the side street shall be 35
feet.
   (c)   The minimum lot width for corner lots shall be 15 feet greater than
the width required for interior lots in the same district.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1153.17 ONE USE PER RECORDED LOT.
   In all R-1, R-3, MF-A and MF-C residential districts there shall not be more
than one permitted, principal use on each recorded lot.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1153.18 PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS PER RECORDED LOT.
   In all districts, no more than one principal building or structure may be
constructed upon any one lot. The construction of more than one principal
building or structure upon any one lot shall require a variance from the
Council.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1153.19 MULTIPLE NON-RESIDENTIAL USES PERMITTED.
   In all NC, GC, SO, and LM districts, multiple uses may be permitted on a
single lot of record subject to the following standards:
   (a)   Uses Shown on Approved Final Site Plan. Multiple uses may be permitted
on a single lot of record when such uses are shown on an approved final site
plan.
   (b)   Certificate of Zoning Compliance Issued. Multiple uses may be
permitted on a single lot of record when such uses are located in a multi-
tenant structure and a certificate of zoning compliance is issued for the
various uses.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1153.20 LOCATION OF VENDING MACHINES.
   All vending machines shall only be displayed, maintained or stored in a
covered or enclosed structure meeting the requirements of this Code.
   (a)   Vending Machines Defined. Vending machine shall include but is not
limited to beverage machines, candy machines, cigarette machines, and ice
machines.
   (b)   Exemption for Telephones. Public telephone facilities shown on an
approved site plan shall be exempt from this provision.
   (c)   Exemption for Newspaper Sales. Vending machines for the sale or
distribution of newspapers of general circulation shall be exempt from this
provision.
   (d)   Location of Newspaper Vending Machines. Vending machines for the sale
or distribution of newspapers of general circulation shall not be located in
such a manner as to obstruct the public rights-of-ways or to impede traffic on
said rights-of-ways.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1153.21 VEHICLE SALES.
   The business of selling new, used, or previously owned vehicles is
restricted to areas zoned for business use.
   (a)   Casual Sale Exempted: This section shall not control the casual sale
of used vehicles. In all the zoning districts, the vehicles for sale must
belong to either the property owner or tenant where the vehicle is parked. No
more than one vehicle may be sold on the lot at any one time.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1153.22 (RESERVED)
CHAPTER 1155
Limited Density Residential District (R-1)
1155.01   Purpose.
1155.02   Permitted uses.
1155.03   Conditional uses.
1155.04   Development standards.
§ 1155.01 PURPOSE.
   The Limited Density Residential District (R-1) is established as a low
density, detached, single-family residential district serviced by public water
and sanitary sewer systems where physical conditions limit the suitability of
servicing by on-site systems. The R-1 District is most appropriate in less
developed portions of the municipality, serving as a transition between rural,
predominantly agricultural areas and more developed areas.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1155.02 PERMITTED USES.
   Land and buildings in the Limited Density Residential District (R-1) shall
be used only for the following purposes:
   (a)   Single-family detached dwellings.
   (b)   Accessory buildings and uses in association with a permitted dwelling.
   (c)   Home occupations in accordance with
Chapter 1187.
   (d)   Private kennels.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1155.03 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be allowed in the Limited Density Residential
District (R-1) subject to approval in accordance with
Chapter 1145:
   (a)   Churches and other similar places of worship and parish houses
provided said use occupies a lot of not less than three acres;
      (1)   The minimum lot width is 300 feet.
      (2)   The lot is adequate to accommodate the required off-street parking
requirements of the church in accordance with
Chapter 1185.
      (3)   The church building is set back from any adjacent residential
property line a distance equal to or greater than the height of the structure
exclusive of the steeple or spire. The church lot is accessible to a major
arterial in a manner that does not require the passage of traffic through local
residential streets.
      (4)   There is one acre or more per 100 seats or similar accommodations
in the main assembly hall.
      (5)   Accessory living quarters may be provided on the church lot as a
conditional use. The location, density, and the additional lot area required
for such uses shall be subject to approval by Council. Accessory recreational
uses may be provided on the church lot as a conditional use subject to approval
by Council.
   (b)   Public uses: parks, playgrounds, recreation and community center
buildings and grounds, golf courses, public swimming pools, tennis courts and
similar recreational uses, provided that any principal building or swimming
pool used therefore shall be located not less than 150 feet from any other lot
in any residential district unless otherwise approved as part of the
development plan within a planned development district.
      (1)   All golf course facilities shall be in accordance with the
following provisions in addition to any other conditions required by Council:
         A.   The hours of operation of the golf course shall be limited from
dawn to dusk to prevent undue disturbance to neighboring uses.
         B.   All maintenance equipment shall be stored in sheds or other
structures and away from view.
         C.   No hole or green shall be located within 200 feet of an existing
residential structure unless otherwise approved as part of the development plan
within a planned district.
         D.   Council may require fencing, walls, landscaping, earth mounds or
other measures where it is determined that buffering or screening is necessary
to manage land use conflicts and/or protect the public safety unless otherwise
approved as part of the development plan within a planned district.
         E.   Parking area requirements shall conform to Chapter 1185.
         F.   The minimum floor area requirements for the clubhouse or
management structure shall be 5,000 square feet.
         G.   Any golf courses hereinafter constructed within designated areas
of Commercial Point shall occupy not less than 150 acres.
      (2)   All private outdoor recreational facilities shall be in accordance
with the following provisions in addition to any other conditions required by
Council:
         A.   Minimum lot area for a private recreational facility shall be no
less than six acres.
         B.   Setbacks: Front = 100 feet for structures and 75 feet for
parking; rear = 75 feet; side = 75 feet.
         C.   All structures and playing fields for outdoor recreation shall be
located at least 250 feet and drives and parking areas shall be at least 50
feet from any adjacent parcels where residences are a permitted use.
         D.   Where a landscaped screen is not already required adjacent to
another parcel, one deciduous tree shall be provided for every 40 feet of
parking lot boundary and loading/unloading area, plus a three foot average
height continuous planting, hedge, fence wall or earth mound. The same parking
lot perimeter screening shall also be provided adjacent to the public right-of-
way. At least one tree per 5,000 square feet of parking area shall be provided
within the parking lot.
         E.   All outdoor playing fields, courts and other similar outdoor
recreation facilities must be secured at night to prevent unauthorized access.
While no lighting will be permitted on any such outdoor recreation facility,
security lights may be approved for any permanent facilities at the site.
         F.   The maximum density allowed on any parcel shall not exceed one
field for every five acres.
         G.   A minimum of 35 parking spaces shall be provided for every field
at the site. All parking areas shall be constructed in accordance with Chapter
1185.
         H.   A minimum eight foot high landscaped screen or combination mound
and plant material with a 90% year round opacity shall be provided on any side
of the site adjacent to parcels where dwellings are a permitted use. If a mound
is used it shall be constructed with no more than a 4:1 slope. Mounds shall not
be constructed to restrict the natural flow of surface water to or from the
site.
         I.   Access shall be from an arterial street or commercial collector
or shall be provided in a manner that does not cause heavy traffic on
residential streets.
         J.   Permanent toilet facilities, connected to a sanitary sewer or
other approved on site disposal system, must be provided with the following
minimum number of fixtures: women - five toilets and two lavatories, men - one
toilet, two urinals and two lavatories, additional fixtures must be added at
the rate of three for every two fields over four fields per site.
      (3)   All private indoor recreational facilities shall be in accordance
with the following provisions in addition to any other conditions required by
Council:
         A.   Minimum lot area for an indoor private recreational facility
shall be no less than five acres.
         B.   Setbacks: Front = 100 feet for structures and 75 feet for
parking; rear = 75 feet; side = 75 feet.
         C.   Driveways and parking areas shall be at least 50 feet from any
adjacent parcels where residences are a permitted use.
         D.   Where a landscaped screen is not already required adjacent to
another parcel, one deciduous tree shall be provided for every 40 feet of
parking lot boundary and loading/unloading area, plus a three foot average
height continuous planting, hedge, fence wall or earth mound. The same parking
lot perimeter screening shall also be provided adjacent to the public right-of-
way. At least one tree per 5,000 square feet of parking area shall be provided
within the parking lot.
         E.   No exterior lighting shall be positioned so as to extend glare on
adjacent property or public right-of-way.
         F.   All activities shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed
building.
         G.   Access shall be from an arterial street or commercial collector
or shall be provided in a manner that does not cause heavy traffic on
residential streets.
         H.   Parking shall be in accordance with the requirements of Chapter
1185.
   (c)   Public and private schools.
   (d)   Home occupations associated with a principal use and in accordance
with
Chapter 1187.
   (e)   Rest homes, nursing homes, children's nurseries of day care centers,
and pre-school provided that the following conditions are met, where
applicable:
      (1)   The building occupied by the use is compatible with neighborhood
structures in dimension, size, and architecture.
      (2)   There is an outdoor play area of 85 square feet or more per child.
      (3)   Such play area shall be enclosed with a chain link fence or its
equivalent in strength and protective character to a height of five feet to
control accessibility of children to adjoining hazardous conditions such as
streets, ponds, etc., or adjacent yards.
      (4)   A drop off area is provided so that children do not have to walk
through the parking lot to enter the facility.
      (5)   Parking spaces are provided as specified in
Chapter 1185.
      (6)   The facility meets or exceeds State of Ohio provisions for daycare
operations.
   (f)   Customary agricultural operations, excluding horses, including the
sale of produce raised on the premises, provided such operation is over ten
acres in area and further provided that no storage of manure or odor or dust
producing substance or use of the housing of farm animals, excluding horses,
shall be permitted. The housing of horses shall comply with §
1181.06.
   (g)   Accessory structures used as private kennels.
   (h)   Bed and breakfast inns provided that the following conditions are met:
      (1)   Structure. The structure is a single family, detached dwelling.
      (2)   Guest rooms. There shall be no more than four separate guest rooms
within a single family dwelling that are utilized by bed and breakfast guests
nor more than 25% of a dwelling's net floor area, whichever is greater. A guest
room shall contain no less than 100 square feet of living space, not including
closets, for two guests and 30 square feet for each additional guest up to a
total of four guests per room.
      (3)   Owner/operator. The owner/operator of the bed and breakfast shall
live full-time on the inn's premises. Such owner/operator shall be the owner of
record of no less than 50% interest of the property in question.
      (4)   Approval of fire and health officers. Written approval from fire
and health officers shall be required for each conditional use application
requesting approval for a bed and breakfast inn. Each guest room shall contain
a separate installed smoke detector alarm approved by the fire officer. No
premises shall be utilized for a bed and breakfast inn unless there are at
least two separate exits to the outdoors.
      (5)   Meals. No more than one meal shall be served to each paying guest
of the bed and breakfast inn and that meal shall be breakfast.
      (6)   Consecutive nights. A paying guest may stay at a bed and breakfast
inn for not more than seven consecutive nights at any single visit nor more
than a total of 28 nights in any given year.
      (7)   Kitchen facilities. Only one kitchen facility shall be permitted
per structure for which a conditional use is granted to operate a bed and
breakfast inn. No cooking facilities shall be permitted in individual guest
quarters.
      (8)   Bathrooms. A minimum of one full bathroom, including shower, toilet
and sink, shall be required for every two guest rooms to be available for the
exclusive use of bed and breakfast paying guests. Bed and breakfast inns shall
be serviced by public sanitary sewer and water service.
      (9)   Guest register. A guest register listing the name, address, phone
number, and dates of stay of all paying guests shall be maintained by the
owner/operator and shall be made available for inspection by municipal
officials.
      (10)   Special gatherings. Rental of the bed and breakfast inn for
special gatherings such as wedding receptions and parties shall be prohibited
in all residential zoning districts or properties adjacent to a residential
zoning district.
      (11)   Business license. A business license shall be required to be
obtained from Commercial Point.
      (12)   Public nuisance. Bed and breakfast inns shall not be permitted and
a conditional use shall be revoked or suspended by Council whenever the
operation has been found by the Planning and Zoning Administrator to conflict
with or violate public nuisance regulations under §
1181.03.
      (13)   Employees. No more than two individuals who are non-residents of
the dwelling may be employed in the operation of a bed and breakfast inn,
whether or not compensated.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1155.04 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (a)   Lot and Building Requirements. The following lot and building
requirements are minimum standards, except where noted, and shall apply in the
Limited Density Residential District (R-1):
      (1)   Lot area: 25,000 square feet.
      (2)   Lot coverage (maximum): 30%.
      (3)   Lot width: 100 feet of frontage on an improved public right-of-way.
      (4)   Lot width on a curving street or cul-de-sac: 60 feet of frontage on
an improved public right-of-way and lot width shall be 100 feet at the minimum
building line.
      (5)   Front yard setback: 60 feet as measured between the street right-
of-way line and the building setback line.
      (6)   Side yard setback: 15 feet on each side as measured from the side
property line.
      (7)   Rear yard setback: 40 feet as measured from the rear property line;
an accessory building may be located in the rear yard no less than eight feet
from the rear property line.
      (8)   Dwelling dimensions: The following dwelling minimum dimensions
measured in terms of square footage apply to all residential structures:
 
DWELLING TYPE        GROUND FLOOR AREA (square FINISHED FLOOR AREA (square
                     feet)                     feet)
Two-story            1,100                     2,200
One-and-a-Half-Story 1,400                     2,000
One-Story            1,800                     1,800
Split Level          1,800                     1,800
 
   (b)   Supplemental Standards. The following supplemental standards shall
apply within the Limited Density Residential District (R-1):
      (1)   No building shall exceed 35 feet in height, nor more than two
stories in height.
      (2)   Applicable standards shall be met in corresponding sections of this
Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020; Am. Ord. 2025-02, passed 3-3-2025)
CHAPTER 1157
Low Density Residential District (R-3)
1157.01   Purpose.
1157.02   Permitted uses.
1157.03   Conditional uses.
1157.04   Development standards.
§ 1157.01 PURPOSE.
   The R-3 District is established as a moderate density, detached, single-
family residential district and shall be serviced by public water and sanitary
sewer systems. The R-3 provides for a residential character more dense than the
R-1 District and where economies of scale support additional utility and
infrastructure services.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1157.02 PERMITTED USES.
   Land and buildings in the Low Density Residential District (R-3) shall be
used only for the following purposes:
   (a)   Single-family detached dwellings.
   (b)   Accessory buildings and uses in association with a permitted dwelling.
   (c)   Home occupation in accordance with
Chapter 1187.
   (d)   Private kennels.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1157.03 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be allowed in the Low Density Residential District
(R-3) subject to approval in accordance with
Chapter 1145:
   (a)   Churches and other similar places of worship and parish houses
provided said use occupies a lot of not less than three acres.
      (1)   The minimum lot width is 300 feet.
      (2)   The lot is adequate to accommodate the required off-street parking
requirements of the church in accordance with
Chapter 1185.
      (3)   The church building is set back from any adjacent residential
property line a distance equal to or greater than the height of the structure
exclusive of the steeple or spire. The church lot is accessible to a major
arterial in a manner that does not require the passage of traffic through local
residential streets.
      (4)   There is one acre or more per 100 seats or similar accommodations
in the main assembly hall.
      (5)   Accessory living quarters may be provided on the church lot as a
conditional use. The location, density, and the additional lot area required
for such uses shall be subject to approval by Council. Accessory recreational
uses may be provided on the church lot as a conditional use subject to approval
by Council.
   (b)   Public uses: parks, playgrounds, recreation and community center
buildings and grounds, golf courses, public swimming pools, tennis courts and
similar recreational uses, provided that any principal building or swimming
pool used therefore shall be located not less than 150 feet from any other lot
in any residential district unless otherwise approved as part of the
development plan within a planned development district.
      (1)   All golf course facilities shall be in accordance with the
following provisions in addition to any other conditions required by Council:
         A.   The hours of operation of the golf course shall be limited from
dawn to dusk to prevent undue disturbance to neighboring uses.
         B.   All maintenance equipment shall be stored in sheds or other
structures and away from view.
         C.   No hole or green shall be located within 200 feet of an existing
residential structure unless otherwise approved as part of the development plan
within a planned district.
         D.   Council may require fencing, walls, landscaping, earth mounds or
other measures where it is determined that buffering or screening is necessary
to manage land use conflicts and/or protect the public safety unless otherwise
approved as part of the development plan within a planned district.
         E.   Parking area requirements shall conform to
Chapter 1185.
         F.   The minimum floor area requirements for the clubhouse or
management structure shall be 5,000 square feet.
         G.   Any golf courses hereinafter constructed within designated areas
of Commercial Point shall occupy not less than 150 acres.
      (2)   All private outdoor recreational facilities shall be in accordance
with the following provisions in addition to any other conditions required by
Council:
         A.   Minimum lot area for a private recreational facility shall be no
less than six acres.
         B.   Setbacks: Front = 100 feet for structures and 75 feet for
parking; rear = 75 feet; side = 75 feet.
         C.   All structures and playing fields for outdoor recreation shall be
located at least 250 feet and drives and parking areas shall be at least 50
feet from any adjacent parcels where residences are a permitted use.
         D.   Where a landscaped screen is not already required adjacent to
another parcel, one deciduous tree shall be provided for every 40 feet of
parking lot boundary and loading/unloading area, plus a three foot average
height continuous planting, hedge, fence wall or earth mound. The same parking
lot perimeter screening shall also be provided adjacent to the public right-of-
way. At least one tree per 5,000 square feet of parking area shall be provided
within the parking lot.
         E.   All outdoor playing fields, courts and other similar outdoor
recreation facilities must be secured at night to prevent unauthorized access.
While no lighting will be permitted on any such outdoor recreation facility,
security lights may be approved for any permanent facilities at the site.
         F.   The maximum density allowed on any parcel shall not exceed one
field for every five acres.
         G.   A minimum of 35 parking spaces shall be provided for every field
at the site. All parking areas shall be constructed in accordance with Chapter
1185.
         H.   A minimum eight foot high landscaped screen or combination mound
and plant material with a 90% year round opacity shall be provided on any side
of the site adjacent to parcels where dwellings are a permitted use. If a mound
is used it shall be constructed with no more than a 4:1 slope. Mounds shall not
be constructed to restrict the natural flow of surface water to or from the
site.
         I.   Access shall be from an arterial street or commercial collector
or shall be provided in a manner that does not cause heavy traffic on
residential streets.
         J.   Permanent toilet facilities, connected to a sanitary sewer or
other approved on site disposal system, must be provided with the following
minimum number of fixtures: women - five toilets and two lavatories, men - one
toilet, two urinals and two lavatories, additional fixtures must be added at
the rate of three for every two fields over four fields per site.
      (3)   All private indoor recreational facilities shall be in accordance
with the following provisions in addition to any other conditions required by
Council:
         A.   Minimum lot area for an indoor private recreational facility
shall be no less than five acres.
         B.   Setbacks: Front = 100 feet for structures and 75 feet for
parking; rear = 75 feet; side = 75 feet.
         C.   Driveways and parking areas shall be at least 50 feet from any
adjacent parcels where residences are a permitted use.
         D.   Where a landscaped screen is not already required adjacent to
another parcel, one deciduous tree shall be provided for every 40 feet of
parking lot boundary and loading/unloading area, plus a three foot average
height continuous planting, hedge, fence wall or earth mound. The same parking
lot perimeter screening shall also be provided adjacent to the public right-of-
way. At least one tree per 5,000 square feet of parking area shall be provided
within the parking lot.
         E.   No exterior lighting shall be positioned so as to extend glare on
adjacent property or public right-of-way.
         F.   All activities shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed
building.
         G.   Access shall be from an arterial street or commercial collector
or shall be provided in a manner that does not cause heavy traffic on
residential streets.
         H.   Parking shall be in accordance with the requirements of Chapter
1185.
   (c)   Public and private schools.
   (d)   Home occupations associated with a principal use and in accordance
with
Chapter 1187.
   (e)   Customary agricultural operations, excluding horses, including the
sale of produce raised on the premises, provided such operation is over ten
acres in area and further provided that no storage of manure or odor or dust
producing substance or use of the housing of farm animals, excluding horses,
shall be permitted. The housing of horses shall comply with §
1181.06.
   (f)   Accessory structures used as private kennels.
   (g)   Day care centers and pre-schools provided that the following
conditions are met, where applicable:
      (1)   The building occupied by the use is compatible with neighborhood
structures in dimension, size, and architecture.
      (2)   There is an outdoor play area of 85 square feet or more per child.
      (3)   Such play area shall be enclosed with a chain link fence or its
equivalent in strength and protective character to a height of five feet to
control accessibility of children to adjoining hazardous conditions such as
streets, ponds, etc., or adjacent yards.
      (4)   A drop off area is provided so that children do not have to walk
through the parking lot to enter the facility.
      (5)   Parking spaces are provided as specified in
Chapter 1185.
      (6)   The facility meets or exceeds State of Ohio provisions for daycare
operations.
   (h)   Bed and breakfast inns provided that the following conditions are met:
      (1)   Structure. The structure is a single family, detached dwelling.
      (2)   Guest rooms. There shall be no more than four separate guest rooms
within a single family dwelling that are utilized by bed and breakfast guests
nor more than 25% of a dwelling's net floor area, whichever is greater. A guest
room shall contain no less than 100 square feet of living space, not including
closets, for two guests and 30 square feet for each additional guest up to a
total of four guests per room.
      (3)   Owner/operator. The owner/operator of the bed and breakfast shall
live full-time on the inn's premises. Such owner/operator shall be the owner of
record of no less than 50% interest of the property in question.
      (4)   Approval of Fire and Health Officers. Written approval from fire
and health officers shall be required for each conditional use application
requesting approval for a bed and breakfast inn. Each guest room shall contain
a separate installed smoke detector alarm approved by the fire officer. No
premises shall be utilized for a bed and breakfast inn unless there are at
least two separate exits to the outdoors.
      (5)   Meals. No more than one meal shall be served to each paying guest
of the bed and breakfast inn and that meal shall be breakfast.
      (6)   Consecutive nights. A paying guest may stay at a bed and breakfast
inn for not more than seven consecutive nights at any single visit nor more
than a total of 28 nights in any given year.
      (7)   Kitchen facilities. Only one kitchen facility shall be permitted
per structure for which a conditional use is granted to operate a bed and
breakfast inn. No cooking facilities shall be permitted in individual guest
quarters.
      (8)   Bathrooms. A minimum of one full bathroom, including shower, toilet
and sink, shall be required for every two guest rooms to be available for the
exclusive use of bed and breakfast paying guests. Bed and breakfast inns shall
be serviced by public sanitary sewer and water service.
      (9)   Guest register. A guest register listing the name, address, phone
number, and dates of stay of all paying guests shall be maintained by the
owner/operator and shall be made available for inspection by municipal
officials.
      (10)   Special gatherings. Rental of the bed and breakfast inn for
special gatherings such as wedding receptions and parties shall be prohibited
in all residential zoning districts or properties adjacent to a residential
zoning district.
      (11)   Business license. A business license shall be required to be
obtained from Commercial Point.
      (12)   Public nuisance. Bed and breakfast inns shall not be permitted and
a conditional use shall be revoked or suspended by Council whenever the
operation has been found by the Planning and Zoning Administrator to conflict
with or violate public nuisance regulations under §
1181.03.
      (13)   Employees. No more than two individuals who are non-residents of
the dwelling may be employed in the operation of a bed and breakfast inn,
whether or not compensated.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1157.04 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (a)   Lot and Building Requirements. The following lot and building
requirements are minimum standards, except where noted, and shall apply in the
Low Density Residential District (R-3):
      (1)   Lot area: 12,200 square feet.
      (2)   Lot coverage (maximum): 30%.
      (3)   Lot width: 70 feet of frontage on an improved public right-of- way.
      (4)   Lot width on a curving street or cul-de-sac: 45 feet of frontage on
an improved public right-of-way and lot width shall be 70 feet at the minimum
building line.
      (5)   Front yard setback: 30 feet as measured between the street right-
of-way line and the building setback line.
      (6)   Side yard setback: Ten feet on each side as measured from the side
property line.
      (7)   Rear yard setback: 30 feet as measured from the rear property line.
Accessory building may be located in the rear yard no less than eight feet from
the rear property line.
      (8)   Dwelling dimensions: The following dwelling minimum dimensions
measured in terms of square footage shall apply to all residential dwellings in
the R-3 district:
 
DWELLING TYPE        GROUND FLOOR AREA (square FINISHED FLOOR AREA (square
                     feet)                     feet)
Two-story            950                       1,900
One-and-a-half story 1,250                     1,700
One-story            1,500                     1,500
Split level          1,500                     1,500
 
   (b)   Supplemental Standards. The following supplemental standards shall
apply within the Low Density Residential District (R-3):
      (1)   No building shall exceed 35 feet in height, nor more than two
stories in height.
      (2)   Applicable standards shall be met in corresponding sections of this
Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020; Am. Ord. 2025-02, passed 3-3-2025)
CHAPTER 1159
Optional Traditional Neighborhood Development Floating District (TND)
1159.01   Purpose.
1159.02   Design objectives.
1159.03   Definitions.
1159.04   Minimum and maximum size, density of TND.
1159.05   General development criteria.
1159.06   Land use categories.
1159.07   Ownership and maintenance of common area(s) and civic use buildings.
1159.08   Applicability.
§ 1159.01 PURPOSE.
   (a)   The purpose of this district is to allow the optional development of
land consistent with the design principles of "traditional" neighborhoods.
These principles provide an opportunity for diversification and integration of
land uses including residential, retail, office, recreation, etc., within close
proximity to one another, thereby providing for many of the daily needs of the
inhabitants of the neighborhood.
   (b)   The district is designed to be self-contained, tightly gridded, and
pedestrian-oriented to encourage socializing, walking, and other aspects of a
vibrant outdoor urban experience. The traditional neighborhood district (TND)
is an optional zoning district/category.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1159.02 DESIGN OBJECTIVES.
   The provisions of this district are intended to establish a neighborhood
which:
   (a)   Is physically recognizable and limited in size.
   (b)   Places residences, shops, workplaces, and civic buildings in close
proximity to one another within the neighborhood, thereby maximizing
transportation choice and reducing the number and length of motor vehicle
trips, traffic congestion, and need for road widening. Compatibility of
buildings, uses, and other improvements is determined by their arrangement,
scale, character, and landscaping to establish a livable, harmonious, and
diverse environment.
   (c)   Establishes a hierarchy of streets serving equitably the needs of the
pedestrian, the bicyclist, the bus rider, and the motorist. Streets are
interconnected and blocks are small.
   (d)   Places civic buildings and squares in prominent locations that act as
landmarks, symbols and focal points for community identity. Such buildings and
squares provide places of assembly for social activities.
   (e)   Links civic buildings, squares, and parks with pedestrian paths and
greenways to provide places for social activity and recreation.
   (f)   Includes private buildings forming a consistent, distinct edge,
spatially delineating the public street space and the private block interior.
   (g)   Includes architecture and landscape that are consistent with the
unique character of the region.
   (h)   Provides defined public spaces such as streets and squares, allowing
citizens to know each other and watch over their collective security.
   (i)   Provides a full range of housing types and work places, allowing all
age groups and economic classes to integrate in an authentic community.
   (j)   Provides trees of the same size, shape or type to create visual
continuity and a unified.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1159.03 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall be applicable in the TND District. When
there are conflicts between the terms used herein and definitions as provided
elsewhere in the Zoning Code, the provisions of this district shall take
precedence. Terms used throughout this district shall take their commonly
accepted meaning unless otherwise defined in this Zoning Code. Terms requiring
interpretation specific to this district are as follows:
   "A" STREET. A street which is designed with, or otherwise characterized by,
features that promote the safety, comfort, and convenience of pedestrians, and
does so in a relatively exceptional way. Such streets typically feature
sidewalks at least five feet wide, narrow streets, buildings pulled up close to
the street, no front yard off-street parking, pedestrian-scaled lighting, on-
street parking, landscaped medians, articulated building walls, aligned
building facades, a building entrance on the street, modest turning radii,
trash receptacles remote from the sidewalk, and outdoor mechanical equipment on
the side, rear or roof of buildings.
   ALLEY. A vehicular passageway providing secondary and/or service access to
the sides or rear of building lots.
   ARTISANAL USE. The manufacture and sale of artifacts utilizing only hand-
held and/or table-mounted electrical tools. Such a use must be contained within
a completely enclosed building.
   BLOCK. The gross area of lots and adjacent alleys, circumscribed by streets.
   CIVIC BUILDING. A building, either publicly or privately owned, located on a
civic lot used for any permitted or required civic use.
   COLONNADE. A roof or building structure, extending over the sidewalk, open
to the street and sidewalk except for supporting columns or piers. Awnings are
permitted within the TND but are not considered colonnades. Colonnades shall
not cause roof drainage into the public right-of-way.
   CORNICE LINE. A molded and projecting horizontal member that crowns an
architectural composition. A cornice line shall project a minimum of two inches
from the front elevation of the structure.
   DRIVE-THROUGH. Establishments which provide services or sales that are
extended mechanically or personally to customers who do not exit their
motorized vehicle. Such facilities include banking facilities, restaurants,
food sales, dry cleaning, express mail services and other services. Not
included in this definition are auto fuel pumps and depositories which involve
no immediate exchange or dispersal to the customer, such as mailboxes, library
book depositories and recycling facilities.
   EDGE AREA. A continuous open area which defines and buffers the edge of a
TND and each neighborhood proper. Edge areas shall be preserved in perpetuity
to buffer adjacent land uses, preserve natural areas, and provide linked
greenway corridors.
   FORMAL LANDSCAPING. Street trees or shrubs that form an aligned street wall
parallel to the street. When used, brick-paved sidewalks or tree grates may be
required to be constructed using engineered soil to accommodate root growth for
long-term tree stability and infrastructural compatibility. This tree
arrangement forms an intimate, comfortable, dignified public place along a
corridor. The arrangement is often useful to visually "narrow down" a corridor
when facing buildings on a street are set too far apart or are of insufficient
height to establish a comfortable street width to building height ratio of 3:
1 to 1:1.
   FRONT PORCH. An un-air conditioned roofed structure attached to the front
and along a side walked street side of the unit, having a minimum depth of six
feet and a minimum width of 12 feet. Except for insect screening and supporting
columns, front porches shall not be enclosed above the minimum railing height
allowed by the Standard Building Code. All or a portion of the front porch may
encompass a ramp providing handicap access. Front porches may encroach up to
ten feet beyond the build-to line.
   FRONTAGE. That side of a lot abutting a street right-of-way. When a lot
abuts more than one street, it is that side that abuts the more primary street
or the street designed for the highest pedestrian volume. For a corner lot, all
sides abutting a street shall be considered frontage.
   LODGING USE. Buildings providing food service and bedrooms for rent or
lease.
   LODGING USE, LIMITED. The provision of no more than four bedrooms for rent
or lease. Food service may be included between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m. The maximum length of stay shall not exceed 14 consecutive days.
   LOT OR BUILDING LOT. A separately platted portion of private land, not
including the specified sidewalk area.
   MEETING HALL. A building designed for public assembly.
   NEIGHBORHOOD PROPER. The built-up area planned for development within a TND,
including blocks, streets, squares, and parks, but excluding adjacent edge
areas and through streets.
   OFFICE USE, LIMITED. The transaction of business or the supply of
professional services, employing no more than eight persons.
   OUTBUILDING. A detached accessory use building on a residential lot, for
residential, parking, or storage use only.
   PARK. A public open space whose area is delineated by the surrounding
building frontage lines within the neighborhood proper. Parks shall be
surrounded by building frontage lines on at least 50% of the park's perimeter.
   PEDESTRIAN PATHWAYS. Interconnecting paved walkways that provide pedestrian
passage through blocks running from street to street. For the purposes of this
district, pathways are not sidewalks.
   PLAZA. An open space area within a town center on which many or all
shopfront lots front. Plazas shall be limited to parking, landscaping, and
permanent architectural and/or water oriented features.
   PRIVATE OPEN SPACE. That space on each building lot that is for the private
use of the inhabitants of such lot. Said space shall be unenclosed except for
being fenced or walled, and open to the sky except for roofed porches. Atriums,
gardens, garden courts, walks, patios, and other similar spaces shall count as
private open space. Up to one third of the private open space area may be a
roof terrace.
   SCREENING WALL. A wall made of fieldstone, brick, stucco, wrought-iron (or
equivalent to wrought-iron), or wood picket excluding round industrial railing
and chain link fence.
   SQUARE. An outdoor public civic tract whose area is defined by streets or
adjacent buildings. Squares shall include streets on at least three sides.
Squares shall be surrounded by shopfronts, rowhouses, or civic use lots on at
least 60% of their perimeter. No more than 40% of the square may be used for
parking.
   STREETEDGE. The vertical face formed by building facades, street trees, and
screening walls which is aligned along a street and forms a comfortable people-
scaled space.
   STREET VISTA. A view through or along a street centerline which is at least
600 feet in length.
   THROUGH STREET. A major collector or arterial street which serves more than
one neighborhood, or carries traffic between neighborhoods proper.
   TOWN CENTER. An optional and accessory use to the TND providing for larger
scale commercial shopfront uses in buildings that front a plaza.
   VERTICAL INTEGRATION. Mixed, dissimilar land uses are contained within the
same building usually on different floors of a multi-story building. By
contrast, a horizontal integration represents a mix of land uses that are near
each other but in separate buildings.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1159.04 MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM SIZE, DENSITY OF TND.
   All applications for a TND shall comply with the following development
parameters:
   (a)   Size and Location of Site. The minimum size of each neighborhood
proper shall be 16 acres unless approved by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator. A neighborhood proper shall be developed on contiguous lots or
tracts.
   (b)   Density. The requested densities, in terms of number of units per
gross residential acre and total number of dwelling units, shall be made at the
time of application, and shall be at least eight du/ac but may not exceed 12
du/ac.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1159.05 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT CRITERIA.
   (a)   Land Use.
      (1)   The entire land area of the TND shall be divided into blocks,
streets, and lots, and optional edge areas.
      (2)   Permitted uses. All uses permitted in R-1, R-3, MF-A, MF-C, NC, GC
and SO districts
are permitted within the TND.
      (3)   Similar land uses (uses within the same land use category) shall
generally face across streets. Dissimilar uses, when adjacent, shall abut at
rear lot lines. Parks and squares uses and civic uses are considered similar
land uses for the purposes of this provision.
      (4)   Neighborhoods shall be limited in size or shape to allow residents
to walk to the neighborhood square.
      (5)   The TND shall contain a meeting hall or clubhouse, and neighborhood
square within 1,000 feet of the geographic center of each neighborhood.
      (6)   A neighborhood proper shall provide areas of mixed use (residential
and commercial) buildings and shall encourage by design the clustering of
living, working, recreation, shopping, and civic uses.
      (7)   A drive-through is allowed under the following conditions:
         A.   No more than one drive-through lane is allowed within the
neighborhood proper.
         B.   The drive-through must not have its entrance or exit drive onto
an "A" street.
         C.   The drive-through is located at the rear or side of the building.
   (b)   Streets and Alleys.
      (1)   Streets shall provide access to all lots and all residential lots
shall abut an alley, unless the Planning and Zoning Administrator determines
that good cause exists to omit an alley or a portion of an alley.
      (2)   All streets and alleys shall connect to other streets within the
TND. All streets shall connect to existing and projected streets outside the
TND, when possible. Cul-de-sacs, T-turnarounds and gated or dead-end streets
are not permitted within the TND.
      (3)   Pedestrian pathways shall be not less than four feet in width.
      (4)   Utilities shall run underground or along an alley to the rear of a
lot.
      (5)   Street lighting shall be provided along all streets. The general
rule for lighting in a TND is to prefer more, smaller lights as opposed to
fewer, high-intensity lights, to provide a more human scale. Street light
structures shall not exceed 18 feet in height. Streetlights shall be installed
on both sides of streets at intervals no longer than 75 feet measured parallel
to the street. Building, wall, and freestanding exterior lighting fixtures
shall be directed downward in order to reduce glare onto adjacent properties
and streets. If the provisions for lighting of this TND District conflict with
the municipal lighting policy, the provisions of the TND District shall
prevail.
      (6)   The TND plan shall designate publicly and privately owned civic
lots and, where possible, the general location of a civic building at the
terminus of street vistas for all major internal streets. Termination of street
vistas with a prominent public monument, specifically designed building facade,
or a gateway to the ensuing space, is also encouraged.
      (7)   A neighborhood's residences, shopping, employment, and recreation
shall be connected by sidewalks, pedestrian paths, bicycle paths, and local
streets.
      (8)   All streets shall have a six-inch high curb except for streets in
house use areas, where they are encouraged but not required. A curb, six inches
in height, is required at all street intersections. There shall be curb cuts
providing handicap access at all intersections and points of pedestrian
crossing. Curb interruptions are permitted only for alleys, handicap access,
and parking access points specified herein.
      (9)   Shopfront use lots, rowhouse use lots, house use lots, and
workplace use lots shall have their rear lot lines coinciding with an alley.
Alleys shall be designed in such a manner as to ensure compatibility with its
intended use.
      (10)   Other street specifications:
 Shopfront Rowhouse House Workplace
                                  Shopfront  Rowhouse   House   Workplace
Typical street right-of-way       60 feet    50 feet    46 feet 60 feet
Number of street travel lanes     2          2          2       2
Travel lane widths                11 feet    10 feet    10 feet 12 feet
Number of parallel parking lanes  At least 1 At least 1 0       At least 1
Width of parallel parking lane    8 feet     8 feet     NA      8 feet
Sidewalk on both sides of street  Yes        Yes        Yes     Yes
Minimum width of sidewalk         8 feet     6 feet     6 feet  8 feet
Maximum intersection curb radius* 10 feet    10 feet    10 feet 15 feet
Design speed of streets           25 mph     25 mph     25 mph  25 mph
 
* Or larger as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator due to
reasonably expected traffic volumes or traffic types as noted by "Traditional
Neighborhood Development Street Design Guidelines," by ITE, 6/97.
      (11)   Parallel parking shall be located adjacent to all shopfront lots
when such lots front a square, park and/or plaza. Otherwise, parallel parking
is encouraged.
      (12)   Shopfront use lots and rowhouse use lots may front on a square or
park tract. In addition, a public access easement shall provide for public
passage for shopfront use sidewalks - excepting an area within four feet of the
shopfronts which may be occupied by furniture for restaurants.
      (13)   For house use lot streets, planting strips are required on each
side. However, a parallel parking lane may be used in place of either planting
strip.
      (14)   Shopfront use lots and workplace use lots may front on through
streets if approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. Shopfront use
lots may also front on a town center.
      (15)   If colonnades are provided on shopfront use lot streetside
sidewalks, no street trees are required on that side of the street.
   (c)   Lots and Buildings.
      (1)   Consistent build-to lines shall be established along all streets
and public space frontages. This build-to line shall determine the width and
ratio of enclosure desired for each street or public space. A minimum
percentage build-out at the build-to line shall be established on the plan
along all streets and public square frontages.
      (2)   All buildings shall have their main entrance opening to a street or
square (except outbuildings).
      (3)   Stoops, colonnades, chimneys, arcades, awnings, cafes, projecting
signs and front porches may encroach up to ten feet into the front setback, as
long as sufficient space for the required sidewalk width is retained.
   (d)   Facade Treatment.
      (1)   No more than 20 feet of horizontal distance of wall shall be
provided without facade articulation or architectural relief for building walls
and frontage walls facing the street. Facade articulation or architectural
relief can include, but is not limited to, pilasters, windows, pedestrian
entrances, arcades, awnings, shutters and canopies, or other types of building
massing that modulates the building mass or surface texture. Facade
articulation shall maintain a distinction between the street-level story and
upper stories.
      (2)   The rhythm established by the repetition of the facade elements
shall be maintained.
   (e)   All outdoor mechanical equipment, such as heating, air conditioning,
and ventilation systems, must be placed on the roof, in the rear or side of the
building, or otherwise visually screened from the street. In no case shall
mechanical equipment be allowed along street frontage(s). Mechanical equipment
on the roof shall be screened from abutting streets with parapets or other
types of visual screening.
   (f)   Signage. A comprehensive sign program is required for the entire TND
which establishes a uniform sign theme. Signs shall share a common style (color
scheme, type, size, material), as approved by Council.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1159.06 LAND USE CATEGORIES.
   (a)   Parks and Squares Use.
      (1)   Land use.
         A.   Land designated for parks and squares use shall be tracts
consisting of parks, squares, edge areas, and civic use lots and buildings.
         B.   The only buildings permitted in parks and squares use tracts
shall be civic use buildings.
         C.   A maximum of 15% of a park or square may be used as a civic use
lot.
         D.   Large-area recreational uses requiring more than three acres of
land, such as golf courses and multiple ball fields, shall be located outside
the neighborhood proper, but may be located within edge areas between
neighborhoods proper.
      (2)   Land allocation.
         A.   A minimum of 5% of the gross area of the neighborhood proper
shall be permanently allocated to tracts totally composed of parks or squares.
No single square or park can be more than 45% of the parks and squares use
area.
         B.   Squares and parks shall have at least 50% of their perimeter
abutting streets. A square shall be surrounded by shopfront use lots or
rowhouse use lots on at least 60% of its perimeter (perimeter being defined as
the aggregate of the frontage lines of the surrounding lots). Such lots
surrounding the square shall serve as a focal point for the social life of the
neighborhood by providing a neighborhood store, bus stop, and/or other
neighborhood services. In addition, it is strongly recommended that a day care
center be provided. Parks shall be surrounded by building frontage lines whose
collective linear footage is equivalent to at least 50% of the park perimeter's
linear footage.
      (3)   Parking. Parking on parks and squares use tracts shall be
restricted to required parking for civic use facilities located thereon.
   (b)   Civic Use.
      (1)   Land use.
         A.   Land designated for civic use shall be lots containing community
buildings which shall be open to the public, including, but not limited to,
meeting halls, libraries, schools, day care centers, police stations, fire
stations, post offices, clubhouses, religious buildings, museums, cultural
societies, visual and performance arts buildings, and governmental buildings.
         B.   The maintenance of commonly-owned buildings on civic use lots
shall be supported by a permanent assessment dedicated to this purpose and
administered according to the common maintenance provisions provided in the
ownership and maintenance of common open space(s) and civic use buildings
section.
      (2)   Land allocation.
         A.   Civic use building lots shall constitute a minimum of 2% of the
gross area of the neighborhood proper.
         B.   Civic use lots shall be located within or adjacent to a square or
park tract, or on a lot terminating a street vista.
         C.   The developer shall include a covenant in the property owners
association or condominium association documents to construct a meeting hall or
clubhouse on a civic use lot, on or adjacent to the mandatory square, upon the
sale of 50% of the lots and/or units of the neighborhood proper end users.
      (3)   Lots and buildings. Buildings located on civic use lots do not have
a height limit.
      (4)   Parking.
         A.   The required parking spaces for civic uses shall be in accordance
with
Chapter 1185; however, the minimum number of spaces required by
Chapter 1185 shall be the maximum.
         B.   When on-site parking is provided, no less than 75% of the off-
street parking places shall be to the rear of the building. Access may be
through the frontage.
      (5)   Signage. Two wall signs, not to exceed a combined total of 16
square feet, shall be permitted for each building.
   (c)   Shopfront Use.
      (1)   Land use.
         A.   Land designated for shopfront use shall be in building lots
containing buildings for residential, including lodging, and commercial uses as
provided in the General Commercial District, and other similar uses as approved
by Council at the time of rezoning to TND, except those listed as prohibited
uses, general development criteria.
         B.   Residential uses are not permitted on the ground floors of
shopfront use buildings.
         C.   An outbuilding is permitted on each lot.
      (2)   Land allocation.
         A.   Shopfront use building lots shall comprise a minimum of 2% and a
maximum of 30% of the gross area of the neighborhood proper.
         B.   A maximum of two shopfront use lots may be consolidated for the
purpose of constructing a single building.
         C.   A maximum of 50% of all shopfront use lots may be consolidated.
         D.   A minimum of two shopfront use lots shall front on the mandatory
square.
      (3)   Lots and buildings.
         A.   Street-front entries shall be at grade to allow handicap access.
         B.   Buildings on shopfront use lots shall have the facade built
directly on the frontage line along at least 70% of its linear frontage. For
lots at street intersections, the building shall be built directly on the side
street frontage for at least 50% of its linear frontage.
         C.   The unbuilt portion of the frontage line shall have a decorative
screening wall built directly upon it. Walls shall have an opening at no more
than 100 feet to allow pedestrian access.
         D.   Buildings on shopfront use lots shall have a setback of zero feet
along at least one side property line. There shall be no required rear setback.
         E.   Buildings on shopfront use lots shall be at least two stories in
height and shall not exceed four stories in height.
         F.   Unenclosed balconies shall be permitted to extend up to six feet
over the sidewalk.
         G.   Colonnades are required when shopfront use lots front on the
mandatory square. Enclosed space shall be permitted directly above the
sidewalk.
      (4)   Parking. No less than 75% of the parking spaces shall be to the
rear of the building. Access may be through the frontage only if an alley or
side street providing access to the alley is not within 200 linear feet of the
lot.
      (5)   Signage. All signs shall be wall signs or cantilever signs. Signs
shall not exceed a cumulative total of 24 square feet per building, with no
more than three signs per building. Individual cantilever signs shall be
mounted perpendicular to the building face and shall not exceed eight square
feet. No sign shall be mounted above the first floor of the building.
   (d)   Rowhouse Use.
      (1)   Land use.
         A.   Land designated for rowhouse use shall be on lots containing
buildings for residential uses including townhouse, family day care, and
limited office, limited lodging, and artisanal use. Where non-residential uses
are proposed, at least 50% of the gross square footage shall be restricted to
residential use for each rowhouse land use district.
         B.   One hundred percent of the building area above the ground floor
shall be designated for residential use.
         C.   An outbuilding is permitted on each lot.
      (2)   Land allocation.
         A.   Rowhouse and/or house use building lots shall constitute a
minimum of 20% and a maximum of 60% of the gross area of the neighborhood
proper.
         B.   A maximum of five rowhouse use lots may be consolidated for
constructing a single building containing multi-family dwellings.
         C.   A maximum of 50% of all rowhouse use lots may be consolidated.
      (3)   Lots and buildings.
         A.   No minimum or maximum lot width.
         B.   Rowhouse use buildings with the minimum setback shall have their
front entry set to one side of the facade.
         C.   Rowhouse use buildings shall be attached (built with no side
setback or as a single building) at not less than five unit segments. Lots
comprising the end of the block adjacent to the street or alley may be attached
in segments of two to five units.
         D.   Buildings on rowhouse use lots shall be set back zero to 15 feet
from the frontage line. Buildings at street intersections shall be set back six
feet from frontage line and side street line. Setback requirements shall apply
to the enclosed portion of the buildings only.
         E.   Buildings on rowhouse use lots shall have a setback of zero feet
from at least one side property line. There shall be no required rear setback.
         F.   Outbuildings shall have no required setbacks.
         G.   Setbacks on consolidated rowhouse use lots shall apply as in a
single lot.
         H.   Buildings on rowhouse use lots shall not exceed four stories in
height and, when fronting a square, be no less than three stories in height. A
cornice line shall be used to define the first floor.
         I.   Buildings on rowhouse use lots shall be raised a minimum of 18
inches from finished exterior sidewalk grade.
         J.   A minimum of 30% of the building lot area shall be developed as
private open space.
         K.   Rowhouse use lots shall have a streetedge built along the unbuilt
parts of the frontage line.
         L.   A minimum of 25% of the buildings on rowhouse use lots shall have
front porches. Front porches may encroach beyond the build-to line and shall
count towards private open space requirements.
      (4)   Parking. All off-street parking places shall be to the rear of the
building. Access shall be through a vehicular alley only.
      (5)   Signage.
         A.   All signs shall be wall signs. Signs shall be limited to two per
building and shall not exceed a cumulative total of four square feet. No signs
shall be mounted above the first floor of a structure.
         B.   Entry features are not included in the above signage totals.
   (e)   House Use.
      (1)   Land use.
         A.   Land designated for house use shall be on lots containing
buildings for residential uses, including single-family houses, guest houses as
outbuildings, home occupations pursuant to
Chapter 1187.
         B.   One hundred percent of the building area above the ground floor
shall be designated for residential use.
         C.   An outbuilding is permitted on each lot.
      (2)   Land allocation.
         A.   House and/or rowhouse use building lots shall constitute a
minimum of 20% and a maximum of 60% of the gross area of the neighborhood
proper.
         B.   A maximum of two house use lots may be consolidated for
constructing a single residence.
         C.   A maximum of 50% of all house use lots may be consolidated.
      (3)   Lots and buildings.
         A.   Buildings on house use lots shall be set back zero to 20 feet
from the frontage line. Buildings at street intersections shall be set back ten
feet from the frontage line and the side street frontage.
         B.   House use building lots shall have a maximum width of 75 feet.
         C.   Setbacks on consolidated house use lots shall apply as on a
single lot.
         D.   Buildings on house use lots shall be set back from the side
building lot lines equivalent (in total) to at least 20% of the width of the
building lot. The entire setback may be allocated to one side.
         E.   Buildings on house use lots shall be set back no less than 20
feet from the rear lot line. Outbuildings on house use lots shall have no
required setback.
         F.   Buildings on house use lots shall not exceed three stories in
height.
         G.   Buildings on house use lots shall have a streetedge built along
the frontage line.
         H.   A minimum of 50% of the buildings on house use lots shall have
front porches. Front porches may encroach into the front setback.
      (4)   Parking. All off-street parking places shall be to the side or the
rear of the building. Where no alley access exists and vehicular access is
through the frontage, garage or carports shall be located a minimum of 20 feet
behind the front building setback.
   (f)   Workplace Use.
      (1)   Land use. Land designated for workplace use shall contain buildings
for any of the uses contained in the General Commercial or Suburban Office
District.
      (2)   Land allocation.
         A.   Workplace use building lots shall constitute a minimum of 2% and
a maximum of 20% of the gross area of the neighborhood proper.
         B.   All workplace use lots shall be located within one geographic
area with no intervening uses.
      (3)   Lots and buildings.
         A.   Buildings on workplace use lots shall have a setback of zero to
five feet from the frontage line. The setback at street intersections shall not
exceed five feet from the frontage line and the side street line. Buildings
have no setbacks from the side or rear lot lines.
         B.   Street-front entries shall be at grade to allow handicap access.
         C.   A minimum of 15% of the building lot area shall be developed as
landscaped open space.
         D.   Buildings on workplace use lots shall not exceed three stories in
height.
         E.   Workplace use lots shall be separated from other use types at the
side and rear lot lines (excepting an entry on the alley) by a continuous
masonry wall no less than three feet and no more than eight feet in height.
Walls shall have an opening at no more than 100 feet to allow pedestrian
access.
         F.   Workplace use building lots shall have a maximum width of 300
feet.
      (4)   Parking. Off-street parking places shall be to the side or the rear
of the building.
      (5)   Signage. All signs shall be wall-mounted and may be perpendicular
to the building face with an eight-foot clearance to the sidewalk. Signs shall
not exceed a cumulative total of 24 square feet, and shall be limited to three
signs per building.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1159.07 OWNERSHIP AND MAINTENANCE OF COMMON AREA(S) AND CIVIC USE BUILDINGS.
   All land designated on approved plans as common area, including squares and
parks, alleys and all structures devoted to the common use of the inhabitants
of a TND, will be owned and/or maintained as follows:
   (a)   Those projects developed under a condominium ownership shall be in
accordance with applicable Ohio law.
   (b)   On projects not developed under condominium ownership, the common area
and civic uses shall be owned by a property owners' association, in which case
the ownership shall be subject to covenants providing for the maintenance of
common facilities in a manner that assures its continuing use for its intended
purpose and provided that the property owners' association shall comply with
the following requirements:
      (1)   Approval by the municipal attorney for form and legality as to
compliance with this division.
      (2)   An association shall be established before the units or individual
building lots are sold.
      (3)   Membership shall be mandatory for each property owner and said
association shall have the authority to adjust the assessment to meet the needs
of maintaining the open space and common facilities.
      (4)   Any sums levied by the homeowners' association that remain unpaid
shall become a lien on the individual property and said lien shall be superior
to all other liens except tax liens and mortgage liens, provided said mortgage
liens are first liens against the property encumbered thereby, subject only to
tax liens and secure indebtedness which are amortized in monthly or quarter
annual payments over a period of not less than ten years.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1159.08 APPLICABILITY.
   In the case of conflict between the Traditional Neighborhood Development
District, and the Subdivision Regulations or any other sections of the Zoning
Code, the provisions of the Traditional Neighborhood Development District,
shall govern and prevail. To the extent that the provisions of the Traditional
Development District, do not expressly amend or supersede the provisions of the
underlying zoning districts, the provisions of the underlying districts shall
apply.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1161
Old Town Zoning Districts
1161.01   Purpose.
1161.02   Old Town Residential Single Family (OT-SF).
1161.03   Old Town Residential Multi Family (OT-MF).
1161.04   Old Town Commercial (OT-C).
§ 1161.01 PURPOSE.
   The following Old Town Zoning Districts are hereby established for
preserving the character and development pattern of the Old Town area. The Old
Town Zoning Districts allow for development intended to be compatible with
existing properties in Old Town Commercial Point.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1161.02 OLD TOWN RESIDENTIAL SINGLE FAMILY (OT-SF).
   (a)   Permitted Uses. Land and buildings in the Old Town Residential Single
Family District (OT-SF) shall be used only for the following purposes:
      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings.
      (2)   Accessory buildings and uses in association with a permitted
dwelling.
      (3)   Home occupations in accordance with
Chapter 1187, unless expressly prohibited in §
1161.04(c).
   (b)   Conditional Uses. The following uses may be allowed in the Old Town
Residential Single Family District (OT-SF) subject to approval in accordance
with
Chapter 1145:
      (1)   Churches and other similar places of worship and parish houses
provided the following conditions are met:
         A.   The church building is set back from any adjacent residential
property line a distance equal to or greater than the height of the structure
exclusive of the steeple or spire.
         B.   The church lot is accessible to a major arterial in a manner that
does not require the passage of traffic through local residential streets.
         C.   Private parking on the lot and public parking within 200 feet of
the property are adequate to accommodate the required off-street parking
requirements of the church in accordance with
Chapter 1185.
         D.   There is one acre or more per 100 seats or similar accommodations
in the main assembly hall.
         E.   Accessory living quarters may be provided on the church lot as a
conditional use. The location, density, and the additional lot area required
for such uses shall be subject to approval by Council. Accessory recreational
uses may be provided on the church lot as a conditional use subject to approval
by Council.
      (2)   Public uses: parks, playgrounds, recreation and community center
buildings and grounds, public swimming pools, tennis courts and similar
recreational uses, provided that any principal building or swimming pool used
therefore shall be located not less than 50 feet from any other lot in any
residential district unless otherwise approved as part of the development plan
within a planned development district.
      (3)   Public and private schools.
      (4)   Home occupations associated with a principal use and in accordance
with
Chapter 1187.
      (5)   Day care centers and pre-schools provided that the following
conditions are met, where applicable:
         A.   The building occupied by the use is compatible with neighborhood
structures in dimension, size, and architecture.
         B.   There is an outdoor play area of 85 square feet or more per
child.
         C.   Such play area shall be enclosed with a fence or its equivalent
in strength and protective character to a height of five feet to control
accessibility of children to adjoining hazardous conditions such as streets,
ponds, etc., or adjacent yards.
         D.   A drop off area is provided so that children do not have to walk
through the parking lot to enter the facility.
         E.   Parking spaces are provided as specified in
Chapter 1185.
         F.   The facility meets or exceeds State of Ohio provisions for
daycare operations.
      (6)   Bed and breakfast inns provided that the following conditions are
met:
         A.   The structure is a single family, detached dwelling.
         B.   Guest rooms. There shall be no more than four separate guest
rooms within a single family dwelling that are utilized by bed and breakfast
guests nor more than 25% of a dwelling's net floor area, whichever is greater.
A guest room shall contain no less than 100 square feet of living space, not
including closets, for two guests and 30 square feet for each additional guest
up to a total of four guests per room.
         C.   Owner/operator. The owner/operator of the bed and breakfast shall
live full-time on the inn's premises. Such owner/operator shall be the owner of
record of no less than 50% interest of the property in question.
         D.   Approval of fire and health officers. Written approval from fire
and health officers shall be required for each conditional use application
requesting approval for a bed and breakfast inn. Each guest room shall contain
a separate installed smoke detector alarm approved by the fire officer. No
premises shall be utilized for a bed and breakfast inn unless there are at
least two separate exits to the outdoors. Adherence to the Ohio Building Code
and National Fire Code is required.
         E.   Meals. No more than one meal shall be served to each paying guest
of the bed and breakfast inn and that meal shall be breakfast.
         F.   Consecutive nights. A paying guest may stay at a bed and
breakfast inn for not more than seven consecutive nights at any single visit
nor more than a total of 28 nights in any given year.
         G.   Kitchen facilities. Only one kitchen facility shall be permitted
per structure for which a conditional use is granted to operate a bed and
breakfast inn. No cooking facilities shall be permitted in individual guest
quarters.
         H.   Bathrooms. A minimum of one full bathroom, including shower,
toilet and sink, shall be required for every two guest rooms to be available
for the exclusive use of bed and breakfast paying guests. Bed and breakfast
inns shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer and water service.
         I.   Guest register. A guest register listing the name, address, phone
number, and dates of stay of all paying guests shall be maintained by the
owner/operator and shall be made available for inspection by municipal
officials.
         J.   Special gatherings. Rental of the bed and breakfast inn for
special gatherings such as wedding receptions and parties shall be prohibited
in all residential zoning districts or properties adjacent to a residential
zoning district.
         K.   Business license. A business license shall be required to be
obtained from Commercial Point.
         L.   Public nuisance. Bed and breakfast inns shall not be permitted
and a conditional use shall be revoked or suspended by Council whenever the
operation has been found by the Planning and Zoning Administrator to conflict
with or violate public nuisance regulations under §
1181.03.
         M.   Employees. No more than two individuals who are non-residents of
the dwelling may be employed in the operation of a bed and breakfast inn,
whether or not compensated.
   (c)   Development Standards.
      (1)   Lot and building requirements. The following lot and building
requirements are minimum standards, except where noted, and shall apply in the
Old Town Residential Single Family District (OT-SF):
         A.   Lot area: No minimum lot area is required, however, all lots
shall abut an improved public right-of-way and lot area shall be adequate to
provide the required yard space.
         B.   Lot coverage (maximum): No maximum lot coverage is required,
however, the lot coverage shall be adequate to provide the required yard space.
         C.   Lot width: No minimum lot width is required, however, all lots
shall abut an improved public right-of-way and have adequate width to provide
the required yard space and meet minimum access requirements.
         D.   Front yard build to line: The principal structure shall be
located no more than three feet from the build to line. At least 50% of the
building's front elevation shall be located within the applicable variation
from the build-to line range. No part of any structure shall be permitted
within the public right-of-way. The build to line shall be calculated as the
distance from the right-of-way equal to the average setback from the right-of-
way of the existing buildings on the same side of the street. Buildings used in
the build to line calculation shall meet the following:
            1.   Front on the same street as the subject property.
            2.   Be located between the nearest cross streets, not including
alleys.
            3.   Be located on a property with an OT-C, OT-SF or OT-MF zoning.
         E.   Side yard setback: Five feet on each side as measured from the
side property line.
         F.   Rear yard setback: 20 feet as measured from the rear property
line; an accessory building may be located in the rear yard no less than five
feet from the rear property line.
         G.   Dwelling dimensions: The following dwelling dimensions measured
in terms of square footage shall apply to all residential dwellings in the Old
Town Residential Single Family District (OT-SF):
 
DWELLING TYPE        GROUND FLOOR AREA (square FINISHED FLOOR AREA (square
                     feet)                     feet)
Two-story            950                       1,900
One-and-a-half-story 1,250                     1,700
One-story            1,500                     1,500
Split level          1,500                     1,500
 
      (2)   Supplemental standards. The following supplemental standards shall
apply within the Old Town Residential Single Family District (OT-SF):
         A.   The height of a building shall not exceed any of the following:
35 feet, two stories, or 10% higher than the immediately adjacent structures on
the same side of the street. Buildings on corner lots shall not be 10% higher
than the structure immediately adjacent on the same side of the street or 10%
higher than the structure immediately to the rear.
         B.   Applicable standards shall be met in corresponding sections of
this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020; Am. Ord. 2025-02, passed 3-3-2025)
§ 1161.03 OLD TOWN RESIDENTIAL MULTI FAMILY (OT-MF).
   (a)   Permitted Uses. Land and buildings in the Old Town Residential Multi
Family District (OT-MF) shall be used only for the following purposes:
      (1)   Multiple-unit residential structures not exceeding six units per
acre and 12 units per building.
      (2)   Accessory buildings and uses in association with a permitted
multiple-unit apartment residential structure, such as recreational facilities.
   (b)   Conditional Uses. The following uses may be allowed in the Old Town
Residential Multi Family District (OT-MF) subject to approval in accordance
with
Chapter 1145:
      (1)   Churches and other similar places of worship and parish houses
provided the following conditions are met:
         A.   The church building is set back from any adjacent residential
property line a distance equal to or greater than the height of the structure
exclusive of the steeple or spire.
         B.   The church lot is accessible to a major arterial in a manner that
does not require the passage of traffic through local residential streets.
         C.   Private parking on the lot combined with public parking within
200 feet of the property are adequate to accommodate the required off street
parking requirements of the church in accordance with Chapter 1185.
         D.   There is one acre or more per 100 seats or similar accommodations
in the main assembly hall.
         E.   Accessory living quarters may be provided on the church lot as a
conditional use. The location, density, and the additional lot area required
for such uses shall be subject to approval by Council. Accessory recreational
uses may be provided on the church lot as a conditional use subject to approval
by Council.
      (2)   Public uses: parks, playgrounds, recreation and community center
buildings and grounds, public swimming pools, tennis courts and similar
recreational uses, provided that any principal building or swimming pool used
therefore shall be located not less than 150 feet from any other lot in any
residential district unless otherwise approved as part of the development plan
within a planned development district.
      (3)   Public and private schools.
   (c)   Development Standards.
      (1)   Lot and building requirements. The following lot and building
requirements are minimum standards, except where noted, and shall apply in the
Old Town Residential Multi Family District (OT-MF):
         A.   Lot area: No minimum lot area is required, however, all lots
shall abut an improved public right-of-way and lot area shall be adequate to
provide the required yard space.
         B.   Lot coverage (maximum): No maximum lot coverage is required,
however, the lot coverage shall be adequate to provide the required yard space.
         C.   Lot width: No minimum lot width is required, however, all lots
shall abut an improved public right-of-way and have adequate width to provide
the required yard space and meet minimum access requirements.
         D.   Front yard build to line: The principal structure shall be
located no more than three feet from the build to line. At least 50% of the
building's front elevation shall be located within the applicable variation
from the build-to line range. No part of any structure shall be permitted
within the public right-of-way. The build to line shall be calculated as the
distance from the right-of-way equal to the average setback from the right-of-
way of the existing buildings on the same side of the street. Buildings used in
the build to line calculation shall meet the following:
            1.   Front on the same street as the subject property.
            2.   Be located between the nearest cross streets, not including
alleys.
            3.   Be located on a property with an OT-C, OT-SF or OT-MF zoning.
         E.   Side yard setback: Five feet on each side as measured from the
side property line.
         F.   Rear yard setback: 20 feet as measured from the rear property
line; an accessory building may be located in the rear yard no less than five
feet from the rear property line.
         G.   Dwelling dimensions: The following dwelling dimensions measured
in terms of square footage shall apply to all residential dwellings in the Old
Town Residential Multi Family District (OT-MF):
 
DWELLING TYPE           FINISHED FLOOR AREA (square feet)
One Bedroom             1,000
Each Additional Bedroom 225
 
      (2)   Supplemental standards. The following supplemental standards shall
apply within the Old Town Residential Multi Family District (OT-MF):
         A.   The height of a building shall not exceed any of the following:
35 feet, two stories, or 10% higher than the immediately adjacent structures on
the same side of the street. Buildings on corner lots shall not be 10% higher
than the structure immediately adjacent on the same side of the street or 10%
higher than the structure immediately to the rear.
         B.   Two or more multiple-unit structures located on the same lot
shall locate no closer than five feet from each structure.
         C.   Applicable standards shall be met in corresponding sections of
this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1161.04 OLD TOWN COMMERCIAL (OT-C).
   (a)   Permitted Uses. Land and buildings in the Old Town Commercial District
(OT-C) shall be used only for the following purposes:
      (1)   Retail stores. Retail stores primarily engaged in selling
merchandise for personal or household consumption and rendering services
incidental to the sale of the goods (including the buying or processing of
goods for resale) including:
         A.   General merchandise: Hardware stores, department stores, mail
order houses, limited price variety stores, and miscellaneous general
merchandise stores.
         B.   Food: Grocery stores, meat and fish (seafood) markets, fruit
stores and vegetable markets, candy, nut and confectionery stores, dairy
products stores, retail bakeries, supermarkets, and miscellaneous food stores.
         C.   Apparel: Clothing, accessories and personal furnishing stores,
shoe stores, custom tailors, furriers and fur shops, and miscellaneous apparel
and accessory stores.
         D.   Home furnishings: Furniture, home furnishings, and equipment
stores, household appliance stores, and radio, television and music stores.
         E.   Eating and drinking places.
         F.   Electronic products.
         G.   Video rental store.
         H.   Miscellaneous retail: Drug stores and proprietary stores, antique
stores and secondhand stores, stationery stores, sporting goods stores and
bicycle shops, jewelry stores, florists, cigar stores, news dealers, camera and
photographic supply stores, gift, novelty and souvenir shops, optical goods
stores, and miscellaneous retail stores not elsewhere classified.
         I.   Business services: Advertising, duplicating, addressing,
blueprinting, photocopying, mailing, stenography, and business services not
elsewhere classified.
         J.   Artisan workshop.
         K.    Specialty food and beverage facility.
      (2)   Business and professional offices. Business offices engaged in
providing tangible and intangible services to the public, involving both
persons and their possessions, including:
         A.   Administrative, business and professional offices: Administrative
offices primarily engaged in general administration, supervision, purchasing,
accounting and other management functions, and professional offices engaged in
providing tangible and intangible services to the general public, involving
both persons and possessions, including financial services, real estate and
insurance.
         B.   Professional: Offices of physicians and surgeons, dentists and
dental surgeons, chiropractors, medical and dental laboratories, health and
allied sciences not elsewhere classified, legal services, design services
including engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, urban planning,
graphic arts and interior design, and accounting, auditing and bookkeeping
services.
         C.   Health care maintenance and emergency services.
      (3)   Personal and consumer services. Personal services generally
involving the care of the person or his/her personal effects and consumer
services generally involving the care and maintenance of tangible property or
the provision of intangible services for personal consumption, including:
         A.   Personal: Photographic studios, including commercial photography,
beauty shops, barber shops, laundromats, shoe repair shops, pressing,
alteration and garment repair, and miscellaneous personal service.
         B.   Repair services: Electrical repair shops, watch, clock and
jewelry repair, reupholsters and furniture repair, and similar household item
repair shops and related services.
         C.   Artisan studio.
      (4)   Museums.
      (5)   Residential. Single family or multi-family residential shall be
permitted following the standards of §§
1161.02 and
1161.03, respectively, and any other sections of this Zoning Code applicable to
residential development.
   (b)   Conditional Uses. The following uses may be allowed in the Old Town
Commercial District (OT-C) subject to approval in accordance with
Chapter 1145:
      (1)   Automobile repair and services, automobile convenience markets, and
automobile car washes as an accessory use.
      (2)   Recreation. Theaters, dance halls, dance studios, dance schools,
bowling, swimming pools, martial arts studios, and skating rinks.
      (3)   Convenient food markets. Establishments for the sale of food only,
gas pumps are not permitted.
      (4)   Bed and breakfast. Following the same standards as found in §
1161.02(b)(6).
      (5)   Licensed massage parlors.
      (6)   Animal grooming or training. Any grooming, training, or related
activities of more than one animal commenced outside shall not be located
within 200 feet of R-1, R-3, MF-A, MF-C, AR-1, OT-SF, OT-MF and PRD zoning
districts or residential sections of PUD, TND and PCND zoning districts. A
designated area shall be identified for animals to relieve themselves.
      (7)   Sale of firearms, ammunition, or other deadly weapons.
      (8)   Drive-up window service or drive in restaurants.
      (9)   Exterminators.
      (10)   Other compatible uses not expressly prohibited by §
1161.04(c).
   (c)   Prohibited Uses. The following uses shall be prohibited in the Old
Town Commercial District (OT-C):
      (1)   Automobile service stations, automobile car washes as a principal
use, automobile parking lots or garages as a principal use unless publicly
owned, and automobile sales unless exempted as a casual sale in §
1153.20.
      (2)   Hotels and motels.
      (3)   Recreational uses except publicly owned and operated parks and
recreational facilities.
      (4)   Offices of veterinarians and animal hospitals.
      (5)   Commercial kennels.
      (6)   Pool halls and amusement arcades as defined in § 701.01(c).
      (7)   Outdoor lumberyards.
      (8)   An establishment principally for the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages for off premise consumption, unless produced on site.
      (9)   Pawn shops.
      (10)   Check cashing or short term loan establishments as a primary use.
      (11)   Funeral homes.
      (12)   Rehabilitation centers for drug addiction, alcohol addiction or
other dependency.
   (d)   Development Standards.
      (1)   Lot and building requirements. The following lot and building
requirements are minimum standards, except where noted, and shall apply in the
Old Town Commercial District (OT-C):
         A.   Lot area: No minimum lot area is required, however, all lots
shall abut an improved public right-of-way and lot area shall be adequate to
provide the required yard space.
         B.   Lot coverage (maximum): No maximum lot coverage is required,
however, the lot coverage shall be adequate to provide the required yard space.
         C.   Lot width: No minimum lot width is required, however, all lots
shall abut an improved public right-of-way and have adequate width to provide
the required yard space and meet minimum access requirements.
         D.   Front yard build to line: The principal structure shall be
located no more than three feet from the build to line. At least 50% of the
building's front elevation shall be located within the applicable variation
from the build-to line range. No part of any structure shall be permitted
within the public right-of-way. The build to line shall be calculated as the
distance from the right-of-way equal to the average setback from the right-of-
way of the existing buildings on the same side of the street. Buildings used in
the build to line calculation shall meet the following:
            1.   Front on the same street as the subject property.
            2.   Be located between the nearest cross streets, not including
alleys.
            3.   Be located on a property with an OT-C, OT-SF or OT-MF zoning.
         E.   Side yard setback: Zero feet if the property does not directly
abut a residentially zoned district. If the property abuts a residential
district, the side yard setback from the side abutting the residential zoning
district shall be eight feet as measured from the side property line. Eaves,
cornices, canopies, windowsills, balconies, bay windows, chimneys, or other
architectural features shall not extend past any property line.
         F.   Rear yard setback: 20 feet as measured from the rear property
line; an accessory building may be located in the rear yard no less than eight
feet from the rear property line.
      (2)   Outdoor display or storage of materials: The placement of outdoor
display or storage of materials shall be permitted per the following
requirements:
         A.   The size of outdoor display or storage of materials areas for a
single property shall not exceed 25 square feet or exceed eight feet in height.
Outdoor display or storage of materials encompassing more than 25 square feet
in area shall be subject to §
1181.02.
         B.   Any items displayed or stored shall only be placed outdoors
during normal business hours of the business displaying or storing the item.
         C.   Outdoor display or storage areas shall not project into the
right-of-way.
         D.   The outdoor display or storage of materials shall not have a
substantial adverse impact on the use, enjoyment or property values of
adjoining properties.
         E.   Any outdoor display or storage of materials not in conformance
with this Zoning Code shall be considered in violation of §
1135.10.
      (3)   Outdoor seating in the public right-of-way. Outdoor seating in the
public right-of- way shall be permitted per the following requirements:
         A.   Permit required. No outdoor seating in the public right-of-way
shall be conducted until a special right-of-way permit application has been
submitted and issued per the requirements of §§
1197.03 and
1197.04. Staff may administratively renew the grant of consent on a year-to-
year basis provided the continued use of the right-of-way does not adversely
affect the public health, safety and welfare.
         B.   Indemnity agreement. An indemnity agreement shall be submitted
with the special right-of-way permit application. Such agreement shall provide
that the applicant will hold the Village of Commercial Point and its officials
and employees harmless of all liability which might arise as a result of
accidents, injuries or damages suffered within the public right-of-way or as a
result of the use of the right-of-way as authorized by this section, and to
fully indemnify the Village of Commercial Point, its officials and employees,
in the event the village is required to pay such losses. The applicant must
keep current liability insurance in the minimum amount of one million dollars
($1,000,000) listing the Village of Commercial Point as an additional insured
during the time of operation of any outdoor seating in the public right-of-way.
         C.   The permit holder is responsible for ensuring that all activity
is contained within the approved area identified on the permit.
         D.   The use of public right-of-way for outdoor dining shall only be
permitted incidental to the operation of a business on private abutting
property. The outdoor dining area shall only project into the right-of-way
directly adjacent to the subject business space.
         E.   Any projections into the right-of-way shall maintain a minimum of
five feet of unobstructed sidewalk width between the outdoor seating and the
curb for pedestrian traffic.
         F.   All items placed in the right-of-way, including, but not limited
to chairs, tables, fencing, lighting and refuse containers, shall be temporary
in nature and shall be constructed and displayed in such a manner as to allow
for their easy removal. The design, quality, materials and colors used for such
items shall complement the architectural style and colors used on the
associated building.
         G.   Portable umbrellas are permitted provided they do not interfere
with the required unobstructed sidewalk and do not contain advertising.
         H.   The preparation of food, beverages, and other items shall take
place inside the associated establishment.
         I.   Outdoor dining in the public right-of-way shall not be open to
patrons between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
         J.   A special right-of-way permit for outdoor seating in the public
right-of-way may be suspended or revoked at any time (upon a 14 day notice) for
a public use of the right-of-way such as street, sidewalk or utility
maintenance, sidewalk or street widening, public festivals or other event. All,
or a portion of, outdoor dining shall be removed from the right-of-way during
the permit suspension at the discretion of the Village of Commercial Point.
         K.   A special right-of-way permit for outdoor seating in the public
right-of-way may be revoked at any time (upon a 14 day notice) for failure to
comply with the regulations set forth in §
1161.04(3). Outdoor seating remaining in the public right-of-way after a notice
to remove has been issued shall be in violation of §
1135.10.
         L.   In the event the outdoor seating is abandoned or not being
utilized, the right- of-way shall be restored to the current condition.
      (4)   Supplemental standards. The following supplemental standards shall
apply within the Old Town Commercial District (OT-C):
         A.   The height of a building shall not exceed any of the following:
38 feet, three stories, or 10% higher than the immediately adjacent structures
on the same side of the street. Buildings on corner lots shall not be 10%
higher than the structure immediately adjacent on the same side of the street
or 10% higher than the structure immediately to the rear.
         B.   Applicable standards shall be met in corresponding chapters of
this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1163
Multi-Family Residential Districts
1163.01   Purpose.
1163.02   Permitted uses.
1163.03   Conditional uses.
1163.04   Development standards.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Swimming pools - see P. & Z. §
1181.01
   Yard and frontage modifications - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1183
   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1185
   Home occupations - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1187
   Signs - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1189
   Landscaping - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1191
   Wireless communication facilities - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1193
   Accessory uses and structures - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1195
§ 1163.01 PURPOSE.
   (a)   The Multi-Family Residential Districts shall consist of the following
subdistricts: Multi-Family Apartment Residential District (MF-A) and Multi-
Family Condominium Residential District (MF-C).
   (b)   The Multi-Family Apartment Residential District (MF-A) is established
as a medium density multi-family district intended to allow renter properties
in an apartment configuration at suitable locations with on-site amenities,
such as recreational facilities, and off-street parking.
   (c)   The Multi-Family Condominium Residential District (MF-C) is
established as a medium density multi-family district intended to allow owner
occupied properties in a condominium configuration at suitable locations with
on-site amenities, such as recreational facilities, and off-street parking.
   (d)   Such uses in the Multi-Family Residential Districts (MF-A or MF-C)
shall be serviced by public water and sanitary sewer systems.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1163.02 PERMITTED USES.
   Land and buildings in the Multi-Family Residential Districts (MF-A and MF-C)
shall be used only for the following purposes as indicated under each specific
subdistrict:
   (a)   Multi-Family Apartment Residential District (MF-A).
      (1)   Multiple-unit residential structures not exceeding six apartment
units per acre and 12 apartment units per building.
      (2)   Accessory buildings and uses in association with a permitted
multiple-unit apartment residential structure, such as recreational facilities.
   (b)   Multi-Family Condominium Residential District (MF-C).
      (1)   Multiple-unit residential structures not exceeding six condominium
units per acre and 12 condominium units per building.
      (2)   Accessory buildings and uses in association with a permitted
multiple-unit condominium residential structure, such as recreational
facilities.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1163.03 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be allowed in the Multi-Family Residential Districts
(MF-A and MFC) subject to approval in accordance with
Chapter 1145:
   (a)   Churches and other similar places of worship and parish houses
provided:
      (1)   The minimum lot size is three acres.
      (2)   The minimum lot width is 300 feet.
      (3)   The lot is adequate to accommodate the required off-street parking
requirements of the church in accordance with
Chapter 1185.
      (4)   The church building is set back from any adjacent residential
property line a distance equal to or greater than the height of the structure
exclusive of the steeple or spire.
      (5)   The church lot is accessible to a major arterial in a manner that
does not require the passage of traffic through local residential streets.
      (6)   There is one acre or more per 100 seats or similar accommodations
in the main assembly hall.
      (7)   Accessory living quarters may be provided on the church lot as a
conditional use. The location, density, and the additional lot area required
for such uses shall be subject to approval by Council. Accessory recreational
uses may be provided on the church lot as a conditional use subject to approval
by Council.
   (b)   Public uses: parks, playgrounds, recreation and community center
buildings and grounds, golf courses, public swimming pools, tennis courts and
similar recreational uses, provided that any principal building or swimming
pool used therefore shall be located not less than 150 feet from any other lot
in any residential district unless otherwise approved as part of the
development plan within a planned development district.
      (1)   All golf course facilities shall be in accordance with the
following provisions in addition to any other conditions required by Council:
         A.   The hours of operation of the golf course shall be limited from
dawn to dusk to prevent undue disturbance to neighboring uses.
         B.   All maintenance equipment shall be stored in sheds or other
structures and away from
view.
         C.   No hole or green shall be located within 200 feet of an existing
residential structure unless otherwise approved as part of the development plan
within a planned district.
         D.   Council may require fencing, walls, landscaping, earth mounds or
other measures where it is determined that buffering or screening is necessary
to manage land use conflicts and/or protect the public safety unless otherwise
approved as part of the development plan within a planned district.
         E.   Parking area requirements shall conform to
Chapter 1185.
         F.   The minimum floor area requirements for the clubhouse or
management structure shall be 5,000 square feet.
         G.   Any golf courses hereinafter constructed within designated areas
of Commercial Point shall occupy not less than 150 acres.
      (2)   All private outdoor recreational facilities shall be in accordance
with the following provisions in addition to any other conditions required by
Council:
         A.   Minimum lot area for a private recreational facility shall be no
less than six acres.
         B.   Setbacks: Front = 100 feet for structures and 75 feet for
parking; rear = 75 feet; side = 75 feet.
         C.   All structures and playing fields for outdoor recreation shall be
located at least 250 feet and drives and parking areas shall be at least 50
feet from any adjacent parcels where residences are a permitted use.
         D.   Where a landscaped screen is not already required adjacent to
another parcel, one deciduous tree shall be provided for every 40 feet of
parking lot boundary and loading/unloading area, plus a three foot average
height continuous planting, hedge, fence wall or earth mound. The same parking
lot perimeter screening shall also be provided adjacent to the public right-of-
way. At least one tree per 5,000 square feet of parking area shall be provided
within the parking lot.
         E.   All outdoor playing fields, courts and other similar outdoor
recreation facilities must be secured at night to prevent unauthorized access.
While no lighting will be permitted on any such outdoor recreation facility,
security lights may be approved for any permanent facilities at the site.
         F.   The maximum density allowed on any parcel shall not exceed one
field for every five acres.
         G.   A minimum of 35 parking spaces shall be provided for every field
at the site. All parking areas shall be constructed in accordance with
Chapter 1185.
         H.   A minimum eight foot high landscaped screen or combination mound
and plant material with a 90% year round opacity shall be provided on any side
of the site adjacent to parcels where dwellings are a permitted use. If a mound
is used it shall be constructed with no more than a 4:1 slope. Mounds shall not
be constructed to restrict the natural flow of surface water to or from the
site.
         I.   Access shall be from an arterial street or commercial collector
or shall be provided in a manner that does not cause heavy traffic on
residential streets.
         J.   Permanent toilet facilities, connected to a sanitary sewer or
other approved on site disposal system, must be provided with the following
minimum number of fixtures: women - five toilets and two lavatories, men - one
toilet, two urinals and two lavatories, additional fixtures must be added at
the rate of three for every two fields over four fields per site.
      (3)   All private indoor recreational facilities shall be in accordance
with the following provisions in addition to any other conditions required by
Council:
         A.   Minimum lot area for an indoor private recreational facility
shall be no less than five acres.
         B.   Setbacks: Front = 100 feet for structures and 75 feet for
parking; rear = 75 feet; side = 75 feet.
         C.   Driveways and parking areas shall be at least 50 feet from any
adjacent parcels where residences are a permitted use.
         D.   Where a landscaped screen is not already required adjacent to
another parcel, one deciduous tree shall be provided for every 40 feet of
parking lot boundary and loading/unloading area, plus a three foot average
height continuous planting, hedge, fence wall or earth mound. The same parking
lot perimeter screening shall also be provided adjacent to the public right-of-
way. At least one tree per 5,000 square feet of parking area shall be provided
within the parking lot.
         E.   No exterior lighting shall be positioned so as to extend glare on
adjacent property or public right-of-way.
         F.   All activities shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed
building.
         G.   Access shall be from an arterial street or commercial collector
or shall be provided in a manner that does not cause heavy traffic on
residential streets.
         H.   Parking shall be in accordance with the requirements of
Chapter 1185.
   (c)   Public and private schools.
   (d)   Accessory structures used as private kennels.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1163.04 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (a)   Lot and Building Requirements. The following lot and building
requirements are minimum standards, except where noted, and shall apply in the
Multi-Family Residential Districts (MF-A and MF-C):
      (1)   Lot area (minimum): 15,000 square feet.
      (2)   Lot coverage (maximum): 35%.
      (3)   Lot width: 80 feet of frontage on an improved public right-of-way.
      (4)   Lot width on a curving street or cul-de-sac: 45 feet of frontage on
an improved public right-of-way and lot width shall be 80 feet at the minimum
building line.
      (5)   Front yard setback: 25 feet as measured between the street right-
of-way line and the building setback line.
      (6)   Side yard setback: 10 feet; for a conditional use, the side yard
setback shall be 15 feet.
      (7)   Rear yard setback: 25 feet as measured from the rear property line;
an accessory building may be located in the rear yard no less than eight feet
from the rear property line.
      (8)   Dwelling dimensions: The following dwelling dimensions measured in
terms of square footage shall apply to all residential dwellings in the Multi-
Family Residential Districts:
 
DWELLING TYPE           FINISHED FLOOR AREA
One Bedroom             1,000 square feet
Each Additional Bedroom 225 square feet
 
   (b)   Supplemental Standards. The following supplemental standards shall
apply within the Multi-Family Residential Districts (MF-A and MF-C):
      (1)   No building shall exceed 35 feet in height, nor more than two and
one-half stories in height.
      (2)   Applicable standards shall be met in corresponding sections of this
Zoning Code.
      (3)   Two or more multiple-unit structures located on the same lot shall
locate no closer than 20 feet to each structure.
      (4)   One covered parking space may be provided per dwelling unit in
clusters not to exceed six spaces.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1165
Neighborhood Commercial District (NC)
1165.01   Purpose.
1165.02   Permitted uses.
1165.03   Conditional uses.
1165.04   Development standards.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1185
   Signs - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1189
   Landscaping and screening - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1191
   Wireless communication facilities - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1193
   Commercial development standards - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1199
§ 1165.01 PURPOSE.
   The Neighborhood Commercial District (NC) is intended to encourage the
clustering of small individual retail and personal service establishments to
promote convenience in serving the daily staple needs of the surrounding
residential areas.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1165.02 PERMITTED USES.
   Land and buildings in the Neighborhood Commercial District (NC) shall be
used only for the following purposes:
   (a)   Retail Stores. Retail stores primarily engaged in selling merchandise
for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the
sale of the goods (including the buying or processing of goods for resale)
including:
      (1)   Hardware stores.
      (2)   Convenience food markets.
      (3)   Meat and fish (seafood) markets.
      (4)   Fruit stores and vegetable markets.
      (5)   Candy, nut and confectionery stores.
      (6)   Dairy products stores.
      (7)   Retail bakeries.
      (8)   Drug stores and proprietary stores.
      (9)   Florists.
      (10)   Electronic products.
      (11)   Video rental store.
      (12)   Eating and drinking establishments with no drive-thru window
service.
   (b)   Personal Services. Personal services generally involving the care of
the person or his/her personal effects including:
      (1)   Beauty shops.
      (2)   Barber shops.
      (3)   Shoe repair shops.
      (4)   Pressing, dry-cleaning, alteration and garment repair.
   (c)   Business and Professional Offices. Business offices carrying on no
retail trade with the general public and having no stock of goods maintained
for sale to customers and professional offices engaged in providing tangible
and intangible services to the general public, involving both persons and their
possessions including:
      (1)   Commercial and stock savings banks.
      (2)   Credit agencies other than banks.
      (3)   Personal credit institutions.
      (4)   Insurance agents, brokers and service.
      (5)   (Real estate) agents, brokers and managers.
      (6)   Combinations of real estate, insurance, loan and law offices.
      (7)   Offices of physicians and surgeons.
      (8)   Offices of dentists and dental surgeons.
      (9)   Offices of chiropractors.
      (10)   Legal services.
      (11)   Health care maintenance and emergency services.
   (d)   Children's Nurseries, Day Care Centers and Pre-schools provided that
the following conditions are met, where applicable:
      (1)   The building occupied by the use is compatible with neighborhood
structures in dimension, size, and architecture.
      (2)   There is an outdoor play area of 85 square feet or more per child.
      (3)   Such play area shall be enclosed with a chain link fence or its
equivalent in strength and protective character to a height of five feet to
control accessibility of children to adjoining hazardous conditions such as
streets, ponds, etc., or adjacent yards.
      (4)   A drop off area is provided so that children do not have to walk
through the parking lot to enter the facility.
      (5)   Parking spaces are provided as specified in Chapter 1185.
      (6)   The facility meets or exceeds State of Ohio provisions for daycare
operations.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1165.03 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be allowed in the Neighborhood Commercial District
(NC) subject to approval in accordance with
Chapter 1145:
   (a)   Drive-up Window Service. Drive-up window service or outdoor service
facility developed in association with and subordinate to a permitted use.
Drive-up window service shall be limited to the rear of the building.
Landscaping and buffering shall be required.
   (b)   Electric Vehicle Charging Stations. Electric vehicle charging stations
when a property has more than five electric vehicle charging stations or an
electric vehicle charging station that includes an overhead-canopy.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1165.04 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (a)   Lot and Building Requirements. The following lot and building
requirements are minimum standards, except where noted, and shall apply in the
Neighborhood Commercial District (NC):
      (1)   Lot area: No minimum lot area is required, however, all lots shall
abut an improved public right-of-way and lot area shall be adequate to provide
the required yard space.
      (2)   Lot coverage (maximum): No maximum lot coverage is required,
however, the lot coverage shall be adequate to provide the yard space required.
      (3)   Lot width: No minimum lot width is required, however, all lots
shall abut an improved public right-of-way and have adequate width to provide
the required yard space and meet minimum access requirements.
      (4)   Front yard setback: The minimum front yard setback shall be no less
than 50 feet measured from the street right-of-way.
      (5)   Side yard setback: For main and accessory structures, including
open service and loading areas, the required side yard shall be not less than
20 feet, unless adjacent to any residential zoning district, Planned
Residential District, Planned Conservation District, Traditional Neighborhood
Development District, and Planned Unit District whereby the side yard shall be
no less than 50 feet.
      (6)   Rear yard setback: For main and accessory structures, the required
rear yard shall be not less than 25 feet, unless adjacent to any residential
zoning district, Planned Residential District, Planned Conservation District,
Traditional Neighborhood Development District, and Planned Unit District
whereby the side yard shall be no less than 50 feet.
      (7)   Building size. Principle structures in the NC District are limited
to 5,000 square feet.
   (b)   Supplemental Standards. The following supplemental standards shall
apply within the Neighborhood Commercial District (NC):
      (1)   No building shall exceed 35 feet in neither height, nor more than
two stories in height.
      (2)   Applicable standards shall be met in corresponding chapters of this
Zoning Code.
      (3)   Operating hours are normally limited to 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
      (4)   The building setbacks and architectural elements of the principle
structure must be consistent with existing neighborhood character.
      (5)   Off-street parking and drive-up window service shall be limited to
the rear of the property. Landscaping and buffering will be required.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1167
General Commercial District (GC)
1167.01   Purpose.
1167.02   Permitted uses.
1167.03   Conditional uses.
1167.04   Development standards.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1185
   Signs - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1189
   Landscaping and screening - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1191
   Wireless communication facilities - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1193
   Commercial development standards - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1199
§ 1167.01 PURPOSE.
   The General Commercial District (GC) is intended to encourage the
concentration of a broad range of individual commercial establishments which
together may constitute a cluster of general commercial activity that serves a
substantial portion of the municipality's residential population. Concentrated
general commercial developments should be ideally located near major
circulation routes and accessible to the population served.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1167.02 PERMITTED USES.
   Land and buildings in the General Commercial District (GC) shall be used
only for the following purposes:
   (a)   Retail Stores. Retail stores primarily engaged in selling merchandise
for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the
sale of the goods (including the buying or processing of goods for resale)
including:
      (1)   General merchandise: Hardware stores, department stores, mail order
houses, limited price variety stores, and miscellaneous general merchandise
stores.
      (2)   Food: Grocery stores, meat and fish (seafood) markets, fruit stores
and vegetable markets, candy, nut and confectionery stores, dairy products
stores, retail bakeries, supermarkets, and miscellaneous food stores.
      (3)   Building materials, retail: Lumber and other building materials,
heating and plumbing equipment, electrical supply equipment, and hardware and
farm equipment.
      (4)   Apparel: Clothing, accessories and personal furnishing stores, shoe
stores, custom tailors, furriers and fur shops, and miscellaneous apparel and
accessory stores.
      (5)   Home furnishings: Furniture, home furnishings, and equipment
stores, household appliance stores, and radio, television and music stores.
      (6)   Eating and drinking places.
      (7)   Electronic products.
      (8)   Video rental store.
      (9)   Miscellaneous retail: Drug stores and proprietary stores, liquor
stores, antique stores and secondhand stores, stationery stores, sporting goods
stores and bicycle shops, jewelry stores, florists, cigar stores, news dealers,
camera and photographic supply stores, gift, novelty and souvenir shops,
optical goods stores, and miscellaneous retail stores not elsewhere classified.
      (10)   Business services: Advertising, duplicating, addressing
blueprinting, photocopying, mailing, stenography, and business services not
elsewhere classified.
      (11)   Artisan workshop.
      (12)   Specialty food and/or beverage facility.
   (b)   Business and Professional Offices. Business offices engaged in
providing tangible and intangible services to the public, involving both
persons and their possessions, including:
      (1)   Administrative, business and professional offices: Administrative
offices primarily engaged in general administration, supervision, purchasing,
accounting and other management functions, and professional offices engaged in
providing tangible and intangible services to the general public, involving
both persons and possessions, including financial services, real estate and
insurance.
      (2)   Professional: Offices of physicians and surgeons, dentists and
dental surgeons, chiropractors, medical and dental laboratories, health and
allied sciences not elsewhere classified, legal services, design services
including engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, urban planning,
graphic arts and interior design, and accounting, auditing and bookkeeping
services.
      (3)   Health care maintenance and emergency services.
   (c)   Personal and Consumer Services. Personal services generally involving
the care of the person or his/her personal effects and consumer services
generally involving the care and maintenance of tangible property or the
provision of intangible services for personal consumption, including:
      (1)   Personal: Photographic studios, including commercial photography,
beauty shops, barber shops, laundromats, funeral services, shoe repair shops,
pressing, alteration and garment repair, and miscellaneous personal service.
      (2)   Repair services: Electrical repair shops, watch, clock and jewelry
repair, reupholsters and furniture repair, and similar household item repair
shops and related services.
      (3)   Artisan studio.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1167.03 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be allowed in the General Commercial District (GC)
subject to approval in accordance with
Chapter 1145:
   (a)   Drive-Up Window Service or Open Display. Drive-up window service or
outdoor service, or open display facility, developed in association with a
principal permitted use.
   (b)   Residential. Living quarters as an integral part of and subordinate to
a principal permitted use.
   (c)   Automobile Convenience Markets. Automobile repair and services, and
automobile service stations. No portion of an automobile service station's
structure or its appurtenances, including ancillary, associated or auxiliary
equipment, shall be located in front of the established building line.
   (d)   Recreation. Theaters, dance halls, dance studios, dance schools,
bowling, swimming pools, and skating rinks.
   (e)   Hotels and Motels. Lodging facilities and subordinate eating and
drinking facilities and recreational facilities, provided that the minimum lot
area is two acres.
   (f)   Offices of veterinarians and animal hospitals.
   (g)   Commercial Kennel. Commercial kennels shall not be located within 200
feet of a residential zoning district, including PUD, TND, PRD, and PCND.
   (h)   Automobile Parking Lot or Garage. An automobile parking lot or garage
as a principal use.
   (i)   Automobile Car Wash. Automobile car washes shall not be located within
150 feet of a residential zoning district, including PUD, PRD, TND and PCND. No
portion of a structure or its appurtenances, including ancillary, associated or
auxiliary equipment, shall be located in front of the established building
line.
   (j)   Electric Vehicle Charging Stations. Electric vehicle charging stations
when a property has more than five electric vehicle charging stations or an
electric vehicle charging station that includes an overhead canopy.
   (k)   Mini-warehouses. Mini-warehouses shall be located on a major or minor
arterial as identified in the Commercial Point Thoroughfare Plan. They shall be
located on a lot with a maximum lot width of 150 feet of frontage measured at
the building line.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1167.04 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (a)   Lot and Building Requirements. The following lot and building
requirements are minimum standards, except where noted, and shall apply in the
General Commercial District (GC):
      (1)   Lot area: No minimum lot area is required, however, all lots shall
abut an improved public right-of-way and lot area shall be adequate to provide
the required yard space.
      (2)   Lot coverage (maximum): No maximum lot coverage is required,
however, the lot coverage shall be adequate to provide the yard space required.
      (3)   Lot width: No minimum lot width is required, however, all lots
shall abut an improved public right-of-way and have adequate width to provide
the required yard space and meet minimum access requirements.
      (4)   Front yard setback: The minimum front yard setback shall be no less
than 50 feet measured from the street right-of-way.
      (5)   Side yard setback: For main and accessory structures, including
open service and loading areas, the required side yard shall be not less than
20 feet, unless adjacent to any residential zoning district, Planned
Residential District, Planned Conservation District, Traditional Neighborhood
Development District, or Planned Unit District whereby the side yard shall be
no less than 50 feet.
      (6)   Rear yard setback: For main and accessory structures, the required
rear yard shall be not less than 25 feet, unless adjacent to any residential
zoning district, Planned Residential District, Planned Conservation District,
Traditional Neighborhood Development District or Planned Unit District whereby
the side yard shall be no less than 50 feet. A use to be serviced from the rear
shall have a service court, alleyway or combination thereof not less than 40
feet in width.
   (b)   Supplemental Standards. The following supplemental standards shall
apply within the General Commercial District (GC):
      (1)   No building shall exceed 40 feet in height, nor more than three
stories in height.
      (2)   Applicable standards shall be met in corresponding chapters of this
Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1169
Suburban Office and Institution District (SO)
1169.01   Purpose.
1169.02   Permitted uses.
1169.03   Conditional uses.
1169.04   Development standards.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1185
   Signs - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1189
   Landscaping and screening - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1191
   Wireless communication facilities - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1193
§ 1169.01 PURPOSE.
   The Suburban Office and Institution District (SO) is provided in recognition
of the need to locate office and institutional land uses where adequate space
can be made available in accordance with current development trends and
standards. The SO District is intended for offices and institutions that may
locate independently or in small clusters and that may desire buildings or
groups of buildings surrounded by landscaped open areas away from the
concentrations of people and traffic of retail, wholesale and industrial areas
in the municipality. The space, location and aesthetic characteristics of these
uses make a location near low density residential neighborhoods or rural
countryside desirable.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1169.02 PERMITTED USES.
   Land and buildings in the Suburban Office and Institutional District (SO)
shall be used only for the following purposes:
   (a)   Administrative and Business Offices. Administrative offices primarily
engaged in general administration, supervision, purchasing, accounting and
other management functions and business offices carrying on no retail trade
with the general public and having no stock of goods maintained for sale to
customers, including financial services, real estate and insurance.
   (b)   Professional Offices. Professional offices engaged in providing
tangible and intangible services to the general public, involving both persons
and their possessions, including: offices of physicians and surgeons, dentists
and dental surgeons, osteopathic physicians, and chiropractors, medical and
dental laboratories, health and allied services, legal services, design
services including engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, urban
planning, graphic arts and interior design, accounting, auditing and
bookkeeping services, and professional services not elsewhere classified.
   (c)   Institution. Institutions providing social, cultural, educational and
health services to member agencies, organizations and individuals or to the
general public, including: hospitals, elementary and secondary schools,
colleges and universities, vocational schools, professional schools, libraries,
museums and art galleries, and religious organizations.
   (d)   Organizations and Associations. Organizations and associations
organized on a profit-making or nonprofit-making basis, for the promotion of
membership interests, including: business associations, professional membership
organizations, labor unions and similar labor organizations, civic, social and
fraternal associations, political organizations, charitable organizations, and
nonprofit membership organizations not elsewhere classified.
   (e)   Residential. Residential dwelling ancillary and subordinate to a
principal permitted use.
   (f)   Churches. Churches and other similar places of worship and parish
houses provided said use occupies a lot of not less than three acres.
      (1)   The minimum lot width is 300 fee);
      (2)   The lot is adequate to accommodate the required off-street parking
requirements of the church in accordance with
Chapter 1185;
      (3)   The church building is set back from any adjacent residential
property line a distance equal to or greater than the height of the structure
exclusive of the steeple or spire;
      (4)   The church lot is accessible to a major arterial in a manner that
does not require the passage of traffic through local residential streets; and
      (5)   There is one acre or more per 100 seats or similar accommodations
in the main assembly hall.
   Accessory living quarters may be provided on the church lot as a conditional
use. The location, density, and the additional lot area required for such uses
shall be subject to approval by Council. Accessory recreational uses may be
provided on the church lot as a conditional use subject to approval by Council.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1169.03 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be allowed in the Suburban Office and Institutional
District (SO) subject to approval in accordance with
Chapter 1145:
   (a)   Drive-up Window Service. Drive-up window service or outdoor service
facilities developed in association with a principal permitted use.
   (b)   Personal Services. Personal services generally involving the care of
the person or his/her apparel, including: photographic services and commercial
photography, beauty shops, barber shops, and funeral service and crematories.
   (c)   Educational and Research. Educational and research establishments
engaged in providing tangible and intangible services to members or the general
public, including: research, development and testing laboratories, school and
educational services not elsewhere classified, and nonprofit educational and
scientific research agencies.
   (d)   Food and Lodging. Food and lodging includes commercial establishments
and institutions engaged in furnishing lodging and meals on a fee basis,
including: eating and drinking places, and organizational hotels and lodging
houses on a membership basis.
   (e)   Offices of veterinarian and animal hospitals.
   (f)   Children's nurseries and day care centers and pre-schools provided
that the following conditions are met, where applicable:
      (1)   The building occupied by the use is compatible with neighborhood
structures in dimension, size, and architecture.
      (2)   There is an outdoor play area of 85 square feet or more per child.
      (3)   Such play area shall be enclosed with a chain link fence or its
equivalent in strength and protective character to a height of five feet to
control accessibility of children to adjoining hazardous conditions such as
streets, ponds, etc., or adjacent yards.
      (4)   A drop off area is provided so that children do not have to walk
through the parking lot to enter the facility.
      (5)   Parking spaces are provided as specified in
Chapter 1185.
      (6)   The facility meets or exceeds State of Ohio provisions for daycare
operations.
   (g)   Electric Vehicle Charging Stations. Electric vehicle charging stations
when a property has more than five electric vehicle charging stations or an
electric vehicle charging station that includes an overhead canopy.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1169.04 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (a)   Lot and Building Requirements. The following lot and building
requirements are minimum standards, except where noted, and shall apply in the
Suburban Office and Institutional District (SO):
      (1)   Lot area: No minimum lot area is required, however, all lots shall
abut an improved public right-of-way and lot area shall be adequate to provide
the required yard space.
      (2)   Lot coverage (maximum): No maximum lot coverage is required,
however, the lot coverage shall be adequate to provide the yard space required.
      (3)   Lot width: No minimum lot width is required, however, all lots
shall abut an improved public right-of-way and have adequate width to provide
the required yard space and meet minimum access requirements.
      (4)   Front yard setback: The minimum front yard setback shall be no less
than 50 feet measured from the street right-of-way.
      (5)   Side yard setback: For main and accessory structures, including
open service and loading areas, the required side yard shall be not less than
20 feet, unless adjacent to any residential zoning district, Planned
Residential District, Planned Conservation District, Traditional Neighborhood
Development District, and Planned Unit District whereby the side yard shall be
no less than 50 feet.
      (6)   Rear yard setback: For main and accessory structures the required
rear yard shall be not less than 20 feet, unless adjacent to any residential
zoning district, Planned Residential District, Planned Conservation District,
Traditional Neighborhood Development District, and Planned Unit District
whereby the rear yard shall be no less than 50 feet. A use to be serviced from
the rear shall have a service court, alleyway or combination thereof not less
than 40 feet in width.
   (b)   Supplemental Standards. The following supplemental standards shall
apply within the Suburban Office and Institutional District (SO):
      (1)   No building shall exceed 40 feet in height, nor more than three
stories in height.
      (2)   Applicable standards shall be met in corresponding chapters of this
Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1171
Limited Manufacturing District (LM)
1171.01   Purpose.
1171.02   Permitted uses.
1171.03   Conditional uses.
1171.04   Development standards.
1171.05   Performance standards.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Open storage and display of material - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1181
   Public nuisance regulations - see P. & Z. §
1181.03
   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1185
   Signs - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1189
   Landscaping and screening - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1191
   Wireless communication facilities - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1193
§ 1171.01 PURPOSE.
   (a)   The Limited Manufacturing District (LM) is established for the purpose
of preserving areas of the municipality for industrial and related uses of such
a nature that they do not create serious problems of compatibility with other
kinds of land uses, and to make provision for certain kinds of commercial uses
which are most appropriately located ancillary to industrial users or which are
necessary to service the immediate needs of people in these areas.
   (b)   Uses under the LM District generally require a minimum of services and
facilities. Such uses typically operate within enclosed structures and have
little or no adverse effect on adjacent land by producing noise, odor, dust,
smoke, glare or other hazards. The intent of the district is to encourage
industrial development that is architecturally sensitive, incorporating
landscaping, generous setbacks, and minimal signage.
   (c)   Performance standards are identified and required to be met by all
uses under the LM District to ensure that those uses are appropriate to the
municipality and that such development is a positive addition to the
municipality without creating undue negative environmental impacts.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1171.02 PERMITTED USES.
   Land and buildings in the Limited Manufacturing District (LM) shall be used
only for the following purposes:
   (a)   Manufacturing.
      (1)   Canning and preserving fruits, vegetables and seafood.
      (2)   Bakery products; candy and other confectionery products.
      (3)   Men's, youth's and boys' clothing, furnishings and allied garments;
women's, misses', children's and infants clothing, furnishings and allied
garments; fur goods and miscellaneous apparel and accessories.
      (4)   Miscellaneous fabricated textile products; broad and narrow woven
fabric mills, including cotton, man-made fiber and silk, and dyeing and
finishing, floor covering mills, yarn and thread mills, and miscellaneous
textile goods.
      (5)   Publishing and printing of newspapers, magazines, books and other
publications, and commercial printing; manifold business forms, greeting cards,
bookbinding and related industries, and service industries for the printing
trade.
      (6)   Pharmaceuticals.
      (7)   Footwear, gloves and mittens, luggage, handbags and other personal
leather goods; boot and shoe cut stock and findings, and leather goods not
elsewhere classified.
      (8)   Glass products made of purchased glass.
      (9)   Communication equipment, electronic components and accessories,
engineering, laboratory, scientific and research instruments and associated
equipment, and instruments for measuring, controlling and indicating physical
characteristics.
      (10)   Optical instruments and lenses, surgical, medical and dental
instruments and supplies, and ophthalmic goods; photographic equipment and
supplies.
      (11)   Watches, clocks, clockwork operated devices and parts; jewelry,
silverware and plated ware.
      (12)   Automobile accessories and electronic components, including
automotive and truck assembly parts.
      (13)   Sausages and other prepared meat products, dairy products, grain
mill products, and beverage industries.
      (14)   Household and office furniture, partitions, shelves, lockers and
office and store fixtures, miscellaneous furniture and fixtures.
      (15)   Nonferrous foundries, sheet metal work, and machine shops, jobbing
and repair.
      (16)   Household appliances, electrical lighting and wiring equipment,
and miscellaneous electrical machinery, equipment and supplies.
      (17)   Musical instruments and parts, toys, amusements, sporting and
athletic goods.
      (18)   Pens, pencils and other office and artists' materials, costume
jewelry, costume novelties, buttons and miscellaneous notions, except precious
metal.
      (19)   Plastic products.
   (b)   Wholesaling.
      (1)   Pharmaceuticals, chemicals and allied products.
      (2)   Dry goods and apparel.
      (3)   Groceries and related products.
      (4)   Electrical goods.
      (5)   Hardware, plumbing and heating equipment and supplies.
      (6)   Machinery equipment and supplies.
      (7)   Tobacco and its products.
      (8)   Beer, wine and distilled alcoholic beverages.
      (9)   Paper and its products.
      (10)   Furniture and home furnishings.
   (c)   Wholesaling, Warehousing and Transportation Services.
      (1)   Trucking, local and long distance.
      (2)   Public warehousing and freight forwarding.
      (3)   Terminal and joint terminal maintenance facilities for motor
freight transportation and miscellaneous services incidental to transportation.
      (4)   Motor vehicles and automotive equipment.
      (5)   Pharmaceuticals, chemicals and allied products, dry goods, apparel,
groceries and related products.
      (6)   Farm products and raw materials, electrical goods, hardware,
plumbing and heating equipment and supplies.
      (7)   Machinery, equipment, and supplies.
      (8)   Miscellaneous wholesalers except scrap and waste materials.
      (9)   Data centers.
   (d)   Service Industries.
      (1)   General construction contractors.
      (2)   Plumbing, heating and air conditioning, painting, paperhanging and
decorating.
      (3)   Electrical work, masonry, stonework, tile setting, and plastering,
carpentering and wood flooring, roofing and sheet metal work, concrete work,
and water well drilling.
      (4)   Miscellaneous special trade contractors.
   (e)   Commercial Retail. Commercial retail uses associated with and
subordinate to another permitted use and limited to no more than 25% of the
total gross floor area of all structures on the subject lot(s).
   (f)   Research, development and testing laboratories.
   (g)   Business and professional offices, but excluding medical and dental
offices.
   (h)   Administrative Offices. Administrative offices primarily engaged in
general administrative supervision, purchasing, accounting and other management
functions.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020; Am. Ord. 2023-09, passed 8-7-2023)
§ 1171.03 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be allowed in the Limited Manufacturing District (LM)
subject to approval in accordance with
Chapter 1145:
   (a)   Other Lawful Industrial Uses. Any other lawful industrial use
compatible with the permitted uses, fulfilling the intent of this district, and
developed in accordance with the development standards and performance
standards of this district.
   (b)   Personal and Consumer Services. Personal and consumer services
generally involving the care and maintenance of tangible property or the
provision of intangible services for personal consumption intended to serve the
industrial establishments of their employees, including:
      (1)   Personal: beauty shops, barber shops, shoe repair shops, pressing,
alteration and garment repair, and miscellaneous personal services.
      (2)   Business: advertising, consumer credit reporting agencies,
mercantile reporting agencies, adjustment and collecting agencies, business
services including duplicating, addressing, blueprinting, photocopying,
mailing, mailing list, and stenographic, private employment agencies, and
business services not elsewhere classified, except research, development and
testing laboratories.
   (c)   Recycling Centers. Not to include manufacturing.
   (d)   Commercial Kennels. Commercial kennels shall not be located within 200
feet of any residential zoning district, including PUD and PRD.
   (e)   Automobile Convenience Markets, Automobile Repair and Services, and
Automobile Service Stations. No portion of an automobile service station's
structure or its appurtenances, including ancillary, associated or auxiliary
equipment, shall be located in front of the established building line.
   (f)   Electric Vehicle Charging Stations. Electric vehicle charging stations
when a property has more than five electric vehicle charging stations or an
electric vehicle charging station that includes an overhead canopy.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1171.04 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (a)   Lot and Building Requirements. The following lot and building
requirements are minimum standards, except where noted, and shall apply in the
Limited Manufacturing District (LM):
      (1)   Lot area: No minimum lot area is required, however, all lots shall
abut an improved public right-of-way and lot area shall be adequate to provide
the required yard space.
      (2)   Lot coverage (maximum): No maximum lot coverage is required,
however, the lot coverage shall be adequate to provide the yard space required.
      (3)   Lot width: No minimum lot width is required, however, all lots
shall abut an improved public right-of-way and have adequate width to provide
the required yard space and meet minimum access requirements.
      (4)   Front yard setback: The minimum front yard setback shall be no less
than 50 feet measured from the street right-of-way.
      (5)   Side yard setback: For accessory structures, including open service
and loading areas, the required side yards shall not be less than ten feet,
unless adjacent to any residential zoning district, Planned Residential
District, Planned Conservation District, Traditional Neighborhood Development
District, and Planned Unit District whereby the side yard shall be no less than
50 feet. For main structures, including open service and loading areas, the
required side yards shall not be less than 20 feet, unless adjacent to any
residential zoning district, Planned Residential District, Planned Conservation
District, Traditional Neighborhood Development District, and Planned Unit
District whereby the side yard shall be no less than 50 feet. For purposes of
this division, "main" shall be synonymous with "principal" as used elsewhere in
the Zoning Code.
      (6)   Rear yard setback: For main and accessory structures the required
rear yard shall be not less than 20 feet, unless adjacent to any residential
zoning district, Planned Residential District, Planned Conservation District,
Traditional Neighborhood Development District, and Planned Unit District
whereby the rear yard shall be no less than 50 feet.
   (b)   Supplemental Standards. The following supplemental standards shall
apply within the Limited Manufacturing District (LM):
      (1)   No building shall exceed 60 feet in height.
      (2)   Applicable standards shall be met in corresponding chapters of this
Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020; Am. Ord. 2022-06, passed 1-24-2022)
§ 1171.05 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   No land or building in the Limited Manufacturing District (LM) shall be used
or occupied in any manner in violation of §
1181.03. The cost of any testing necessary, as determined by the municipality,
for determining whether a violation of such regulations exists, has occurred,
or may occur in the future shall be paid by the violator to Commercial Point.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1173
Planned Districts (PRD, PCD, PID, PUD, PCND)
1173.01   Purpose and intent.
1173.02   Permitted uses.
1173.03   Development standards.
1173.04   Plan contents and requirements.
1173.05   Review basis.
1173.06   Procedures for approval.
1173.07   Ownership of common open space in PCND.
1173.08   Maintenance of open space in PCND.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Subdivision design standards - see P. & Z. Title One
   Private swimming pools - see P. & Z. §
1181.01
   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1185
   Home occupations - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1187
   Signs - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1189
   Landscaping and screening - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1191
   Wireless communication facilities - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1193
§ 1173.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (a)   Planned districts shall include residential, commercial, industrial,
and mixed-use sub-districts: Planned Residential District (PRD), Planned
Commercial District (PCD), Planned Industrial District (PID), Planned Unit
District (PUD), and Planned Conservation District (PCND).
   (b)   It is the intent of the planned districts to promote the progressive
development of land and construction thereon and to encourage imaginative
architectural design and layout, flexibility in building styles and types, and
sensitivity to the natural environment.
   (c)   The planned districts are designed to guide development in an orderly,
coordinated and comprehensive manner that preserves natural quality and beauty
and provides supporting community facilities in the development of diverse,
sound urban environments consistent with accepted land planning, landscape
architecture practices and engineering principals. Such developments should:
      (1)   Provide a more useful pattern of open space and recreation areas.
      (2)   Preserve and utilize natural topography and geologic features,
scenic vistas, trees and other vegetation, while preventing disruption of
normal drainage patterns.
      (3)   Provide a more efficient pattern of development that reduces
investments in utility lines, streets, and similar infrastructure.
      (4)   Promotes a development pattern in harmony with the municipal land
use objectives and priorities.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1173.02 PERMITTED USES.
   Land and buildings in the planned districts (PRD, PCD, PID, PUD, and PCND)
shall be used only for the following purposes as indicated under each specific
sub-district:
   (a)   Planned Residential District (PRD).
      (1)   Residential dwellings: single-family, two-family and multi-family
dwellings and accessory uses and buildings in association with a permitted
dwelling.
      (2)   Public uses: parks, playgrounds, recreation and community center
buildings and grounds, golf courses, public swimming pools, tennis courts and
similar recreational uses.
      (3)   Accessory buildings and uses in association with a permitted single
or multiple-unit residential structure.
      (4)   Home occupations associated with a principal use and in accordance
with
Chapter 1187.
   (b)   Planned Commercial District (PCD). Uses permitted, including
conditional uses, under the Neighborhood Commercial District (NC), General
Commercial District (GC), and Suburban Office District (SO).
   (c)   Planned Industrial District (PID). Uses permitted, including
conditional uses, under the Limited Manufacturing District (LM).
   (d)   Planned Unit District (PUD).
      (1)   Uses permitted under the Planned Residential District (PRD).
      (2)   Uses permitted under the Planned Commercial District (PCD) but
limited to no more than 40% of the net developable site.
      (3)   Accessory buildings and uses in association with a permitted use.
      (4)   Home occupations associated with a principal use and in accordance
with
Chapter 1187.
   (e)   Planned Conservation District (PCND).
      (1)   Uses permitted under the Planned Residential District (PRD).
      (2)   Cluster housing units.
      (3)   Common wall single family attached dwelling units.
      (4)   Single-family zero lot line, attached twin singles, townhouses, or
other innovative forms of residential development, provided all density
criteria and applicable requirements are met.
      (5)   Accessory buildings and uses in association with a permitted use.
      (6)   Public buildings and/or uses which are supported in whole or part
by taxes or by special public assessment. Such uses include but are not limited
to libraries, schools, fire stations, water treatment, pumping and storage
facilities, and wastewater treatment and pumping facilities.
      (7)   Forest and wildlife preserves.
      (8)   Projects specifically designed for watershed protection,
conservation of soil or water or flood control.
      (9)   Family care homes and group care homes.
      (10)   Home occupations associated with a principal use and in accordance
with
Chapter 1187.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1173.03 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (a)   Project Ownership. The planned development area shall be under
contract for purchase by a single entity or owned by a single entity at the
time of application. For the purposes of this chapter a single entity includes
the following: an individual, a husband and wife; corporation; partnership; or
two or more property owners enjoined as a single entity.
   (b)   Minimum Lot Requirements. The minimum lot requirements of a parcel
that can be zoned under the Planned Districts are the following:
 
DEVELOPMENT STANDARD                      PRD PCD  PID PUD PCND
Minimum lot area (acres)                  5   None 10  20  10
Minimum lot width (feet) at building line 350 350  500 750 350
Minimum frontage (feet)                   250 250  400 600 250
Maximum coverage                          N/A 45%  50% N/A N/A
Maximum building height (feet)            35  40   40  40  35
 
      (1)   For each use the lot and building requirements of the appropriate
district other than the planned district shall apply unless superseded herein.
      (2)   Parking areas shall be no closer to the main structure(s) than ten
feet.
      (3)   Under PRD and PUD individual home sites or clusters thereof must be
designated under one of the municipality's residential zoning districts. At the
time of the application, the municipality has the ability to negotiate
development standards.
      (4)   Under PRD, PUD, and PCND adjacent residential homes shall not have
identical facades relative to style and color, and all residential building
front yard setbacks shall meet the applicable district requirement and be
staggered.
      (5)   Under PCND, there are no minimum yard requirements for residential
units. Other permitted uses shall have front, side, and rear yards each of
which is at least 50 feet. No building shall be located closer than 50 feet to
any residential district boundary line. Buildings within developments adjacent
to major thoroughfares and arterial streets shall be setback no less than 150
feet from the centerline of said major thoroughfare or arterial street.
   (c)   Site Development Standards. The following site development standards
shall apply in the planned districts:
      (1)   The applicable sections of the Subdivision Regulations and the off-
street parking, sign and landscaping regulations of this Zoning Code shall
apply.
      (2)   The traffic and parking system shall meet the requirements relative
to access as indicated in
Chapter 1185. Access points shall be kept to a minimum to reduce traffic
congestion and mitigate potential conflict points. Vehicular and pedestrian
conflict points shall also be minimized.
      (3)   Under PCD and PUD, where applicable, the parking system shall be so
designed as to discourage single large unbroken paved lots for off-street
parking and shall encourage smaller defined parking areas within the total
parking system. Such defined parking areas should be delineated and accented by
landscaped areas. Parking aisles, whenever possible, shall be oriented
perpendicular to the building fronts.
      (4)   The maximum PRD and PUD density shall be four dwelling units per
acre based upon the number of units proposed divided by the net developable
site.
      (5)   The maximum PCND density shall be four dwelling units per acre
based upon the number of units proposed divided by the gross developable site
(including open space).
      (6)   Under PRD and PUD a minimum of 20% of the gross site minus publicly
dedicated streets and alleys shall be set aside as public open space. Such open
space shall be used for such public purposes as a natural area, recreational
area, or the site of a community or school facility.
      (7)   Under PCND no less than 50% of the total gross area of the site
shall be set aside as common open space. Open space land may, at the discretion
of the municipality, be dedicated as public park land or public institutional
use; or placed within other protected land classification systems which will
assure that such land will remain in a natural state prohibiting further
development, and the establishment of appropriate standards safeguarding the
sites special assets as identified by Council.
         A.   The location, shape, size and character of common open space
shall be suitable for the Planned Conservation Development in relation to the
location, number and types of buildings it is intended to serve. In any case,
it shall be highly accessible to all residents or users of the planned
development. Entry features, detention and retention basins shall not be
included in the area required for common open space.
         B.   The common open space shall be used for amenity or recreational
purposes. Any uses and/or buildings authorized for the common open space must
be appropriate to the scale and character of the planned development in
relation to its size, density, expected population, topography, and the type of
dwellings.
         C.   The common open space may be suitably improved for its intended
use, but common open space containing natural features worthy of preservation
such as slopes over 12% and wooded areas shall be left unimproved. The
buildings, structures, and improvements which are permitted in the common open
space must be appropriate to the uses which are authorized for the common open
space and must conserve and enhance the amenities of the common open space with
regard to its topography and unimproved condition.
      (8)   Under PCD and PUD where applicable all service and delivery shall
be made to the rear of the structure(s) or use unless special design treatment
or circumstances warrant an alternative, but only with the approval of Council.
Landscaping and screening requirements of
Chapter 1191 shall apply.
      (9)   Under PRD, PUD and PCND the location and arrangement of areas of
various density shall be so designed as to balance higher density areas
adjacent to open space.
      (10)   Under PRD, PUD, and PCND private roads as a common easement may be
used to provide access to clustered lots and/or structures serving residential
uses in accordance with the following:
         A.   The easement shall not be counted as required open space.
         B.   The easement does not serve an area larger than two acres, except
that such area will contain six dwellings or less.
         C.   Approved as a part of the Subdivision Plat as the most
appropriate form of access to the lots and/or structures.
      (11)   Under PRD, PUD and PCND off-street parking shall be provided in
accordance with
Chapter 1185, except residential parking may be provided in group garages or
parking lots within 150 feet of the dwellings served.
      (12)   Under PCD, PID, PUD, and PCND where appropriate whenever multiple
structures are to be located on the site and the site abuts a collector or
arterial street, access onto the collector or arterial shall be via interior
local streets or marginal access (frontage) roads. All uses within the PCD,
PID, PUD, and PCND shall derive their access from the interior streets in the
district, unless specific exemptions are made as a part of the approved
Development Plan.
      (13)   Drainage and runoff from the proposed development shall not cause
property damage. All drainage improvements shall be designed in conformance
with the requirements of the Municipal Subdivision Regulations and shall be
approved by the Municipal Engineer prior to Development Plan approval.
      (14)   Details regarding sanitary sewage collection and disposal and
water supply techniques to be utilized shall be addressed in the Development
Plan, together with letters of approval from the pertinent local, state and, if
applicable, private agencies, and approved by the Municipal Engineer prior to
Development Plan approval.
      (15)   Under PCD, PUD, and PCND no unscreened outside storage shall be
permitted and no rubbish or debris of any kind shall be placed or permitted to
accumulate on any portion of the parcel or lot so as to render any portion of
the property unsanitary, unsightly or detrimental to the public health, safety
or welfare.
      (16)   All utilities shall be placed underground and all utility boxes
shall be screened.
      (17)   Public nuisance regulations under §
1181.03 shall apply.
   (d)   Conflict With Other Chapters. Because of the special characteristics
of Planned Conservation Developments (PCND), special provisions governing the
development of land for this purpose are required. Whenever there is a conflict
or difference between the provisions of
Chapter 1141 and those of the other chapters of this Zoning Code, the more
restrictive provisions shall prevail. Subjects not covered by this chapter
shall be governed by the respective provisions found elsewhere in this Zoning
Code.
   (e)   Relationship to the Subdivision Regulations. The uniqueness of each
proposal for a Planned Conservation Development (PCND) may require that there
be modification from the specifications established in the Subdivision
Regulations of Commercial Point, Ohio. Modifications may be incorporated into
the plan by the developer only after the review of the Planning and Zoning
Administrator.
   (f)   Utilities. The following regulations apply to the provision of
utilities in planned conservation developments.
      (1)   Planned Conservation Developments (PCND) shall have an adequate
source of potable water. All water lines constructed within a planned
conservation development shall be at the financial responsibility of the owner
or developer.
      (2)   The owner or developer of a planned conservation development shall
be financially responsible for the extension of the existing network of
sanitary sewage lines to serve the planned development area. No construction of
buildings within any segment of a planned conservation development shall be
commenced until after the extension of sanitary sewage lines has been
completed.
      (3)   The following utility equipment shall be provided, constructed and
installed underground within a planned development: gas lines, sanitary and
storm sewer lines, water lines, electrical lines, telephone lines, and cable
television lines.
      (4)   All utility systems shall be located and designed in such a manner
and method as to preserve the natural features of the land such as streams,
rock outcropping, topsoil, trees and shrubs and the same shall be incorporated
into and with the landscaping of said lands.
      (5)   Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall
be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be of adequate width to
facilitate the proposed usage.
      (6)   All utility boxes shall be screened.
   (g)   Storm Water Management. Due to the size and nature of planned
conservation developments and the fact that several types of developments may
be exempt from platting requirements, all site plans must have a storm water
management plan, approved by the Municipal Engineer, with the improvements
constructed before a zoning certificate will be issued for construction of
buildings.
   (h)   Walkways. All Planned Conservation Developments (PCND) where the
average lot frontage is less than 90 feet shall be provided with concrete
sidewalks on both sides of the street throughout the development. All other
walkways shall be constructed of a suitable, dust free, hard surface material.
Mulch or other similar surfaces may be permitted for walking trails in areas
Council feels are appropriate.
   (i)   Trees.
      (1)   The clearing of land shall be kept to a minimum to help preserve
the existing natural conditions.
      (2)   No land shall be cleared of trees eight to ten feet away from the
existing tree canopy. An exception to this requirement shall be granted in the
case of those trees which should be removed due to malformation, disease,
safety hazards, or to the general benefit of surrounding trees. The foregoing
shall be considered as a guideline for preservation of the natural environment.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1173.04 PLAN CONTENTS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   As part of the request for rezoning to a planned district, a
preliminary plan must be submitted to Council along with the text of all
applicable development standards text. A zoning certificate will not be issued
for any site or sites until a development plan is approved by Council and found
in conformance with the adopted preliminary plan and development standards.
      (1)   Preliminary plan. The preliminary plan is a conceptual plan
submitted at the time of a request for rezoning generally describing the
proposed uses for the site to be rezoned and their relationship with
surrounding properties and uses. The preliminary plan shall contain the
following elements.
         A.   A topographic map of the site and adjacent property showing
existing natural features including wooded areas and major trees. A description
of how the proposed development has planned to utilize the existing site,
identifying changes to the existing site grading and noting major trees that
will be removed as a part of the proposed development.
         B.   A schematic plan showing the general development of the tract,
location of existing and proposed structures, parking lot layout and other
development features including the location of all out parcels.
         C.   An engineering feasibility statement in sufficient detail to
indicate how the proposed development will be serviced with water, sanitary
sewer and storm drainage facilities.
         D.   The proposed traffic circulation pattern showing public and
private streets and other transportation facilities, including major pedestrian
routes, with evidence through a traffic study that the proposed development
will not adversely impact existing transportation facilities.
         E.   A conceptual landscaping plan that shows the ability of the
proposed development to meet all aspects of
Chapter 1191.
         F.   A proposed schedule or phasing of development of the site.
         G.   Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the land
to accomplish proposed and required land improvements.
         H.   Any additional information required by Council necessary to
determine that the proposed development meets the intent and purposes of the
appropriate planned district.
      (2)   Development Standards Text. A Development Standards Text shall be
submitted as part of the preliminary plan and shall be narrative and graphics,
as necessary, in order to detail the development standards to be applied to the
development concept described in the preliminary plan. The Development
Standards Text should clearly identify any standard that is less than the
standards established by this chapter. These modifications shall be justified
by fully stating what adjustments, amenities or other compensations are
provided as part of the preliminary plan to offset the use of reduced standards
and by demonstrating how the modified standards will result in the best
possible development for the site. Unless specifically modified by the
Development Standards Text, the standards established by this chapter shall
apply to the proposed development.
      (3)   Development plan. Following approval of the preliminary plan and
prior to issuance of a zoning certificate, a development plan shall be
submitted to Council for the part of the area defined in the preliminary plan.
The development plan is a detailed site plan that shall contain the following
information and adhere to the Development Standards Text approved as part of
the preliminary plan:
         A.   Site survey. On a survey, show boundary information, existing and
proposed development, existing and proposed topography, existing and proposed
easements, rights-of-way and utilities.
         B.   Setbacks. The site plan shall indicate building, service areas,
parking lot and signage setbacks including front yard, rear yard and side yard
areas and shall be in accordance with the approved Development Standards Text.
         C.   Modifications of Development Standards Text. Any desired
modifications of the Development Standards Text approved as part of the
preliminary plan shall be so indicated in a modified Development Standards Text
document.
         D.   Height requirements. Maximum height requirements, including
mechanical areas, parapets, etc. shall be made per the Development Standards
Text requirements and shown on building front, rear and side elevation
drawings.
         E.   Parking and loading. All parking and loading spaces shall be
shown including typically dimensions of parking stalls, aisles and loading
spaces, size, number of spaces and general location shall also be governed by
the Development Standards Text.
         F.   Waste and refuse. Handling of waste and refuse materials shall be
indicated and described by the Development Standards Text and shall include
appropriate screening and type of containerization.
         G.   Circulation. All major circulation routes, including arterial,
adjacent curb cuts, collector and local streets shall be indicated including
rights-of-way, dimensions, pavement widths and intersection improvements. All
driveways/curb cuts shall be indicated, including major aisle ways and service
routes. Major pedestrian circulation routes shall also be indicated including
dimensions of path and pedestrian crossings, etc. plus any attempts at
separating vehicular and pedestrian/recreation movement.
         H.   Landscaping. As part of the development plan, proposed
landscaping shall be shown including the general landscaping pattern and type
of materials, mounding and fencing. Landscaping may vary in density, spacing
and other treatment to reflect variations in topography, existing landscaping
or adjacent land uses and conform to
Chapter 1191. Landscape features shall be shown as well as planting dimensions,
height, d.b.h. and type of plant materials per the Development Standards Text.
         I.   Signage and graphics. All signage and graphics shall comply with
the Development Standards Text. Letter and other graphic size, sign material,
shape, color and illumination (internal only) shall be indicated. This includes
dimensions of all ground and wall signage as well as distances from rights-of-
way and intensity of illumination. Directional signage shall also be indicated.
         J.   Lighting. All exterior lighting fixtures shall be shown including
parking lot lighting, street walkway or pedestrian lighting, walkway accent
lighting and building accent lighting. Lighting intensity and installation
height shall be indicated.
         K.   Accessory structures, decks, patios and fencing. All accessory
structures, decks, patios and fences shall conform to the Development Standards
Text and appropriate materials, heights, location and style indicated.
         L.   Architectural treatment. As part of the development plan front,
rear and side building elevations shall be shown in accordance with the
Development Standards Text indicated building material, color and height. Color
material samples shall also be made available for inspection.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1173.05 REVIEW BASIS.
   (a)   Preliminary Plan. The basis for the approval of the preliminary plan
shall be:
      (1)   That the proposed development is consistent in all respects with
the purpose, intent and applicable standards of the Zoning Code.
      (2)   That the proposed development is in conformity with appropriate
comprehensive planning or portion thereof as it may apply.
      (3)   That the acceptability of setbacks, distances between buildings,
yard space, suitability of open space systems, traffic accessibility and other
elements having a bearing on the overall acceptability of the development plan
shall contribute to the orderly development of land within the municipality.
      (4)   That any modifications or minimum development standards established
by the Zoning Code are properly identified and adequately justified in the
Development Standards Text as necessary to insure a higher quality development.
      (5)   That the proposed development is in conformity with any design or
site planning guidelines adopted by Council.
      (6)   That the plan provides for the coordination and integration of
individually designed buildings into one planned district.
   (b)   Development Plan. Basis for approval of a development plan shall be:
      (1)   That the plan is complete in all respects relative to the
requirements set forth in division (a) of this section.
      (2)   That any modifications of the Development Standards Text approved
as part of the preliminary plan support and enhance the purposes and intent of
the Zoning Code, any applicable comprehensive planning program and any design
or site planning guidelines adopted by Council.
      (3)   That all engineering issues for the phase(s) submitted in the
development plan application have been resolved to the satisfaction of the
appropriate municipal staff.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1173.06 PROCEDURES FOR APPROVAL.
   (a)   Submission of Application for Preliminary Plan.
      (1)   Prior to filing an application for rezoning to a planned district,
the applicant shall meet with Planning and Zoning Administrator in a pre-
application review meeting to discuss the requirements for a preliminary plan
and Development Standards Text which are required as part of the rezoning
request.
      (2)   The applicant shall submit the rezoning application along with 20
copies of the proposed preliminary plan and Development Standards Text in
accordance with the submission schedule established by Council. In order to
defray the cost of examination of the rezoning application and the plan and
text and review by Council, the applicant shall pay a fee in accordance with
the fee as stipulated by ordinance. Staff shall circulate the preliminary plan
and other comments to appropriate departments in the municipality for review
and comment.
      (3)   Once the applicant has submitted a completed application in
accordance with the submission schedule, staff shall submit the application,
including the preliminary plan and Development Standards Text, to Council for
their review and action within 45 days. It shall be the duty of Council to
review the preliminary plan and Development Standards Text and determine
whether it complies with the regulations of this chapter.
      (4)   A preliminary plan shall be valid for five years after Council
approval. Construction of any phase of the development must begin within this
period or a new preliminary plan is required.
   (b)   Submission of Development Plan.
      (1)   Prior to filing for development plan approval, the applicant shall
meet with the Planning and Zoning Administrator to review the development plan
relative to the previously approved preliminary plan and Development Standards
Text as well as procedures for approval.
      (2)   The applicant shall submit an application to the municipality
including the required number of copies of the proposed development plan,
Development Standards Text modification if appropriate and any other required
information in accordance with the submission schedule of Council. In order to
defray the cost of examination of the materials and review by Council, the
applicant shall pay a fee in accordance with the fee schedule as stipulated by
ordinance.
      (3)   It shall be the duty of Council to review the development plan and
determine whether it complies with the regulations of this chapter. Such
determination shall be made by Council within 45 days of submission of the
development plan to Council, which shall be done after any necessary approvals
by the Village Engineer and Planning and Zoning Administrator are obtained and
payment of the construction plan review fee is received by the village. If
Council finds that the development plan complies in all respects with the
regulations of this chapter and the previously approved preliminary plan and
Development Standards Text, Council shall approve the development plan. With
the approval of Council, minor modifications of the approved development plan
may be made. Such modifications shall not increase the overall density of the
site or change the essential character of the approved development plan. If the
Planning and Zoning Administrator determines that such proposed changes
significantly alter the approved development plan, it is considered a major
change and the development plan must be resubmitted to Council for approval.
      (4)   In the event that Council does not approve the plan, each applicant
shall be notified in writing of the reason for disapproval or modification
along with the decision of Council.
   (c)   Conformance with the Development Plan. Development shall be in
conformance with the development plan and construction site improvements must
be commenced within two years of Council approval; otherwise, no development of
the land shall take place until a new development plan is approved pursuant to
this section.
   (d)   Modification of the Development Plan. With the approval of Council,
minor modifications of the approved preliminary development plan may be made.
Such modification shall not increase the overall density of the site or change
the essential character of the approved plan. If Council determines that such
proposed changes significantly alter the approved preliminary development plan,
it is considered a major change and the revised plan must be resubmitted to
Council for approval. Development of land shall not proceed prior to final
approval of the development plan. Any development undertaken without such final
approval is in violation of this Zoning Code and an abatable nuisance.
   (e)   Variances from Development Standards. Council may approve variances
from the Development Standards of this chapter as part of the Development
Standards Text and development plan. These variances shall be consistent with
the intent of the zoning district.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020; Am. Ord. 2020-15, passed 8-17-2020)
§ 1173.07 OWNERSHIP OF COMMON OPEN SPACE IN PCND.
   Different ownership and management options apply to the permanently
protected common open space created through the PCND development process. The
common open space shall remain undivided and may be owned and managed by a
homeowners association, the municipality, or a recognized land trust or
conservation district (conservancy). A public land dedication, not exceeding
10% of the total parcel size, may be required by the municipality to facilitate
trail or pathway connections. A narrative describing ownership, use and
maintenance responsibilities shall be submitted for all common and public
improvements, utilities, and open spaces.
   (a)   Ownership Standards. Common open space within the PCND development
shall be owned, administered, and maintained by any of the following methods,
either individually or in combination, and subject to approval by the
municipality.
      (1)   Offer of dedication. The municipality shall have the first offer of
dedication of undivided common open space in the event said land is to be
conveyed. Dedication shall take the form of a fee simple ownership. The
municipality may, but not be required to accept undivided common open space
provided: 1) such land is accessible to all the residents of the municipality;
2) there is no cost of acquisition other than incidental costs related to the
transfer of ownership; 3) the municipality agrees to maintain such lands; 4)
the land is not potentially hazardous. Where the municipality accepts
dedication of common open space that contains improvements, the municipality
may require the posting of financial security to ensure structural integrity of
improvements for a term not to exceed 18 months.
      (2)   Homeowners association. The undivided common open space and
associated facilities may be held in common ownership by a homeowners
association. The association shall be formed and operated under the following
provisions:
         A.   The developer shall provide a description of the association,
including its bylaws and methods for maintaining the common open space.
         B.   The association shall be organized by the developer and shall be
operated by the developer, before the sale of any lots within the development.
         C.   Membership in the association is mandatory for all purchasers of
homes therein and their successors. The conditions and timing of transferring
control of the association from developer to homeowners shall be identified.
         D.   The association shall be responsible for maintenance of insurance
and taxes on the undivided common open space, enforceable by liens placed by
the municipality on the association. The association may establish rules to
ensure proper maintenance of property, including monetary liens on the homes
and home sites of its members who fail to pay their association dues in a
timely manner. Such liens may impose a penalty of interest charges.
         E.   The members of the association shall share equitably the costs of
maintaining and developing, where appropriate, such undivided common open
space. Shares shall be defined within the association bylaws.
         F.   In the event of transfer, within the methods here permitted, of
undivided common open space land by the homeowners association, or the
assumption of maintenance of undivided common open space land by the
municipality, notice of such pending action shall be given to all property
owners within the development.
         G.   The association shall provide for adequate staff to administer
common facilities and property and continually maintain the undivided common
open space.
         H.   The lease shall be subject to the approval of the homeowners
association board and any transfer or assignment of the lease shall be further
subject to the approval of the board. Lease agreements shall be recorded with
the Franklin County or Pickaway County Recorders Office, whichever is
applicable, and notification shall be provided to Council within 30 calendar
days of action by the board.
         I.   The homeowners association may lease common open space lands to
any other qualified person, or corporation, for operation and maintenance of
common open space lands, but such a lease agreement shall provide:
            1.   That the residents of the development shall at all times have
access to the common open space lands contained therein (except croplands
during the growing season);
            2.   That the undivided common open space shall be maintained for
purposes set forth in this chapter; and
            3.   That the operation of common open space facilities may be for
the benefit of the residents only, or may be open to all residents of the
municipality, at the election of the developer and/or homeowners association.
In cases where public trails or paths are provided as linkage between
developments or as a continuous link of common open space within the
municipality, all residents of the municipality shall have access to such
identified paths/walkways.
      (3)   Condominiums. The undivided common open space and associated
facilities may be controlled through the use of condominium agreements,
approved by the municipality. Such agreements shall be in conformance with all
applicable laws and regulations. All undivided common open space land shall be
held as a "common element".
      (4)   Dedication of easements. The municipality may, but shall not be
required to, accept easements for public use of any portion or portions of
undivided common open space land, title of which is to remain in ownership by
condominium or homeowners association, provided:
         A.   Such land is accessible to municipal residents;
         B.   There is no cost of acquisition other than incidental transfer of
ownership costs; and
         C.   A satisfactory maintenance agreement is reached between the
developer, association and the municipality.
      (5)   Transfer of easements to a private conservation organization. With
the permission of the municipality, an owner may transfer easements to a
private, nonprofit organization, among whose purposes it is to conserve open
space and/or natural resources, provided that:
         A.   The organization is acceptable to the municipality, and is a bona
fide conservation organization with perpetual existence;
         B.   The conveyance contains appropriate provisions for the proper
reverter or retransfer in the event that organization becomes unwilling or
unable to continue carrying out its function; and,
         C.   A maintenance agreement acceptable to Council is entered into by
the developer and the organization.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1173.08 MAINTENANCE OF OPEN SPACE IN PCND.
   (a)   The ultimate owner of the open space shall be responsible for raising
all monies required for operations, maintenance, or physical improvements to
the open space through annual dues, special assessments, etc. The owner shall
be authorized under its bylaws to place liens on the property of residents who
fall delinquent in payment of such dues, assessments, etc.
   (b)   In the event that the organization established to own and maintain
common open space shall at any time after establishment of the planned
development fail to maintain the common open space in reasonable order and
condition in accordance with the final development plan, the Planning and
Zoning Administrator may serve written notice upon such organization or upon
the residents of the planned conservation development setting forth the manner
in which the organization has failed to maintain the common open space in
reasonable condition. The notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies
of maintenance be cured within 30 calendar days thereof, and shall state the
date and place of a hearing thereon which shall be held within 14 calendar days
of the notice. At such hearing Council may modify the terms of the original
notice as to the deficiencies and may give an extension of time within which
they shall be cured. If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in
the modifications thereof shall not be cured within said 30 calendar days or
any extension thereof, Council, in order to preserve the taxable values of the
properties within the planned development and to prevent the common open space
from becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon said common open space and
maintain the same for a period of one year. Said entry and maintenance shall
not vest in the public any rights to use the common open space. Before the
expiration of said year, Council shall, upon its initiative or upon the request
of the organization theretofore responsible for the maintenance of the common
open space, call a public hearing upon notice to such organization, or to the
residents of the planned development, to be held by Council, at which hearing
such organization or the residents of the planned development shall show cause
why such maintenance by Council shall not, at the election of Council, continue
for a succeeding year. If Council determines such organization is ready and
able to maintain said common open space in reasonable condition, Council shall
cease to maintain said common open space at the end of said year. If Council
shall determine such organization is not ready and able to maintain said common
open space in a reasonable condition, Council may, in its discretion, continue
to maintain said common open space during the next succeeding year and subject
to a similar hearing and determination, in each year thereafter. The decision
of Council in any such case shall constitute a final administrative decision
subject to review as provided by law.
   (c)   The cost of such maintenance by the municipality shall be assessed
against the properties within the planned development that have a right of
enjoyment of the common open space, and shall become a tax lien on said
properties. The municipality, at the time of entering upon said common open
space for the purpose of maintenance, shall file a notice of such lien in the
office of the Franklin or Pickaway County Recorder, upon the properties
affected by such lien within the planned development.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1175
Overlay Districts
1175.01   (Reserved)
1175.02   (Reserved)
1175.03   (Reserved)
1175.04   Stream corridor protection policy.
1175.05   Stream Corridor Protection Zone.
1175.06   Conflicts.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Swimming pools - see P. & Z. §
1181.01
   Yard and frontage modifications - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1183
   Home occupations - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1187
   Signs - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1189
   Wireless communication facilities - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1193
   Accessory uses and structures - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1195
§ 1175.01 (RESERVED).
§ 1175.02 (RESERVED).
§ 1175.03 (RESERVED).
§ 1175.04 STREAM CORRIDOR PROTECTION POLICY.
   (a)   Except as noted herein, no open channels (natural or man-made) will be
enclosed within a storm sewer when an area is developed. This policy will apply
even when the open watercourse is located on a property line.
   (b)   If exceptions are granted on any project, it will be with the
requirement that any enclosure will convey flow from the entire tributary
drainage area up to the ten-year recurrence interval. A flood routing flow path
must be provided through the development site for all storms greater than the
ten-year recurrence interval. This flood routing path must be clearly shown on
the site development plans.
   (c)   For all natural or manmade open channels, a stream corridor protection
zone (riparian setback) will be required. This zone shall be kept in as natural
a state as possible so that it can perform its inherent function of erosion
protection, flood storage and water quality protection.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1175.05 STREAM CORRIDOR PROTECTION ZONE.
   (a)   The Stream Corridor Protection Zone (SCPZ) for streams within
Commercial Point are shown as "preservation" land use areas in the Village of
Commercial Point Comprehensive Plan. A copy of the mapped protection zones may
be obtained from the Planning and Zoning Administrator. The setback width on
any specific parcel will be that area indicated on the Comprehensive Plan and
as determined by the Municipal Engineer calculated using the methodology
specified in Commercial Point's Specifications, Materials, and Standard
Drawings Manual.
   (b)   The SCPZ must be clearly shown on site development plans.
   (c)   All applicable state and federal regulations shall be followed,
including Sections 401 and 404 or the Clean Water Act. No exceptions to this
rule will be allowed to raise flood elevations upstream of the project.
   (d)   All conveyances and conduits containing a stream, if allowed, shall
have the capacity to carry a minimum of a ten-year design storm from the entire
upstream drainage area. In addition, a flood routing flow path shall be
included to carry the 100-year storm flow. This flood routing path must be
clearly shown on the site development plans, and the applicant shall provide
stormwater calculations for the proposed enclosure and flood routing to the
municipality for approval.
   (e)   Construction Limitations.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this regulation, the SCPZ shall be
preserved in its natural state.
      (2)   Prior to any earth moving or clearing and grubbing activity on a
development property, the SCPZ shall be clearly delineated by the applicant or
their designated representative on the site. Such delineation shall also be
identified on the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Plan (see §
1115.10) and this delineation shall be maintained throughout soil disturbing
activity.
      (3)   No later than the conclusion of construction, the applicant shall
permanently delineate the SCPZ in an aesthetically harmonious manner, approved
by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, such that the location of the
riparian setback boundary defining the SCPZ is apparent to the casual observer
and that permits access to the zone.
      (4)   Language preventing property owners from constructing facilities
and performing activities that are prohibited within the SCPZ shall be shown on
the plat or separate instrument and reflected on all deeds.
      (5)   Land contained within the SCPZ may, at the applicant's option and
if approved by Council, be deeded in fee simple to the municipality.
Alternatively, the land contained within the SCPZ shall be preserved via
dedicated conservation easement or reserve.
      (6)   The applicant shall obtain all necessary permits from the Army
Corps of Engineers, OEPA and other regulatory agencies as needed. The applicant
is responsible for all permitting fees.
   (f)   Post-Construction Requirements.
      (1)   Permitted uses and activities.
         A.   Passive uses. Uses that are passive in character shall be
permitted in the SCPZ, including but not limited to, passive recreational uses,
as permitted by federal, state, and local laws, such as hiking, fishing,
picnicking and similar uses. Construction of paved trails to further such
passive recreation uses are also permitted. However, trails that become damaged
due to natural erosion shall not be repaired but shall be moved upland or
removed altogether.
         B.   Removal of damaged or diseased trees. Damaged or diseased trees
may be removed. Due to the potential for felled logs and branches to damage
downstream properties and/or block watercourses or otherwise exacerbate
flooding, logs and branches resulting from the removal of damaged or diseased
trees that are greater than six-inches in diameter at the cut end shall be cut
into sections no longer than six-feet, anchored to the shore or removed.
         C.   Revegetation and/or reforestation. The Planning and Zoning
Administrator maintains a list of plant and shrub species recommended for
stabilizing flood prone areas. Proper selection of species is dependent on soil
conditions, available water and amount of sun exposure. Proper species
selection will take into account these factors.
         D.   Public utilities. Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and/or water lines
and public utility transmission lines may be located within the riparian
setback and disturbances of the setback necessary to place and/or maintain such
utilities are also authorized. The placement, construction and maintenance of
such utilities shall minimize disturbance to riparian areas and shall mitigate
any necessary disturbances. The developer and/or landowner shall secure the
appropriate state and federal permits required for installations of this type.
Utilities that are parallel to the stream shall not be constructed or placed
within the SCPZ.
         E.   Public roadways. Public roadways may cross the riparian setback
and disturbances of the setback necessary to place and/or maintain the roadways
are authorized. The placement, construction and maintenance of the roadway
shall minimize disturbance to riparian areas and shall mitigate any necessary
disturbances. There shall be no more than two roadway crossings of the setback
within any proposed development. The developer and/or landowner shall secure
the appropriate state and federal permits required for installations of this
type.
         F.   Construction activities associated with properly permitted stream
restoration projects.
         G.   Disturbances resulting from permitted stream and/or wetland
mitigation projects provided that mitigation is to offset impacts to local
wetlands.
         H.   "Emergency channel maintenance activity" may be authorized by the
Village Engineer, as needed to restore and/or maintain the flood carrying
capacity of the main channel area. Such activity may include, but not be
limited to removal of offending trees or brush or the accumulation of sediment
in the main channel, as necessary to restore flood flow carrying capacity of
the main channel.
      (2)   Prohibited uses. Any use not authorized under these regulations
shall be prohibited in the SCPZ. By way of example, the following uses are
specifically prohibited, however prohibited uses are not limited to those
examples listed here.
         A.   Construction. There shall be no structures of any kind.
         B.   Dredging or filling. There shall be no drilling, filling,
dredging, grading or dumping of soils, spoils, liquid or solid materials. No
floodplain fill permits will be granted for areas within the SCPZ except those
that are required for activities listed as permitted uses above.
         C.   Motorized vehicles. There shall be no use of motorized vehicles
except as needed for activities associated with those listed as permitted uses
above.
         D.   Parking lots. There shall be no parking lots or other human made
impervious cover except as allowed above.
         E.   Stormwater detention facilities. Stormwater detention facilities
may be located adjacent to, but not within, the SCPZ unless otherwise approved
by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
         F.   Platted lots. No part of any lot to be developed will be located
within the SCPZ.
      (3)   Non-conforming uses and structures within the SCPZ.
         A.   Any non-conforming use, existing at the time of passage of this
regulation and within a SCPZ that is not permitted under this regulation, may
be continued but shall not be changed to a new use or enlarged unless changed
to a use permitted under this regulation.
         B.   A non-conforming use, existing at the time of passage of this
regulation and within a SCPZ that is not permitted under this regulation, may
be continued but shall not have the existing building footprint or roofline
expanded or enlarged.
         C.   A non-conforming use, existing at the time of passage of this
regulation and within a SCPZ that has substantial damage and that is
discontinued, terminated, or abandoned for a period of six months or more may
not be revived, restored or re-established. Substantial damage is defined in §
1149.04(d) as damages that equate to greater than half of the fair value of the
property.
   (g)   Maintenance of the Stream Corridor Protection Zone.
      (1)   Disturbance of natural vegetation. There shall be no disturbance of
the natural vegetation at any time, including construction of the remainder of
the site, except for such plantings as are consistent with these regulations;
for removal of invasive species and their replacement with native vegetation;
and for the passive enjoyment, access and maintenance of landscaping or lawns
existing at the time of passage of these regulations except as needed for
activities associated with those listed above.
      (2)   Recommended vegetation for stabilizing floodprone areas. Proper
selection of species for stabilization of flood prone areas is dependent on
several factors, including soil conditions, available water and amount of sun
exposure. Proper species selection and installation will take into account
these factors. A list of appropriate plant species is maintained by the
Planning and Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1175.06 CONFLICTS.
   In cases where the requirements and standards of the Overlay District
conflicts with similar requirements and standards of the underlying zoning
district, the Overlay District shall supersede such underlying zoning district.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1177
Floodplain District (FP)
1177.01   General provisions.
1177.02   Definitions.
1177.03   Administration.
1177.04   Use and development standards for flood hazard reduction.
1177.05   Appeals and variances.
1177.06   Enforcement.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Basis of zoning districts - see R.C. § 713.10
   Marking flood areas - see R.C. § 1521.14
   Conservancy districts - see R.C. § 6101.04
§ 1177.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Statutory Authorization. Article XVIII, Section 3 of the Ohio
Constitution grants municipalities the legal authority to adopt land use
control measures for promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of its
citizens. Therefore, the Village Council of Commercial Point, State of Ohio,
does ordain as follows.
   (b)   Findings of Fact. Commercial Point, Ohio has special flood hazard
areas that are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life
and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection
and relief, and impairment of the tax base. Additionally, structures that are
inadequately elevated, flood proofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage
also contribute to the flood loss. In order to minimize the threat of such
damages and to achieve the purposes hereinafter set forth, these regulations
are adopted.
   (c)   Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of these regulations to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to:
      (1)   Protect human life and health,
      (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects,
      (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public,
      (4)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions,
      (5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard,
      (6)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the proper use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to protect property and
minimize future flood blight areas,
      (7)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions,
      (8)   Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within
and near flood prone areas,
      (9)   Ensure that the flood storage and conveyance functions of the
floodplain are maintained,
      (10)   Minimize the impact of development on the natural, beneficial
values of the floodplain,
      (11)   Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or
environmentally incompatible, and
      (12)   Meet community participation requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
   (d)   Methods of Reducing Flood Loss. In order to accomplish its purposes,
these regulations include methods and provisions for:
      (1)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in flood heights or velocities,
      (2)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction,
      (3)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters,
      (4)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, excavating, and other
development which may increase flood damage, and
      (5)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
   (e)   Lands to Which These Regulations Apply. These regulations shall apply
to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Commercial
Point, Ohio as identified in division (f) of this section, including any
additional areas of special flood hazard annexed by Commercial Point, Ohio.
   (f)   Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. For the
purposes of these regulations, the following studies and/or maps are adopted:
      (1)   "Flood Insurance Rate Map Pickaway County, Ohio and Incorporated
Areas" and "Flood Insurance Study Pickaway County, Ohio and Incorporated Areas"
both effective September 19, 2007.
      (2)   Other studies and/or maps that may be relied upon for establishment
of the flood protection elevation, delineation of the 100-year floodplain,
floodways or delineation of other areas of special flood hazard include:
Floodplain Study in Franklin and Pickaway County, Ohio.
      (3)   Any hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis authored by a
registered professional engineer in the State of Ohio which has been approved
by Commercial Point, Ohio as required by §
1177.04(c).
      (4)   Any revisions to the aforementioned maps and/or studies are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations. Such maps
and/or studies are part of the Village of Commercial Point Comprehensive Plan,
and may be reviewed at 10 West Scioto Street, Commercial Point, Ohio.
   (g)   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. These regulations are not
intended to repeal any existing ordinances including subdivision regulations,
zoning or building codes. In the event of a conflict between these regulations
and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall be followed. These
regulations shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement but the
land subject to such interests shall also be governed by the regulations.
   (h)   Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of these
regulations, all provisions shall be:
      (1)   Considered as minimum requirements,
      (2)   Liberally construed in favor of Commercial Point, Ohio, and
      (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes. Where a provision of these regulations may be in conflict with
a state or federal law, such state or federal law shall take precedence over
these regulations.
   (i)   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection
required by these regulations is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes
and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can
and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or
natural causes. These regulations do not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damage. These regulations shall not create liability on the
part of Commercial Point, Ohio, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damage that results from reliance on
these regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
   (j)   Severability. Should any section or provision of these regulations be
declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the regulations as a whole, or any part thereof
other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1177.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in these
regulations shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give these regulations the most reasonable application.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure on the same lot with, and of a nature
customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure.
   APPEAL. A request for review of the floodplain administrator's
interpretation of any provision of these regulations or a request for a
variance.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. The base flood may also be referred to as the 1% chance annual
flood or 100 year flood.
   BASE (100-YEAR) FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The water surface elevation of the
base flood in relation to a specified datum, usually the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, and
usually expressed in feet mean sea level (MSL). In Zone AO areas, the base
flood elevation is the natural grade elevation plus the depth number (from one
to three feet).
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials. (Note §
1153.13)
   ENCLOSURE BELOW THE LOWEST FLOOR. See LOWEST FLOOR.
   EXECUTIVE ORDER 11988 (FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT). Issued by President Carter in
1977, this order requires that no federally assisted activities be conducted in
or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard areas, unless
there is no practicable alternative.
   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA). The agency with the overall
responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
   FILL. A deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters, and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). Usually the initial map, produced by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, or U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development, for a community depicting approximate special flood hazard areas.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has delineated the areas of special flood hazard.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RISK ZONES. Zone designations on FHBMs and FIRMs that
indicate the magnitude of the flood hazard in specific areas of a community.
Following are the zone definitions:
      (1)   Zone A: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood;
base flood elevations are not determined.
      (2)   Zones A1-30 and Zone AE: Special flood hazard areas inundated by
the 100-year flood; base flood elevations are determined.
      (3)   Zone AO: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood
with flood depths of one to three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain);
average depths are determined.
      (4)   Zone AH: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood
with flood depths of one to three feet (usually areas of ponding); base flood
elevations are determined.
      (5)   Zone A99: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood to be protected from the 100-year flood by a federal flood protection
system under construction; no base flood elevations are determined.
      (6)   Zone B and Zone X (shaded): Areas of 500-year flood; areas subject
to the 100-year flood with average depths of less than one foot or with
contributing drainage area less than one square mile; and areas protected by
levees from the base flood.
      (7)   Zone C and Zone X (unshaded): Areas determined to be outside the
500-year floodplain.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official report in which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has provided flood  profiles, floodway boundaries (sometimes shown
on flood boundary and floodway maps), and the water surface elevations of the
base flood.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The base flood elevation plus one and one-
half feet of freeboard. In areas where no base flood elevations exist from any
authoritative source, the flood protection elevation can be historical flood
elevations, or base flood elevations determined and/or approved by the
floodplain administrator.
   FLOODWAY. 
      (1)   A floodway is the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that have been reserved in order to pass the base flood
discharge. A floodway is typically determined through a hydraulic and
hydrologic engineering analysis such that the cumulative increase in the water
surface elevation of the base flood discharge is no more than a designated
height. In no case shall the designated height be more than one foot at any
point within the community.
      (2)   The floodway is an extremely hazardous area, and is usually
characterized by any of the following: Moderate to high velocity flood waters,
high potential for debris and projectile impacts, and moderate to high erosion
forces.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level
for the purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for
the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than
the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such
as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, and the
hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listings on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district; or
      (3)   Individually listed on the State of Ohio's inventory of historic
places maintained by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office.
   HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING ANALYSIS. An analysis performed by a
professional engineer, registered in the State of Ohio, in accordance with
standard engineering practices as accepted by FEMA, used to determine flood
elevations and/or floodway boundaries.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). An official FEMA determination, by letter, to
amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and
floodway maps, and flood insurance studies. LOMC's are broken down into the
following categories:
      (1)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). A revision based on technical data
showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood
hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and
establishes that a specific property is not located in a special flood hazard
area.
      (2)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A revision based on technical data
that, usually due to manmade changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood
elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. One
common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a determination concerning whether a
structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation
and is, therefore, excluded from the special flood hazard area.
      (3)   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A formal review and
comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum
National Flood Insurance Program floodplain management criteria. A CLOMR does
not amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and
floodway maps, or flood insurance studies.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement) of a structure. This definition excludes an "enclosure below the
lowest floor" which is an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely
for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, provided that such enclosure is built in accordance with the
applicable design requirements specified in these regulations for enclosures
below the lowest floor.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". For the purposes
of these regulations, a manufactured home includes manufactured homes and
mobile homes as defined in R.C. Chapter 3733.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. As specified in the Ohio Administrative Code 3701-
27- 01, a manufactured home park means any tract of land upon which three or
more manufactured homes, used for habitation are parked, either free of charge
or for revenue purposes, and includes any roadway, building, structure,
vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the facilities of the
park. A tract of land that is subdivided and the individual lots are not for
rent or rented, but are for sale or sold for the purpose of installation of
manufactured homes on the lots, is not a manufactured home park, even though
three or more manufactured homes are parked thereon, if the roadways are
dedicated to the local government authority.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The NFIP is a federal program
enabling property owners in participating communities to purchase insurance
protection against losses from  flooding. This insurance is designed to provide
an insurance alternative to disaster assistance to meet the escalating costs of
repairing damage to buildings and their contents caused by floods.
Participation in the NFIP is based on an agreement between local communities
and the federal government that states if a community will adopt and enforce
floodplain management regulations to reduce future flood risks to all
development in special flood hazard areas, the federal government will make
flood insurance available within the community as a financial protection
against flood loss.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced
on or after the initial effective date of the Commercial Point, Ohio Flood
Insurance Rate Map, June 4, 1980, and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
   PERSON. Includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association, or any other entity, including state and local
governments and agencies. An agency is further defined in R.C. § 111.15 as any
governmental entity of the state and includes, but is not limited to, any
board, department, division, commission, bureau, society, council, institution,
state college or university, community college district, technical college
district, or state community college. "Agency" does not include the general
assembly, the controlling board, the adjutant general's department, or any
court.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is (1) built on a single chassis, (2)
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, (3)
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and
(4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ARCHITECT. A person registered to engage in the
practice of architecture under the provisions of R.C. §§ 4703.01 to 4703.19.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A person registered as a professional
engineer under R.C. Chapter 4733.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL SURVEYOR. A person registered as a professional
surveyor under R.C. Chapter 4733.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Also known as AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD, it
is the land in the floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in
any given year. Special flood hazard areas are designated by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency on flood insurance rate maps, flood insurance
studies, flood boundary and floodway maps and flood hazard boundary maps as
Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, and A99. Special flood hazard areas may also refer
to areas that are flood prone and designated from other federal state or local
sources of data including but not limited to historical flood information
reflecting high water marks, previous flood inundation areas, and flood prone
soils associated with a watercourse.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. The date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was  within 180 calendar days of the permit
date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of a building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, manufactured home, or gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its' before damaged condition would
equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial
damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include:
      (1)   Any improvement to a structure which is considered "new
construction";
      (2)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified prior to the application for a development permit by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
      (3)   Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure".
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the standards of these regulations
consistent with the variance conditions herein.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with these regulations.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1177.03 ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The Planning and Zoning
Administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter and
is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator.
   (b)   Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. The
duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include but
are not limited to:
      (1)   Evaluate applications for permits to develop in special flood
hazard areas.
      (2)   Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide flood hazard and flood
protection elevation information.
      (3)   Issue permits to develop in special flood hazard areas when the
provisions of these regulations have been met, or refuse to issue the same in
the event of noncompliance.
      (4)   Inspect buildings and lands to determine whether any violations of
these regulations have been committed.
      (5)   Make and permanently keep all records for public inspection
necessary for the administration of these regulations including flood insurance
rate maps, letters of map amendment and revision, records of issuance and
denial of permits to develop in special flood hazard areas, determinations of
whether development is in or out of special flood hazard areas for the purpose
of issuing floodplain development permits, elevation certificates, variances,
and records of enforcement actions taken for violations of these regulations.
      (6)   Enforce the provisions of these regulations.
      (7)   Provide information, testimony, or other evidence as needed during
variance hearings.
      (8)   Coordinate map maintenance activities and FEMA follow-up.
      (9)   Conduct substantial damage determinations to determine whether
existing structures, damaged from any source and in special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, must meet the development standards of these regulations.
   (c)   Floodplain Development Permits. It shall be unlawful for any person to
begin construction or other development activity including but not limited to
filling; grading; construction; alteration, remodeling, or expanding any
structure; or alteration of any watercourse wholly within, partially within or
in contact with any identified special flood hazard area, as established in §
1177.01(f), until a floodplain development permit is obtained from the
Floodplain Administrator. Such floodplain development permit shall show that
the proposed development activity is in conformity with the provisions of these
regulations. No such permit shall be issued by the Floodplain Administrator
until the requirements of these regulations have been met.
   (d)   Application Required. An application for a floodplain development
permit shall be required for all development activities located wholly within,
partially within, or in contact with an identified special flood hazard area.
Such application shall be made by the owner of the property or his/her
authorized agent, herein referred to as the applicant, prior to the actual
commencement of such construction on a form furnished for that purpose. Where
it is unclear whether a development site is in a special flood hazard area, the
Floodplain Administrator may require an application for a floodplain
development permit to determine the development's location. Such applications
shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and topography of the area in question; the location of existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location
of the foregoing.
      (2)   Elevation of the existing, natural ground where structures are
proposed.
      (3)   Elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed
structures.
      (4)   Such other material and information as may be requested by the
Floodplain Administrator to determine conformance with, and provide enforcement
of these regulations.
      (5)   Technical analyses conducted by the appropriate design professional
registered in the State of Ohio and submitted with an application for a
floodplain development permit when applicable:
         A.   Flood proofing certification for non-residential flood proofed
structure as required in §
1177.04(e).
         B.   Certification that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor of
a structure not meeting the design requirements of §
1177.04(d)(5) are designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces.
         C.   Description of any watercourse alteration or relocation that the
flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished, and
maintenance assurances as required in §
1177.04(i)(3).
         D.   A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot in special flood hazard areas
where the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided base flood
elevations but no floodway as required by §
1177.04(i)(2).
         E.   A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis showing impact of
any development on flood heights in an identified floodway as required by §
1177.04(i)(1).
         F.   Generation of base flood elevation(s) for subdivision and large
scale developments as required by §
1177.04(c).
      (6)   A floodplain development permit fee of $500 which includes the
Village Engineer review fee shall be paid by the property owner or applicant,
payable to the General Fund.
   (e)   Review and Approval of a Floodplain Development Permit Application.
      (1)   Review.
         A.   After receipt of a complete application, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the application to ensure that the standards of
these regulations have been met. No floodplain development permit application
shall be reviewed until all information required in division (d) of this
section has been received by the Floodplain Administrator.
         B.   The Floodplain Administrator shall review all floodplain
development permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have been
received from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which
prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining
such permits as required including permits issued by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act and Section 404 of the
Clean Water Act, and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency under Section 401
of the Clean Water Act.
      (2)   Approval. Within 30 calendar days after the receipt of a complete
application, the Floodplain Administrator shall either approve or disapprove
the application. If an application is approved, a floodplain development permit
shall be issued. All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon
the commencement of work within one year. A floodplain development permit shall
expire one year after issuance unless the permitted activity has been
substantially begun and is thereafter pursued to completion.
   (f)   Inspections. The Floodplain Administrator shall make periodic
inspections at appropriate times throughout the period of construction in order
to monitor compliance with permit conditions.
   (g)   Post-Construction Certifications Required. The following as-built
certifications are required after a floodplain development permit has been
issued:
      (1)   For new or substantially improved residential structures, or
nonresidential structures that have been elevated, the applicant shall have a
Federal Emergency Management Agency Elevation Certificate completed by a
registered surveyor to record as-built elevation data. For elevated structures
in Zone A and Zone AO areas without a base flood elevation, the elevation
certificate may be completed by the property owner or owner's representative.
      (2)   For all development activities subject to the standards of division
(j)(1) of this section, a letter of map revision.
   (h)   Revoking a Floodplain Development Permit. A floodplain development
permit shall be revocable, if among other things, the actual development
activity does not conform to the terms of the application and permit granted
thereon. In the event of the revocation of a permit, an appeal may be taken to
Council in accordance with §
1177.05.
   (i)   Exemption from Filing a Development Permit. An application for a
floodplain development permit shall not be required for:
      (1)   Maintenance work such as roofing, painting, and basement sealing,
or for small nonstructural development activities (except for filling and
grading) valued at less than $5,000.
      (2)   Development activities in an existing or proposed manufactured home
park that are under the authority of the Ohio Department of Health and subject
to the flood damage reduction provisions of the Ohio Administrative Code
Section 3701.
      (3)   Major utility facilities permitted by the Ohio Power Sitting Board
under R.C. Chapter 4906.
      (4)   Hazardous waste disposal facilities permitted by the Hazardous
Waste Sitting Board under R.C. Chapter 3734.
      (5)   Development activities undertaken by a federal agency and which are
subject to Federal Executive Order 11988 - Floodplain Management.
   Any proposed action exempt from filing for a floodplain development permit
is also exempt from the standards of these regulations.
   (j)   Map Maintenance Activities. To meet National Flood Insurance Program
minimum requirements to have flood data reviewed and approved by FEMA, and to
ensure that the municipality's flood maps, studies and other data identified in
§
1177.01(f) accurately represent flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain
management criteria are based on current data, the following map maintenance
activities are identified:
      (1)   Requirement to submit new technical data.
         A.   For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations
or base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical data
reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six months of the date such
information becomes available. These development proposals include:
            1.   Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood
elevations or alter floodway boundaries;
            2.   Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures
where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard
area;
            3.   Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or
elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts; and
            4.   Subdivision or large scale development proposals requiring,
the establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with division (c) of
this section.
         B.   It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data,
required in accordance with division (j)(1) of this section, prepared in a
format required for a conditional letter of map revision or letter of map
revision, and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for these map
revisions shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
         C.   The Floodplain Administrator shall require a conditional letter
of map revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for:
            1.   Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood
elevation; and
            2.   Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation
by more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations
but no floodway.
         D.   Floodplain development permits issued by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a letter of map
revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to division (j)(1) of
this section.
      (2)   Right to submit new technical data. The Floodplain Administrator
may request changes to any of the information shown on an effective map that
does not impact floodplain or floodway delineations or base flood elevations,
such as labeling or planimetric details. Such a submission shall include
appropriate supporting documentation made in writing by the Mayor of Commercial
Point, and may be submitted at any time.
      (3)   Annexation I detachment. Upon occurrence, the Floodplain
Administrator shall notify FEMA in writing whenever the boundaries of the
municipality have been modified by annexation or the community has assumed
authority over an area, or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce
floodplain management regulations for a particular area. In order that the
municipality's flood insurance rate map accurately represent the municipality
boundaries, include within such notification a copy of a map of the
municipality suitable for reproduction, clearly showing the new corporate
limits or the new area for which the municipality has assumed or relinquished
floodplain management regulatory authority.
   (k)   Data Use and Flood Map Interpretation. The following guidelines shall
apply to the use and interpretation of maps and other data showing areas of
special flood hazard:
      (1)   In areas where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard areas,
or in FEMA identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and
floodway data have not been identified, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review and reasonably utilize any other flood hazard data available from a
federal, state, or other source.
      (2)   Base flood elevations and floodway boundaries produced on FEMA
flood maps and studies shall take precedence over base flood elevations and
floodway boundaries by any other source that reflect a reduced floodway width
and/or lower base flood elevations. Other sources of data, showing increased
base flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FEMA flood
maps and studies, shall be reasonably used by the Floodplain Administrator.
      (3)   When preliminary flood insurance rate maps or flood insurance study
have been provided by FEMA:
         A.   Upon the issuance of a letter of final determination by the FEMA,
the preliminary flood hazard data shall be used and replace all previously
existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA for the purposes of administering
these regulations.
         B.   Prior to the issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA,
the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall only be required where no base
flood elevations and/or floodway areas exist or where the preliminary base
flood elevations or floodway area exceed the base flood elevations and/or
floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA. Such
preliminary data may be subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA.
      (4)   The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where
needed, as to the exact location of the flood boundaries and areas of special
flood hazard. A person contesting the determination of the location of the
boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation
as provided in §
1177.05 Appeals and Variances.
      (5)   Where a map boundary showing an area of special flood hazard and
field elevations disagree, the base flood elevations or flood protection
elevations (as found on an elevation profile, floodway data table, established
high water marks, etc.) shall prevail.
   (l)   Substantial Damage Determinations. Damages to structures may result
from a variety of causes including tornado, wind, heavy snow, flood, fire, etc.
After such a damage event, the Floodplain Administrator shall:
      (1)   Determine whether damaged structures are located in special flood
hazard areas;
      (2)   Conduct substantial damage determinations for damaged structures
located in special flood hazard areas; and
      (3)   Make reasonable attempt to notify owners of substantially damaged
structures of the need to obtain a floodplain development permit prior to
repair, rehabilitation, or reconstruction.
   Additionally, the Floodplain Administrator may implement other measures to
assist with the substantial damage determination and subsequent repair process.
These measures include issuing press releases, public service announcements;
and other public information materials related to the floodplain development
permits and repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other federal,
state, and local agencies to assist with substantial damage determinations;
providing owners of damaged structures materials and other information related
to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood hazard areas; and
assist owners of substantially damaged structures with increased cost of
compliance insurance claims.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1177.04 USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
   The following use and development standards apply to development wholly
within, partially within, or in contact with any special flood hazard area as
established in §§
1177.01(f) or
1177.03(k)(1):
   (a)   Use Regulations.
      (1)   Permitted uses. All uses not otherwise prohibited in this section
or any other applicable land use regulation adopted by the municipality are
allowed provided they meet the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Prohibited uses.
         A.   Structures designed or used for human habitation.
         B.   The storage or processing of materials that are pollutants,
buoyant, flammable, poisonous, explosive, or could be injurious to human,
animal, or plant life in time of flooding, or that have a high flood damage
potential.
         C.   Garbage and waste disposal facilities.
         D.   Private water supply systems in all special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, permitted under R.C. Chapter 3701.
         E.   Infectious waste treatment facilities in all special flood hazard
areas, permitted under R.C. Chapter 3734.
   (b)   Water and Wastewater Systems. The following standards apply to all
water supply, sanitary sewerage and waste disposal systems not otherwise
regulated by the Ohio Revised Code:
      (1)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems;
      (2)   New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and,
      (3)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to or contamination from them during flooding.
   (c)   Subdivisions and Large Developments.
      (1)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in these
regulations.
      (2)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
      (3)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage.
      (4)   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation
data are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for all subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments containing at least 50 lots or five
acres, whichever is less.
      (5)   The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical data
to FEMA in §
1177.03(j)(1)A.4. when a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis is completed that
generates base flood elevations as required by division (c)(4) of this section.
   (d)   Residential Structures.
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
Where a structure, including its foundation members, is elevated on fill to or
above the base flood elevation, the requirements for anchoring and construction
materials resistant to flood damage are satisfied.
      (2)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with methods and materials resistant to flood damage.
      (3)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
      (4)   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to or above the flood protection elevation; or the structure
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet
above the highest adjacent natural grade; whichever is more restrictive.
      (5)   New construction and substantial improvements, including
manufactured homes, that do not have basements and that are elevated to the
flood protection elevation using pilings, columns, posts, or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to allow unimpeded movement of flood
waters may have an enclosure below the lowest floor provided the enclosure
meets the following standards:
         A.   Be used only for the parking of vehicles, building access, or
storage; and
         B.   Be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters; or
         C.   Have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total
net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area,
and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot above grade.
The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
      (6)   Manufactured homes shall be affixed to a permanent foundation and
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
      (7)   Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure, shall
be exempt from the development standards of division (d) of this section.
      (8)   New construction and substantial improvement shall have adequate
drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from the structure.
   (e)   Nonresidential Structures.
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall meet the requirements of
divisions (d)(1) through (d)(3) and (d)(5) through (d)(7) of this section.
      (2)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other non-residential structure shall either have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above the level of the flood
protection elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall meet all of the following standards:
         A.   Be dry flood proofed so that the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of the
flood protection elevation;
         B.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and,
         C.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect,
through the use of a Federal Emergency Management Agency Floodproofing
Certificate, that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
division (e) of this section.
      (3)   Where flood protection data are not available the structure shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet above the
highest adjacent natural grade.
   (f)   Accessory Structures. Relief to the elevation or dry flood proofing
standards may be granted for accessory structures containing no more than 600
square feet. Such structures must meet the following standards:
      (1)   They shall not be used for human habitation;
      (2)   They shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
      (3)   They shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the
minimum resistance to the flow of flood waters;
      (4)   They shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
      (5)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall
be elevated or flood-proofed to or above the level of the flood protection
elevation; and
      (6)   They shall meet the opening requirements of division (d)(5)C. of
this section;
   (g)   Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles must meet at least one of
the following standards:
      (1)   They shall not be located on sites in special flood hazard areas
for more than 180 calendar days, or
      (2)   They must be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
      (3)   They must meet all standards of division (d) of this section.
   (h)   Above Ground Gas or Liquid Storage Tanks. All above ground gas or
liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral movement
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads.
   (i)   Assurance of Flood Carrying Capacity. Pursuant to the purpose and
methods of reducing flood damage stated in these regulations, the following
additional standards are adopted to assure that the reduction of the flood
carrying capacity of watercourses is minimized:
      (1)   Development in floodways.
         A.   In floodway areas, development shall cause no increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Prior to issuance of
a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer,
demonstrating that the proposed development would not result in any increase in
the base flood elevation; or
         B.   Development in floodway areas causing increases in the base flood
elevation may be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the
applicant:
            1.   Meet the requirements to submit technical data in §
1177.03(j)(1);
            2.   An evaluation of alternatives which would not result in
increased base flood elevations and an explanation why these alternatives are
not feasible;
            3.   Certification that no structures are located in areas which
would be impacted by the increased base flood elevation;
            4.   Documentation of individual legal notices to all impacted
property owners within and outside the community, explaining the impact of the
proposed action on their property; and
            5.   Concurrence of the Mayor of Commercial Point and the chief
executive officer of any other communities impacted by the proposed actions.
      (2)   Development in riverine areas with base flood elevations but no
floodways.
         A.   In riverine special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA where
base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been designated,
the cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point. Prior to issuance of a floodplain
development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer, demonstrating that
this standard has been met; or,
         B.   Development in riverine special flood hazard areas identified by
FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been
designated causing more than one foot increase in the base flood elevation may
be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the applicant:
            1.   An evaluation of alternatives which would result in an
increase of one foot or less of the base flood elevation and an explanation why
these alternatives are not feasible;
            2.   Division (i)(1)B.1. and 3. through 5.
      (3)   Alterations of a watercourse. For the purpose of these regulations,
a watercourse is altered when any change occurs within its banks. The extent of
the banks shall be established by a field determination of the "bankfull
stage." The field determination of "bankfull stage" shall be based on methods
presented in Chapter 7 of the USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-
245, Stream Channel Reference Sites: An Illustrated Guide to Field Technique or
other applicable publication available from a federal, state, or other
authoritative source. For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse,
the following standards apply:
         A.   The bankfull flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a description of the
extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development, and certification by a registered professional engineer
that the bankfull flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be
diminished.
         B.   Adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the
Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water, must be notified prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Evidence of such notification
must be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
         C.   The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary
maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood carrying capacity will not be diminished. The Floodplain
Administrator may require the permit holder to enter into an agreement with the
municipality specifying the maintenance responsibilities. If an agreement is
required, it shall be made a condition of the floodplain development permit.
         D.   The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical
data in §
1177.03(j)(1)A.3. when an alteration of a watercourse results in the relocation
or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1177.05 APPEALS AND VARIANCES.
   (a)   Appeals Board. Council shall hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination
made by the Floodplain Administrator in the administration or enforcement of
this chapter.
   (b)   Powers and Duties.
      (1)   Council shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is
an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
Floodplain Administrator in the administration or enforcement of these
regulations.
      (2)   Authorize variances in accordance with division (d) of this
section.
   (c)   Appeals.
      (1)   Any person affected by any notice and order, or other official
action of the Floodplain Administrator may request and shall be granted a
hearing on the matter before Council provided that such person shall file,
within ten calendar days of the date of such notice and order, or other
official action, a statement of the grounds for such hearing or for the
mitigation of any item appearing on any order of the Floodplain Administrator's
decision. Such appeal shall be in writing, signed and dated by the applicant,
and be filed with the Floodplain Administrator. Upon receipt of the appeal, the
Floodplain Administrator shall transmit said notice and all pertinent
information on which the Floodplain Administrator's decision was made to
Council.
      (2)   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, Council shall fix a
reasonable time for the appeal not to exceed 60 calendar days from the date of
receipt of the appeal, give notice in writing to parties in interest, and
decide the appeal within a reasonable time after it is submitted.
   (d)   Variances. Any person believing that the use and development standards
of these regulations would result in unnecessary hardship may file an
application for a variance. Council shall have the power to authorize, in
specific cases, such variances from the standards of these regulations, not
inconsistent with Federal regulations, as will not be contrary to the public
interest where, owning to special conditions of the lot or parcel, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of these regulations would result in unnecessary
hardship.
      (1)   Application for a variance.
         A.   Any owner, or agent thereof, of property for which a variance is
sought shall make an application for a variance by filing it with the
Floodplain Administrator, who upon receipt of the variance shall transmit it to
Council.
         B.   Such application at a minimum shall contain the following
information: Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; legal
description of the property; parcel map; description of the existing use;
description of the proposed use; location of the floodplain; description of the
variance sought; and reason for the variance request.
         C.   A fee as stipulated by ordinance shall be paid by the applicant
payable to the General Fund.
      (2)   Notice for public hearing. The Council shall schedule and hold a
public hearing within 30 calendar days after the receipt of an application for
a variance from the Floodplain Administrator. Prior to the hearing, a notice of
such hearing shall be given in one or more newspapers of general circulation in
the community at least 30 calendar days before the date of the hearing.
      (3)   Public hearing. At such hearing the applicant shall present such
statements and evidence as Council requires. In considering such variance
applications, Council shall consider and make findings of fact on all
evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of
these regulations, and the following factors:
         A.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
         B.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage.
         C.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
         D.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community.
         E.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
         F.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
         G.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development.
         H.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area.
         I.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
         J.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
         K.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         A.   A showing of good and sufficient cause,
         B.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the property.
Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the requirements of these
regulations does not constitute an exceptional hardship to the applicant,
         C.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in these regulations;
additional threats to public safety; extraordinary public expense, nuisances,
fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws,
         D.   A determination that the structure or other development is
protected by methods to minimize flood damages, and
         E.   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   Upon consideration of the above factors and the purposes of these
regulations, Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as
it deems necessary to further the purposes of these regulations.
      (5)   Other conditions for variances.
         A.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if
any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
         B.   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing items in division (d)(3)A. through K. of
this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-
half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
         C.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
   (e)   Procedure at Hearings.
      (1)   All testimony shall be given under oath.
      (2)   A complete record of the proceedings shall be kept, except
confidential deliberations of Council, but including all documents presented
and a verbatim record of the testimony of all witnesses.
      (3)   The applicant shall proceed first to present evidence and testimony
in support of the appeal or variance.
      (4)   The Floodplain Administrator may present evidence or testimony in
opposition to the appeal or variance.
      (5)   All witnesses shall be subject to cross-examination by the adverse
party or their counsel.
      (6)   Evidence that is not admitted may be proffered and shall become
part of the record for appeal.
      (7)   Council shall issue subpoenas upon written request for the
attendance of witnesses. A reasonable deposit to cover the cost of issuance and
service shall be collected in advance.
      (8)   The decision of Council may be announced at the conclusion of the
hearing or the decision may be issued in writing within a reasonable time after
the hearing.
   (f)   Appeal to the Court. Those aggrieved by the decision of Council may
appeal such decision to the Franklin County or Pickaway County, as applicable,
Court of Common Pleas, as provided in R.C. Chapter 2506.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1177.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Compliance Required.
      (1)   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, erected,
constructed, reconstructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or altered
without full compliance with the terms of these regulations and all other
applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of these
regulations, unless specifically exempted from filing for a development permit
as stated in §
1177.03(i).
      (2)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit shall be a
violation of these regulations and shall be punishable in accordance with
division (c) of this section.
      (3)   Floodplain development permits issued on the basis of plans and
applications approved by the Floodplain Administrator authorize only the use,
and arrangement, set forth in such approved plans and applications or
amendments thereto. Use, arrangement, or construction contrary to that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and punishable in
accordance with division (c) of this section.
   (b)   Notice of Violation. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator determines
that there has been a violation of any provision of these regulations, he shall
give notice of such violation to the person responsible therefore and order
compliance with these regulations as hereinafter provided. Such notice and
order shall:
      (1)   Be put in writing on an appropriate form;
      (2)   Include a list of violations, referring to the section or sections
of these regulations that have been violated, and order remedial action which,
if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of these regulations;
      (3)   Specify a reasonable time for performance;
      (4)   Advise the owner, operator, or occupant of the right to appeal;
      (5)   Be served on the owner, occupant, or agent in person. However, this
notice and order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner,
occupant, or agent if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to
the person's last known mailing address, residence, or place of business, and/
or a copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or on the dwelling affected.
   (c)   Violations and Penalties. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed to be a
strict liability offense, and shall constitute a fourth degree misdemeanor. Any
person who violates these regulations or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined or imprisoned as provided
by the laws of the municipality. Each day such violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
municipality from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation. The municipality shall prosecute any violation of these
regulations in accordance with the penalties stated herein.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1179
Exceptional Use District (EU)
1179.01   Purpose.
1179.02   Special uses.
1179.03   Application procedure.
1179.04   Criteria for review.
1179.05   Review procedure.
1179.06   Effect of approval; time extension or modification.
1179.07   Development standards.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Special provisions - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1181
   Height, area and yard modifications - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1183
   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1185
   Signs - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1189
   Landscaping and screening - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1191
   Wireless communication facilities - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1193
   Accessory uses and structures - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1195
§ 1179.01 PURPOSE.
   (a)   The Exceptional Use District (EU) is designed to permit certain uses
which are not addressed in any other adopted district and which are of a nature
as to warrant individual consideration and regulation due to unique demands
placed upon the public health, safety and general welfare and the requirements
of location and development that generally are peculiar to these uses.
   (b)   The Exceptional Use District (EU) is intended to allow these uses to
be suitably located and developed to appropriate and necessary standards of
development in relation to other land uses and development with a minimum of
conflict, without undue demand on necessary public services and facilities, and
without adverse impact on the natural environment. To this end, these uses are
intended to be developed in a manner of appropriate architectural, engineering,
and landscape design and layout with necessary space or other provisions
regarding development or operation to overcome any obnoxious or hazardous
effect on adjacent lands as such effect may be a potential in the proposed use.
   (c)   The Exceptional Use District (EU) is a holding district for recently
annexed land into the Village of Commercial Point until a development plan is
submitted. Any change to the current use of the annexed property is required to
go through the rezoning process of
Chapter 1143.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1179.02 SPECIAL USES.
   (a)   Land or buildings may be approved as permitted uses in the Exceptional
Use District (EU) provided that such use is not a permitted or conditional use
in any other district. For purposes of this section:
      (1)   PAWNBROKER means a person engaged in the business of lending money
on deposit or pledges of personal property, other than securities, printed
evidence of indebtedness, titles, deeds, or bills of sale, at a total charge,
rate of interest, or discount or other remuneration in excess of 8% per annum,
and includes a person engaged in the business of purchasing personal property
from another person with an agreement that the personal property will be made
available to that person for repurchase with an agreed-to-time period for an
amount greater than the price originally paid to that other person for the
purchase of property.
      (2)   PLASMA means the fluid portion of blood that has been stabilized
against clotting, and is collected by plasmapheresis.
      (3)   PLASMAPHERESIS means a procedure in which blood is drawn from a
donor, the plasma is separated from the formed elements, and the formed
elements are returned to the donor during a single visit to the plasmapheresis
center, but excludes such a procedure performed for the purpose of improving
the health of a donor.
      (4)   PLASMAPHERESIS CENTER means a blood bank or other establishment
except a hospital that collects plasma.
   (b)   The Exceptional Use District shall be limited to the following issues:
      (1)   Golf club, country club, fishing club or lake, gun club, riding
stable, including boarding of animals or similar recreational facility operated
on an admission fee or membership basis.
      (2)   Cemetery or crematory not otherwise allowed by the provisions of
the Zoning Code. The following standards shall apply to the development and
construction of cemeteries within the municipality.
         A.   The site proposed for a cemetery shall not interfere with the
development of a system of collector and larger streets in the vicinity of such
site. In addition, such site shall have direct access to a thoroughfare which
Council determines is adequate to serve the size of the facility proposed.
         B.   Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less
than 20 acres.
         C.   All buildings, including but not limited to mausoleums and
maintenance buildings, shall respect the required yards setback of the district
in which it is located.
         D.   All graves or burial lots shall be set back not less than 25 feet
from any street right-of-way line.
         E.   All required yards shall be landscaped and maintained in good
order. A plan for perpetual care of the grounds shall be required.
      (3)   Agriculture.
      (4)   Pawnbrokers not otherwise allowed by the provisions of the Zoning
Code. All requirements set forth in R.C. Chapter 4727 shall apply.
      (5)   Plasmapheresis centers not otherwise allowed by the provisions of
the Zoning Code. All requirements set forth in R.C. Chapter 3725 shall apply.
      (6)   Other legal uses of unique or exceptional requirements of
circumstances that are otherwise not permitted by this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1179.03 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   The application procedure for amendments shall apply as stated in §
1143.02 except division (c)(7) thereof which shall be replaced with a
development plan, 15 copies of which shall be submitted with the application.
The development plan shall include in text and map form:
   (a)   The proposed location and size of areas of use, in dictating size,
location and type of structure(s).
   (b)   The proposed location, size and use of all open areas landscaped and
other open space with ownership of such areas.
   (c)   The proposed provision of water, sanitary sewer and surface drainage
facilities including engineering feasibility or other evidence of
reasonableness.
   (d)   The proposed circulation pattern including streets, both public and
private, driveways, parking areas, walking and other access ways including
their relation to topography, existing streets and other evidence of
reasonableness.
   (e)   The proposed schedule of site development and construction of
buildings and associated facilities, and sketches or other documentation
indicating design principals or concepts for site development, buildings,
lighting and illumination, landscapes or other features. Such schedule shall
include the use or redevelopment of existing features such as structures,
streets, easements, utility lines, and land use.
   (f)   The relationship of the proposed development to the existing and
future land use in the surrounding areas, the street system, community
facilities and services, and other public improvements.
   (g)   Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the land to
effectuate the proposed development plan within three years. Such control
includes property rights, economic resources, and engineering feasibility as
may be necessary.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1179.04 CRITERIA FOR REVIEW.
   Council shall, at the minimum, consider the following factors in the review
of the application:
   (a)   That the proposed development is consistent in all respects to the
purpose, intent and applicable standards of this Zoning Code.
   (b)   That the proposed development is compatible with adjacent land use,
adjacent zoning and to appropriate plans for the area.
   (c)   That the proposed development advances the general welfare of the
municipality and that the benefits to be derived from the proposed use
justifies the change in land use character of the area.
   (d)   That the proposed development promotes the public health, safety,
convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1179.05 REVIEW PROCEDURE.
   The review procedure shall be as stated and required in §
1143.04 except as to effect of approval as stated in §
1179.06.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1179.06 EFFECT OF APPROVAL; TIME EXTENSION OR MODIFICATION.
   (a)   Effect of Approval. The development plan as approved by Council shall
constitute an amendment of the official zoning map. Such approval shall be for
a three year period commencing from the date of approval by Council to allow
the preparation of a subdivision plat or application for certificate of zoning
compliance, whichever shall apply. The approval shall become voided and the
land shall revert to its last previous zoning district if a final subdivision
plat has not been approved or a certificate of zoning compliance has not been
issued, unless an extension of time is granted as per division (b) of this
section.
   (b)   Time Extension or Modification. An extension of the time limit or the
modification of the approved development plan may be approved by Council. Such
approval shall be given upon the finding of the purpose and necessity for such
extension or modification and evidence of reasonable effort toward the
accomplishment of the approved development plan, and that such extension or
modification is not in conflict with the general health, safety and welfare of
the public or the development standards of the Exceptional Use District (EU).
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1179.07 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The provisions of Title Seven, Supplemental Regulations, shall pertain to
the Exceptional Use District (EU). Because of the unique nature and
requirements of these uses, and because their locations cannot be readily
predetermined, appropriate development standards, requirements, and other
provisions of this Zoning Code, as appropriate, shall be used.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
TITLE SEVEN - Supplemental Zoning Regulations
               
Chap. 1181.   Special Provisions. (with amendment deleting § 1181.06)
               
Chap. 1183.   Height, Area and Yard Modifications.
               
Chap. 1185.   Off-Street Parking and Loading.
               
Chap. 1187.   Home Occupations.
               
Chap. 1189.   Signs.
               
Chap. 1191.   Landscaping and Screening.
               
Chap. 1193.   Wireless Communication Facilities.
               
Chap. 1195.   Accessory Uses and Structures.
               
Chap. 1197.   Right-of-Way Use.
               
Chap. 1199.   Commercial Development Standards.
CHAPTER 1181
Special Provisions (with amendment deleting § 1181.06)
1181.01   Swimming pools.
1181.02   Open storage and display of material.
1181.03   Public nuisance regulations.
1181.04   (Reserved)
1181.05   Portable structures.
1181.06   Solar panels.
1181.07   Fences and hedges.
1181.08   Outdoor furnaces.
1181.09   Electric vehicle charging stations.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Definitions - see P. & Z. §
1133.02
   Accessory uses and structures - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1195
§ 1181.01 SWIMMING POOLS.
   A PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL as regulated herein means any pool or tank,
exclusive of "storable swimming pools," not located within a completely
enclosed building and containing water at any point to a depth of 24 inches. No
private swimming pool, above or below ground, shall be allowed in a residential
district except as an accessory use, and unless such private swimming pool has
received a certificate of zoning compliance prior to issuance of a building
permit and provided such pool complies with the following conditions and
requirements:
   (a)   The pool is an accessory structure intended and used primarily for the
enjoyment of the occupants of the principal use of the property.
   (b)   The pool may not be located in an easement or installed in any manner
that negatively impacts storm water runoff or causes flooding to adjoining
properties.
   (c)   The pool, or the entire lot on which such pool is located, shall be
enclosed by a structure with a minimum height of four feet to prevent
uncontrolled access from the street and from adjacent properties.
   (d)   Access gates must be self-closing and have a self-latching device and
shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device.
   (e)   No person, firm or corporation shall construct or install a swimming
pool or make any alteration therein or in the appurtenances thereof without
having received an approved certificate of zoning compliance.
   (f)   Any lighting to illuminate the pool area shall be so arranged as to
deflect the light away from the adjoining properties.
   (g)   The pool must be a minimum of ten feet away from the property line.
NOTE: Deed restrictions or covenants may also prohibit certain kinds of fences
or specify locations in the subdivision. The village does not regulate nor
enforce deed restrictions; other home owners or civic associations in a
subdivision may regulate them as well as other subdivision rules.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1181.02 OPEN STORAGE AND DISPLAY OF MATERIAL.
   The open storage and display of material and equipment incidental to a
nonresidential use adjacent to a residential zoning district, Planned
Residential District, Planned Unit District, or visible from a public right-of-
way shall only be permitted provided the area used for open storage and display
shall be effectively screened on adjoining sides and public rights-of-way by
means of walls or fences with a 100% opaqueness and is located behind the
building line and not in a required yard. Walls or fences shall be a minimum of
six feet in height without advertising thereon and shall not include chain-link
fences. Walls and fences may be further screened with plantings comprised of
evergreen hedges six feet in height.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1181.03 PUBLIC NUISANCE REGULATIONS.
   No land or building in any district shall be used or occupied in any manner
creating dangerous, injurious, noxious, or otherwise objectionable conditions
which could adversely affect the surrounding areas or adjoining premises,
except that any use permitted by this Zoning Code may be undertaken and
maintained if acceptable measures or safeguards to reduce dangerous and
objectionable conditions to acceptable limits are established by the
performance requirements in divisions (a) to (l) of this section.
   (a)   Fire Hazards. Any activity involving the use or storage of flammable
or explosive materials shall be protected by adequate fire-fighting and fire
prevention equipment and by such safety devices as are normally used in the
handling of any such material. Such hazards shall be kept removed from adjacent
activities to a distance compatible with the potential danger involved.
   (b)   Radioactivity or Electrical Disturbance. No activity shall emit
dangerous radioactivity at any point, or electrical disturbance adversely
affecting the operation of any equipment at any point than that of the creator
of such disturbance.
   (c)   Noise and Vibration. Noise or vibration shall be so controlled that at
the property line on which such noise or vibration is produced it will not be
at a level above that normally perceptible from other development activities in
the area or from the usual street traffic observed at the street right-of-way
line of the lot, except occasional blast or shock required in normal operation
and produced in such manner as not to create a hazard.
   (d)   Toxic and Hazardous Substances. No toxic substance shall be emitted or
otherwise discharged into the atmosphere, ground, surface waters or ground
waters. No storage, use or transport of toxic or hazardous substances shall be
permitted unless such activity is in full compliance with applicable state and
federal environmental protection regulations and the expressed prior written
approval of the Fire Chief.
   (e)   Air Pollution. No pollution of air by fly-ash, dust, vapors, odors,
smoke or other substances shall be permitted which are harmful to health,
animals, vegetation or other property, or which can cause excessive soiling.
   (f)   Glare. No direct or reflected glare shall be permitted which is
visible from any property or from any public street.
   (g)   Erosion. No erosion, by either wind or water, shall be permitted which
will carry objectionable substances onto neighboring properties.
   (h)   Water Pollution. Water pollution shall be subject to the requirements
and regulations established by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency.
   (i)   Trash. The storage of trash and waste materials, including but not
limited to discarded household goods, discarded commercial products, industrial
by-products, and other similar materials shall not be visible from the property
line on which such materials are being stored or otherwise placed. All such
materials shall be housed in an appropriate container or enclosure, excepting
trash that is properly placed in an appropriate enclosed container at an
assigned location for regularly scheduled trash pickup. In all cases, there
shall be full compliance with applicable zoning district standards.
   (j)   Enforcement Provisions. The Planning and Zoning Administrator or
Council prior to the issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance may require
the submission of statements and plans indicating the manner in which dangerous
and objectionable elements involved in processing and in equipment operations
are to be eliminated or reduced to acceptable limits and tolerances.
   (k)   Measurement Procedures. Methods and procedures for the determination
of the existence of any dangerous and objectionable elements shall conform to
applicable standard measurement procedures published by the American National
Standards Institute, United States Bureau of Mines, and Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency.
   (l)   Turf and Shrubs. Turf shall not be higher than eight inches, and
shrubs may not extend over a sidewalk or into a public right-of-way. If the
owner, lessee, agent or tenant having charge of the land mentioned fails to
comply with a violation notice per
Chapter 1135, the municipality may cause such turf or shrubs to be cut and may
employ the necessary labor to perform such task. All expenses incurred shall be
documented. The Fiscal Officer shall make a written return to the County
Auditor of action taken under this section, with a statement of the charges for
its services, the amount paid for the performing of such labor, the fees of the
officers who made the service of the notice and return, and a proper
description of the premises. Such amounts, when allowed, shall be entered upon
the tax duplicate, shall be a lien upon such lands from the date of the entry,
and shall be collected as other taxes and returned to the municipality with the
General Fund.
   (m)   Abatable Nuisance. Upon determination by Council, divisions (a) to (l)
of this section shall be considered abatable nuisances and a violation of the
provisions of this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1181.04 (RESERVED)
§ 1181.05 PORTABLE STRUCTURES.
   (a)   Portable Residential Structures. No mobile home, trailer or similar
portable residential structures in use shall be permitted in any district in
the municipality except for camping and traveling trailers specified in §
1185.07.
   (b)   Portable Non Residential Structures. Portable non-residential
structures shall not be permitted in the municipality, except as provided in
division (c) of this section and §
1135.09. For the purposes of this Zoning Code, a portable non-residential
structure shall be defined as any building or other structure designed for
occupation or sale of goods which is not placed on a permanent foundation.
   (c)   Portable On Demand Storage (PODS). The use of PODS within the
municipality, or other similar units, shall be permitted in any zoning district
only for the purpose of loading or unloading in association with moving in or
out of a building. PODS shall be parked on property for a period not to exceed
seven consecutive days, shall not be parked on public right-of-way or private
streets, and shall be located on an existing driveway or parking area composed
of gravel, asphalt, concrete or other hard surface. The Planning and Zoning
Administrator shall issue a certificate of zoning compliance for the location
of PODS in the municipality abiding by the aforementioned conditions.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1181.06 SOLAR PANELS.
   (a)   Definitions. All solar panels shall be classified as either a:
      (1)   ROOF MOUNTED SOLAR PANEL STRUCTURE. A solar panel structure that is
attached to the roof of a principal structure or an accessary structure that
does not create an additional footprint or reduce the amount of yard area on
the parcel of land that it is installed within.
      (2)   GROUND MOUNTED SOLAR PANEL STRUCTURE. A solar panel structure that
is attached to the ground or a specially prepared base for the solar panel
structure that creates an additional footprint or reduces the amount of yard
area on the parcel of land that it is installed within.
   (b)   Permitted zoning districts.
      (1)   Roof mounted solar panel structures are allowed in all zoning
districts.
      (2)   Ground mounted solar panel structures are only allowed in the
following districts:
         A.   Limited Manufacturing District (LM);
         B.   Planned Industrial District (PID); and
         C.   Floodplain District (FD) - Subject to applicable government
approvals.
   (c)   Required permitting.
      (1)   All ground mounted solar panel structures, whether a principal
structure or an accessary structure, shall be indicated on an approved site
plan in conformance with the requirements of
Chapter 1141.
      (2)   A village zoning permit is required for both ground mounted, and
roof mounted solar panel structures.
   (d)   Prohibitions. The use/installation of ground mounted solar panels used
solely for resale purposes is prohibited.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 10-7-2024)
§ 1181.07 FENCES AND HEDGES.
   (a)   Electrically Charged Fences Prohibited. Electrically charged fences
shall be forbidden in all districts except on sites of more than ten acres used
to confine livestock.
   (b)   Use of Barbed Wire. Barbed wire may be used only to top standard
security fences in commercial and industrial districts at a height of six feet
or greater, the supports for such barbed wire shall be either vertical or lean
inward above the property of the owner of the fence. Lands used for
agricultural purposes, meeting the requirements of this Code, shall be exempt
from this provision.
   (c)   Decorative Fences Required. Only decorative fences shall be
constructed in front setbacks or side setbacks abutting streets. Decorative
fences shall mean split rail, ornamental iron, vinyl, or other decorative
wooden fences as approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
   (d)   Chain Link Prohibited. Chain link fences shall not be permitted within
front setbacks or side setbacks abutting streets in any district, except by
variance granted by Council.
   (e)   Guard Rails Prohibited. Guard rails shall not be used as fencing.
   (f)   Location in Front Setbacks. Fences and hedges in front setbacks and/or
side setbacks abutting streets and alleys in any district shall not exceed four
feet in height and shall not obstruct the view of pedestrians or vehicular
traffic or be detrimental to the public safety.
   (g)   Fencing Agricultural Uses. Lands used for agricultural purposes,
meeting the requirements of this Code, shall not place any fence used for the
confinement of said use closer than 15 feet from any public right-of-way or
private street.
   (h)   Height Restriction in Rear and Side Yards. Fences in rear setbacks and
side setbacks not abutting streets and alleys shall not exceed six feet in
height in residential districts or 12 feet in height commercial or industrial
districts.
   (i)   Permit Required. No fence shall hereafter be erected, constructed,
altered, relocated or rebuilt until an application has been filed with and a
permit issued by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
   (j)   Exemptions for Temporary Fences. The following temporary fences shall
be exempt from the provisions of this section:
      (1)   Temporary construction fences when such fence is indicated on an
approved site plan.
      (2)   Temporary fences used for special events and shown on an approved
plot plan for said event.
      (3)   Temporary snow fence installed by any government agency.
      (4)   Temporary fences installed for the protection of the public from
any obvious danger.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1181.08 OUTDOOR FURNACES.
   (a)   Definition. An outdoor furnace shall be defined as any equipment,
device or apparatus, or any part thereof, which is installed, affixed or
situated outdoors for the primary purpose of combustion of fuel to produce heat
or energy used as a component of a heating system providing heat for any
interior space.
   (b)   Permits. The property owner is required to obtain a certificate of
zoning compliance, required building permits and other applicable permits prior
to the location, construction, installation, or operation of outdoor furnace in
the Village of Commercial Point.
   (c)   Operation. All outdoor furnaces shall be constructed, established,
installed, operated and maintained in conformance with the manufacturer's
instructions, the requirements of this Zoning Code, and all federal and state
regulations, whichever is more restrictive.
   (d)   Permitted Fuel. Only firewood, untreated lumber, wood pellets, biomass
pellets, or corn are permitted to be burned in any outdoor furnace, per the
manufacturer's specifications. Burning of any and all other materials in an
outdoor furnace is prohibited.
   (e)   Permitted Zones. Outdoor furnaces shall be permitted in the R-1 and R-
3 zoning districts.
   (f)   Minimum Property Size. The minimum property size on which outdoor
furnaces may be operated shall be two acres.
   (g)   Setbacks. Outdoor furnaces shall be set back no less than 75 feet from
the nearest lot line or public right-of-way.
   (h)   Number. No more than one outdoor furnace shall be permitted on any one
lot of record.
   (i)   Size. Outdoor furnaces shall be no larger than 40 square feet in area
and be no taller than eight feet in height, not including the chimney or stack.
   (j)   Chimney or Stack Height. The chimney of an outdoor furnace shall
extend at least two feet above the peak of the residence for which it serves.
   (k)   Appearance. Outdoor furnaces must have a shed appearance enclosing the
furnace unit and other associated equipment.
   (l)   Months of Operation. Outdoor furnaces shall be operated only between
September 1 and May 31.
   (m)   If an existing outdoor furnace is determined to be creating a
nuisance, as established in §
1181.03 and/or the Ohio Revised Code:
      (1)   The operation of the unit shall cease and desist until reasonable
steps can be taken to ensure that the outdoor wood furnace will not be a
nuisance.
      (2)   The property owner shall work with the Planning and Zoning
Administrator to modify the outdoor furnace to eliminate the nuisance by such
means as extending the chimney, relocating the outdoor wood furnace, or other
appropriate measures.
      (3)   The outdoor furnace shall be removed from the property if modifying
the outdoor furnace, relocating the outdoor furnace, or other appropriate
measures do not eliminate the nuisance.
   (n)   Any person who constructs or operates an outdoor furnace in violation
of this section shall be deemed in violation of this Zoning Code and punishable
as prescribed in
Chapter 1135.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020; Am. Ord. 2020-30, passed 1-4-2021)
§ 1181.09 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS.
   (a)   An electric vehicle charging station shall mean a public or private
parking space located together with a battery charging station which permits
the transfer of electric energy (by conductive or inductive means) to a battery
or other storage device in an electric vehicle.
   (b)   Electric vehicle supply equipment, as defined in the National Electric
Code, shall obtain any required building permits, electrical permits or other
applicable permits prior to their location, construction, installation, or
operation in the Village of Commercial Point.
   (c)   Electric Vehicle Charging Stations on Residential Properties. Electric
vehicle charging stations shall be permitted in the R-1, R-3, MF-A, MF-C, PRD
zoning districts, and areas designated for residential use in PUD, PCND, and
TND zoning districts, subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Electric vehicle charging stations on residential properties shall
not be located within the front, side or rear setbacks of the applicable zoning
district.
      (2)   Residential properties with more than five electric vehicle
charging stations in a single parking lot shall provide screening of such
charging stations from adjacent properties with landscaping, fencing, or a
combination thereof and achieve at least 50% opacity at installation.
      (3)   Electric vehicle charging stations shall only be utilized by the
residents of the property such charging stations are located upon.
      (4)   Only single phase Level 1 and Level 2 electric vehicle supply
equipment shall be permitted on residential properties.
      (5)   A certificate of zoning compliance shall be required for electric
vehicle charging stations located on residential properties.
   (d)   Electric Vehicle Charging Stations on Non-Residential Properties.
Electric vehicle charging stations shall be permitted in the GC, NC, SO, PCD,
PID, and LM zoning districts, and areas designated for non-residential use in
PUD, PCND, and TND zoning districts, subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Non-residential properties with five or less electric vehicle
charging stations that do not have overhead canopies shall be permitted per to
the following:
         A.   Minor site development plan approval shall be required per §
1141.02(d).
         B.   Electric vehicle charging stations shall not be located within
the front yard setback of the applicable zoning district and shall be located
no less than ten feet from the side or rear property lines. Electric vehicle
charging stations shall be located no less than 30 feet from any residential
zoning district as stated in §
1181.08(b).
      (2)   Non-residential properties with more than five electric vehicle
charging stations, or charging stations that include overhead canopies, shall
be permitted per the following:
         A.   Conditional use approval shall be required per
Chapter 1145 and major site development plan approval shall be required per §
1141.02(c).
         B.   Electric vehicle charging stations shall not be located within
the front, side, or rear setbacks of the applicable zoning district.
         C.   Electric vehicle charging stations shall be screened from
adjacent residential uses with landscaping, fencing, or a combination thereof
and achieve at least 50% opacity at installation.
      (3)   Parking spaces designated for electric vehicular charging stations
shall not apply to the required minimum number of parking spaces.
      (4)   Signage shall only be located on the electronic vehicle charging
station and shall not exceed four square feet in area per charging station.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1183
Height, Area and Yard Projections
1183.01   Height modifications.
1183.02   Yard projections.
1183.03   Lot area requirements; private sanitary facilities.
§ 1183.01 HEIGHT MODIFICATIONS.
   The height limitations stipulated elsewhere in this Zoning Code shall not
apply to the following:
   (a)   Farm Buildings, Churches, Architectural Features and Similar
Structures. Barns, silos, or other farm buildings or structures on farms;
church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes; monuments; chimneys, flagpoles;
parapet walls extending not more than four feet above the limiting height of
the building.
   (b)   Elevator Penthouses, Water Tanks, and Similar Structures. Elevator
penthouses, water tanks, monitors and scenery lofts, provided the height of any
such structure doesn't exceed 50% of the corresponding street lot line
frontage; monuments, grain elevators, conveyers, derricks, gas holders or other
structures and mechanical appurtenances where the manufacturing process
requires a greater height and provided no such structure is located in front of
the building, and provided that such structure is setback a distance greater
than its height from any lot line.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1183.02 YARD PROJECTIONS.
   The yard space required for a use or structure shall, during its life,
remain free of all uses or occupancies except as follows:
   (a)   Landscaping shall be permitted in any required yard, or along the edge
of any yard, provided that no fence or wall, unless decorative, no higher than
three feet in height except as required in
Chapter 1191, and not located so as to reduce visibility, shall be located
between a public right-of-way and a front building line. Such fencing shall not
include chain link fencing.
   (b)   Eaves, cornices, canopies, windowsills, belt courses and any similar
architectural feature may project into any required yard a distance not to
exceed 24 inches.
   (c)   Bay windows, balconies, uncovered porches and chimneys may project
beyond the front building line or into a required rear yard space a distance
not to exceed five feet.
   (d)   Driveways shall be permitted in required yards, but shall be three
feet or more from any property line, except where such driveways are developed
jointly as a common drive to adjoining lots.
   (e)   Underfootings shall be permitted to extend to the building setback
line.
   (f)   All above ground utility connections shall be located at the rear of
the house.
   (g)   Unroofed porches, decks and steps may extend from the dwelling into
the required front yard a maximum of ten feet.
   (h)   Open structures such as roofed porches, canopies, balconies, and
carports, shall be considered parts of the building to which attached and shall
not project into any required yard.
   (i)   No structure may project into a required side yard except in the case
of a single nonconforming lot of record which is of insufficient width to meet
the side yard requirements of this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1183.03 LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS; PRIVATE SANITARY FACILITIES.
   Any other regulations of this Zoning Code notwithstanding or as otherwise
determined by the applicable County Board of Health, in any district where
public water and sanitary sewer facilities are not immediately accessible, the
lot area per single-family dwelling and lot frontage requirements otherwise
specified for residential uses shall be increased as follows:
   (a)   Sewerage and Water Not Available. Where both public sanitary sewerage
and public water supply are not accessible:
      (1)   Minimum lot area - one acre.
      (2)   Minimum lot frontage - 125 feet.
   (b)   Sewerage Not Available. Where public water supply is accessible and
private connections will be made, but where public sanitary sewerage is not
accessible:
      (1)   Minimum lot area - one acre.
      (2)   Minimum lot frontage - 125 feet.
      (3)   Residential structures containing two or more dwelling units shall
not be rezoned, shall not be issued a certificate of zoning compliance, nor
shall be issued a building permit without access to public sanitary sewer and
water facilities.
   (c)   Determination of Assigned Yards. The assigned yard (typically diamond-
shaped) shall be the area bounded by lines passing through points that are
located by the following procedure:
      (1)   The outline of the structure shall be a quadrangle described by
lines established by the projection of the outermost faces of the structure.
      (2)   If a wing, bay or other section of the structure is 25% or less of
the linear dimension of a projected face or is of ten feet or more difference
in height, then a quadrangle and/or height as determined above may be described
separately. If a face of the structure is other than straight, then the
projection of such a face shall be a line through the outermost point of the
face, such line being parallel to the projection of the structure's front face.
      (3)   The points shall be established on a perpendicular bisector of each
side of the quadrangle at a distance from such side equal to the sum of the
length of the side and height of the structure divided by two.
   (d)   Relationship of Assigned Yards. The assigned yard of a structure shall
not be occupied by any other structure, except accessory structures on the same
lot.
      (1)   Structures adjacent to property of another ownership shall comply
with the yard requirements prescribed in relation to the lot line except that
if the adjacent property is developed or its proposed structure is determined
and with written consent of the adjacent property owner, then assigned yards
may be used to establish the arrangement between the structures.
      (2)   The assigned yard shall not extend into a street right-of-way,
except that if a street is abutted by property of the same ownership or with
agreement between owners for its full extent between intersections, then the
assigned yard may be extended to the centerline of the right-of-way, except
that the structure shall not be closer than ten feet to the existing or
proposed right-of-way, whichever is greater.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1185
Off-Street Parking and Loading
1185.01   Off-street parking generally.
1185.02   Dimensions.
1185.03   Development standards.
1185.04   Access drives.
1185.05   Off-street loading.
1185.06   Limitations in residential districts.
1185.07   Commercial parking in residential areas.
§ 1185.01 OFF-STREET PARKING GENERALLY.
   (a)   Surfaced off-street automobile parking shall be provided on any lot on
which any of the following uses are hereafter established and are intended for
use by the public, whether as customers, employees, or residents of a use or
uses. Off-street loading and vehicle storage space shall be provided for the
handling of materials and products of commercial and industrial uses. Such off-
street parking, loading and vehicle storage spaces shall be provided with
vehicular access to a publicly dedicated street or alley.
   (b)   Such required facilities, additional space provided, and access drives
thereto, including required curb-cuts, shall be sloped and constructed to
provide adequate drainage of the area, surfaced as required herein, and
maintained in such a manner that no dust will be produced by continuous use.
The design and construction of all such facilities shall be subject to approval
by the Municipal Engineer.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1185.02 DIMENSIONS.
   (a)   Parking Spaces. Minimum area and dimensions exclusive of driveways and
aisles as follows:
 
TYPE OF PARKING   MINIMUM WIDTH (feet) MINIMUM LENGTH (feet) MINIMUM AREA (sq
SPACE                                                        feet)
90-degree parking 9                    18                    162
Parallel parking  9                    23                    207
60-degree parking 9                    18                    162
45-degree parking 9                    18                    162
 
   (b)   Parking Aisles. Minimum widths as follows:
 
TYPE OF PARKING                   MINIMUM AISLE WIDTH (feet)
90-degree parking                 22
Angle parking                     18
Parallel parking on one-way drive 14
 
USE REQUIRED PARKING SPACE
USE                                     REQUIRED PARKING SPACE
Automobile service station              1 for each 2 pumps plus 2 for each
                                        service bay
Automobile repairs; car wash (office    1 for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor
area)                                   area
Assembly hall, club room, place of      1 for each 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor
amusement or similar place of assembly  area
without fixed seating
Banks, savings and loans, and other     1 for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor
financial businesses                    area
Bed and breakfast inns                  1 for each guest room
Bowling alleys, tennis courts or        4 for each alley, court or similar
similar place of intensive public       activity area
activity
Business, technical and trade school,   1 for each 2 students
college and university
Business and professional offices not   1 for each 200 sq. ft. of office space
elsewhere specified
Dance halls and assembly halls without
fixed seats, exhibition halls except    1 for each 100 sq. ft. of gross floor
church assembly rooms in conjunction    area used for assembly or dancing
with auditorium
Day care centers, children's nurseries  2 for each classroom but not less than
and pre-schools                         6 per center
Drive-up window service or fast-food    1 for each 100 sq. ft. of gross floor
restaurants, with seating,              space
Drive-up window service or fast-food    1 for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor
restaurants, without seating            area
Driving range                           1 for each 2 playing locations
Dwellings other than multi-family       2 for each dwelling unit
Eating and drinking establishments with 1 for each 100 sq. ft. of gross floor
no drive-up window service              space
Electronic products store - retail      1 for each 500 sq. ft.
                                        1 for each teacher and staff member,
Elementary and middle schools           plus 1 per student up to 5% of the
                                        student body
Funeral homes, mortuaries               1 for each 150 sq. ft. of gross floor
                                        area
Furniture and appliance stores,         1 for each 400 sq. ft. of gross floor
household equipment or furniture repair area
shop
Golf course                             4 for each hole plus 1 space for each 2
                                        employees on combined work shifts
Health care maintenance and emergency   1.5 for each treatment room plus 1 for
services                                every employee on the largest shift
High school                             1 for each 2 students
Hospitals                               1 for each bed
                                        1 for each 5-person capacity (1 person/
Indoor swimming pool or natatorium      1,000 gallons of pool capacity) plus 1
                                        for each 4 seats or 30 sq. ft. of
                                        seating floor area
Indoor sales exclusively of motor
vehicles, aircraft, watercraft, lumber, 1 for each 1,000 sq. ft. of sales area
plants and furniture
Libraries, museums or art galleries     1 for each 500 sq. ft. of gross floor
                                        area
                                        For buildings 1,000,000 sq. ft. and
Manufacturing, warehousing,             less, 1 per 2,500 sq. ft. of gross
wholesaling, or similar establishments  building area, for buildings 1,00,001
                                        sq. ft. and greater, 1 per 3,000 sq.
                                        ft. of gross building area
Medical and dental offices and clinics  1 for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor
                                        area
Miniature golf course                   2 spaces for each hole plus 1 for each
                                        2 employees on combined work shifts
Motels and hotels (not including        1 for each living or sleeping unit plus
restaurant facilities)                  space for supplementary uses
Multi-family residential                2 for each dwelling unit
Outdoor display and sales               1 for each 1,000 sq. ft. of display
                                        area
                                        1 for each 5-person capacity (1 person/
Outdoor swimming pool                   500 gallons) plus space for
                                        supplementary uses
Personal services such as barber shop   1 space for every chair
or beauty shop
Personal and consumer services not      1 for each employee plus 1 for each 400
elsewhere specified                     square feet of office space
Recreational uses not elsewhere         1 for each 3 patrons
specified
Restaurants and bars                    1 for each 100 sq. ft. of gross floor
                                        area
Retail sales or services not elsewhere  3 for first 1,000 sq. ft. plus 1 for
specified                               each additional 500 sq. ft. of gross
                                        floor area
Sanitariums, convalescent homes,        1 for each 2 beds
children's homes
Service-related uses such as printing   1 for each 2 employees plus 1 for every
or plumbing shops                       2 vehicles used for service or delivery
Shopping centers including supermarkets 3 for each 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor
                                        area
Sports arenas, auditoriums, theaters,
assembly halls, churches, or similar    1 for each 4 seats
place with fixed seating
Video rental store                      1 for each 300 square feet of gross
                                        floor area
 
   (c)   Where two or more uses are provided on the same lot, including
principal and supplementary uses, the total number of spaces required shall
equal or exceed the sum of their individual requirements.
   (d)   The calculation of parking spaces shall be to the next highest whole
number where a fractional space results.
   (e)   Whenever a building or use is constructed or enlarged in gross floor
area, by number of employees, by number of dwelling units, by seating capacity
or otherwise after the effective date of this Zoning Code such as to create a
requirement under this chapter for an increase of 10% or more in the number of
existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the
enlargement or change.
(Ord. 2021-44, passed 12-6-2021)
§ 1185.03 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private off-street
parking area, including a commercial parking lot and automobile or trailer
sales lot, shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the following
requirements:
   (a)   Minimum Distance. No part of any parking area for more than five
vehicles shall be closer than 20 feet to any dwelling unit, school, hospital or
other institution for human care located on an abutting or adjoining lot,
unless separated by a solid wood privacy fence or other approved constructed
screen of between four and six feet in height.
   (b)   Location Relative to Use. Off-street parking facilities shall be
located on the same lot as the structure or use served, except that a parking
facility providing the sum of parking space required of several uses may be
provided contiguous and in common to the several structures and uses served.
Parking spaces may be located on a lot other than that containing the principal
use provided it is within 300 feet of the principal use, with the approval of
Council, and subject to meeting all applicable requirements of this Zoning
Code.
   (c)   Parking Lot Layout. Whenever a parking lot extends to a property line
or where the extension of a vehicle beyond the front line of the parking space
would interfere with drive or aisle access, wheel blocks or other devices shall
be used to restrict such extension.
   (d)   Surfacing. All off-street parking areas shall be graded for proper
drainage and surfaced with concrete, asphalt concrete, premixed asphalt
pavement, blacktop, or brick so as to provide a durable and dustless surface.
Off-street parking area designs shall be reviewed and approved by the Municipal
Engineer prior to issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance.
   (e)   Illumination. Any parking lot intended to be used during non-daylight
hours shall be illuminated. Illumination of parking lots shall be so arranged
as to reflect light away from adjacent properties and shall provide not less
than two and one-half foot candles at the paved surface.
   (f)   Vehicular Access. All parking areas shall be provided with direct
vehicular access to a street or alley abutting the property upon which the
parking area is provided or to an adjacent parking area.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1185.04 ACCESS DRIVES.
   The frequency of access points along thoroughfares in Commercial Point is to
be minimized to reduce vehicle and pedestrian conflict and improve traffic
flow. Access drives (driveways) leading to and from a street shall be developed
according to the following standards:
   (a)   Width. An access drive serving a single family residence shall be a
minimum of ten feet in width. Access drive entrances at a street shall be a
minimum of 18 feet in width. All access drives shall not exceed 25 feet in
width, except at curb returns.
   (b)   Spacing. The following standards shall apply to determining the
permitted spacing of access drives. Street classifications are based upon the
municipal thoroughfare plan, as amended, and interpretation by the Municipal
Engineer relative to street classification.
      (1)   For all arterials and collectors, the following minimum spacing
related to the posted speed limit shall be required between adjacent access
drives:
 
POSTED HIGHWAY SPEED (mph) MINIMUM SPACING (feet)
25                         150
30                         150
35                         300
40                         300
45                         600
50                         600
 
      (2)   For non-residential uses on local streets, the minimum distance
between access drives shall be 25 feet.
      (3)   For all arterials, access drives shall be located no closer than
300 feet to an intersection.
   (c)   Side Lot Lines. An access drive, exclusive of curb returns, shall be
located no less than ten feet from the side lot line, except that an access
drive for a residential use may be within three feet of a side lot line. Access
drives for any uses utilizing a common drive may be adjacent to and coterminous
with a side lot line.
   (d)   Quantity Permitted. The number of access drives shall be kept to a
minimum to promote safe and reasonable access, improve the convenience and ease
of movement of travelers, and permit reasonable speeds and economy of travel
while maintaining roadway capacity. For lots with less than 200 feet of
frontage on public right(s)-of-way and with less than five acres in total area,
no more than two access drives shall be permitted. For lots with more than 200
feet of road frontage on public right(s)-of-way and greater than five acres in
total area, additional access drives may by permitted by Council. The spacing
standards of division (b) of this section shall take precedence.
   (e)   Surfacing. All access driveways shall be graded for proper drainage
and surfaced with concrete, asphaltic concrete, premixed asphalt pavement,
blacktop, or brick so as to provide a durable and dustless surface. All access
driveway aprons shall be graded for proper drainage and surfaced with concrete.
Access driveway and apron designs shall be reviewed and approved by the
Municipal Engineer prior to construction.
   (f)   Location in Easements. An access drive shall not be located in an
easement unless said easement is unavoidable in the access drive's connection
with a public street.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1185.05 OFF-STREET LOADING.
   (a)   Classification. The loading space shall consist of a rectangular area
of one of the following classes:
      (1)   Class A: An area at least 14 feet by 55 feet having a vertical
clearance of 15 feet or more, plus adequate area for ingress and egress.
      (2)   Class B: An area at least 12 feet by 30 feet having a vertical
distance of 15 feet or more, plus adequate area for ingress and egress.
   (b)   Schedule of Loading Spaces. Loading space shall be provided for
retailing, wholesaling, warehousing, processing, hotel, hospital, goods
display, and similar uses requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of
material or merchandise in accordance with the following schedule:
 
BUILDING AREA (square feet, gross floor REQUIRED CLASS
area)
Less than 5,000                         None unless otherwise required by
                                        Council
5,000 to 9,999                          1 Class A and 1 Class B or 3 Class B
                                        1 Class A and 1 Class B or 3 Class B,
10,000 to 49,999                        plus 1 Class A for each 10,000 sq. ft.
                                        over the first 10,000 sq. ft. of area
                                        1 Class A for each 10,000 sq. ft. over
More than 50,000                        the first 10,000 sq. ft. of area, plus
                                        1 Class A for each 25,000 sq. ft. over
                                        the first 50,000 sq. ft.
Maximum seven required Class A, unless otherwise specified by Council.
   (c)   Surfacing. Areas designated for off-street loading shall be surfaced
with asphalt concrete or concrete and shall be graded for proper drainage.
Designs shall be reviewed and approved by the Municipal Engineer prior to
construction.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1185.06 LIMITATIONS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   The provision of parking space, either open or enclosed, for the parking or
storage of vehicles in a residential zoning district or planned district for
residential uses shall be subject to the following:
   (a)   Commercial Vehicles. Not more than one truck limited to being a two-
axle, four-tired pickup, panel or light truck and which has operating
characteristics similar to those of a passenger car shall be allowed per one
dwelling unit. Trucks having dual tires on one or more axles, or having more
than two axles, designed for the transportation of cargo and including tractor-
trucks, trailers, and semi-trailers, shall not be permitted on a lot or parked
on a street or alley in a residential area.
   (b)   Parking of Semi-Trailers, Travel Trailers, or Other Trailer or Motor
Home. The parking of recreational equipment, including but not limited to
travel trailers, motor homes, pickup campers, folding tent trailers, boats or
boat trailers, and other similar recreational equipment, semi-trailers, travel
trailers, or other trailers or motor homes shall not be permitted on any street
within Commercial Point, other than for the purpose of loading or unloading.
When parked on property in a residential district for the purpose of loading or
unloading, travel trailers, motor homes, boats or boat trailers, and other
similar recreational vehicles shall not exceed a loading or unloading time of
72 consecutive hours. Such recreational equipment shall not be stored in any
residential district unless located within an enclosed structure or, if stored
outside, unless all of the following requirements are satisfied:
      (1)   Such recreational equipment shall be stored behind the building
line and shall not be stored within a required side yard or within ten feet of
the rear property line.
      (2)   Not more than one piece of recreational equipment shall be
permitted to be stored outside on a parcel containing a single family or two-
family dwelling. All recreational vehicles must be registered and licensed (if
applicable) to the resident of the property on which the items are parked or
stored. For the purposes of this chapter, a boat stored on a boat trailer shall
be deemed one piece of recreational equipment. For multi-family uses, an area
to accommodate not more than one piece of recreational equipment for each 15
dwelling units shall be provided and meet the screening requirements herein.
      (3)   All recreational equipment stored outside shall be screened from
view from all contiguous dwellings and public right-of-ways by suitable
screening. Screening shall consist of walls, fences, natural vegetation or any
combination thereof acceptable to the Planning and Zoning Administrator and
with an opacity of no less than 75%. Screening shall meet the requirements of §
1181.07. Landscaping provided in lieu of such wall or fence shall consist of
dense evergreen bushes. All landscaping material shall be maintained in proper
and healthful condition. Property owners shall maintain landscaped areas for a
proper, neat, and orderly appearance and free from refuse and debris.
      (4)   Recreational equipment shall not be occupied or used for living,
sleeping, housekeeping, storage, or business purposes.
   (c)   Inoperable Vehicles. Requirements regarding inoperable vehicles are
found in the Codified Ordinances of Commercial Point, Part Six, General
Offences Code § 660.07.
   (d)   Garages Required. Garages shall be required in all residential
districts subject to the following standards:
      (1)   For all single-family dwellings of 1,100 square feet or greater and
for each unit of all duplexes at least one of the required spaces shall be in a
completely enclosed garage.
      (2)   For multi-family dwellings, at least one space shall be provided in
a completely enclosed garage for each dwelling unit provided.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1185.07 COMMERCIAL PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   (a)   Employee/client parking to serve commercial, office or industrial
enterprises may be permitted in residential districts with the approval of
Council provided that:
      (1)   The area to be used for parking shall directly abut the land zoned
for commercial, office or industrial uses; and
      (2)   The residentially zoned land used for such parking shall not
contain any dwellings; and
      (3)   That such parking is for passenger vehicles only. This does not
include busses, semi-trucks, or other commercial vehicles.
   (b)   In granting such approval Council shall require a site plan of the
proposed parking area including required landscaping, buffering and screening,
landscaping, or buffering as it deems necessary to minimize the impact on
adjoining properties.
   (c)   Council shall review all such requests subject to
Chapter 1145.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1187
Home Occupations
1187.01   Purpose.
1187.02   Permitted use.
1187.03   Conditional use.
§ 1187.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of these provisions is to allow where appropriate limited, non-
residential activities in residential structures that are compatible with the
neighborhoods in which such structures and related home occupation activities
are located. The standards provided for herein are intended to ensure
compatibility of home occupations with other permitted uses and with the
residential character of the neighborhood. A zoning permit fee of twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) is required.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1187.02 PERMITTED USE.
   A home occupation use shall be permitted within a dwelling unit provided the
occupation does not occupy more than 20% of the gross floor area or 200 square
feet of the dwelling unit, whichever is larger, and provided the following
criteria are met.
   (a)   Requirements. The following requirements shall apply to permitted home
occupation uses:
      (1)   The home occupation shall only be conducted within a principal
structure and shall not be conducted within an accessory use or structure.
      (2)   The external appearance of the principal structure or property
shall not be altered and the home occupation within the residence shall not be
conducted in a manner which would cause the premises to differ in any way.
      (3)   No more than one non-resident employee shall be engaged in such
home occupation.
      (4)   No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the lot. In the case of electrical
interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or
audible interference in any radio or televisions receivers off the premises, or
causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
      (5)   There shall only be limited sales on the premises of goods produced
on the premises.
      (6)   There shall be no external indication of such home occupation other
than one sign, controlled by the sign regulations in this Zoning Code under
Chapter 1189.
      (7)   There shall be no outside storage of any kind related to such home
occupation.
      (8)   Specialized tutoring or instruction shall be limited to one
individual in the principal structure during said tutoring or instruction.
      (9)   No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater
volume than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any
need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall meet
the off-street parking requirements as to use as specified under Chapter 1185,
and shall not be located in front of the building line.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1187.03 CONDITIONAL USE.
   It is recognized that there may exist certain home occupations that fail to
meet the criteria of §
1187.02, but which may be appropriate for a residential area provided the
following additional criteria are met through the conditional use procedure of
Chapter 1145 including the requirements therein.
   (a)   Requirements. Home occupation conditional uses shall be limited by the
following criteria and/or any other conditions as determined by Council in
order to protect the residential character of the subject area:
      (1)   There shall be no more than three non-resident employees.
      (2)   The conduct of the home occupation may be approved within a
structure accessory to the principal structure.
      (3)   Sales of commodities not produced on the premises may be permitted
provided such commodities are specified and approved as a part of the
application for a conditional use, provided Council determines that such sales
will not become a detriment to the existing residential character of the lot or
neighborhood through a resulting increase in traffic, noise, vibration, glare,
fumes, odors or electrical interference or any other factor resulting in an
adverse impact.
      (4)   Organized instruction may be permitted provided the class size does
not exceed six pupils during any one period of instruction, provided Council
determines that such organized instruction will not become a detriment to the
existing residential character of the lot or neighborhood through a resulting
increase in traffic, on-street parking, or any other factor resulting in an
adverse impact.
      (5)   No outside storage of any kind associated with a home occupation
conditional use shall be permitted unless it is totally screened from the
adjacent residential lots and the abutting street(s).
      (6)   The off-street parking requirements of
Chapter 1185 apply and such off- street parking area shall not be located in
front of the building line.
   (b)   Validity. For the purposes of this Zoning Code, a home occupation
conditional use ceases to be valid once the premises used for the home
occupation is no longer occupied by the holder of the certificate of zoning
compliance or upon the conduct of a home occupation in a manner not approved by
Council.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1189
Signs
1189.01   Permit required.
1189.02   Signs allowed without a permit.
1189.03   Alterations.
1189.04   Existing signs; continuance.
1189.05   Prohibited signs.
1189.06   Church and institutional directional signs.
1189.07   Temporary signs.
1189.08   Miscellaneous provisions.
1189.09   Maintenance.
1189.10   Abandoned.
1189.11   Violations, penalties and remedies.
§ 1189.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   Except as provided in §
1189.02, no display sign, whether permanent or temporary, shall hereafter be
erected, constructed or maintained within the limits of Commercial Point by any
person, firm or corporation until a permit for the same has been issued by the
Planning and Zoning Administrator.
   (b)   The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall grant a sign permit that
meets the requirements of this chapter upon written application, accompanied by
a scale drawing of the proposed sign(s) showing its design, color and
materials, and a site drawing showing its proposed location. A sign permit fee,
as stipulated by ordinance, shall be paid by the property owner or applicant
payable to the General Fund.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1189.02 SIGNS ALLOWED WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   A permit shall not be required for the following signs:
   (a)   The flag, pennants or insignia of any nation, state, municipality, or
other political unit or jurisdiction.
   (b)   Cornerstones, commemorative tablets and historical signs, not to
exceed ten square feet in area.
   (c)   Signs bearing only residential property address or names of occupants
of residential premises, not to exceed one square foot in area. Signs bearing
only non-residential street number, not to exceed one square foot in area.
   (d)   One wall sign on or over a show window or door of a store or business
establishment, announcing only the name of proprietor and the nature of the
business, not to exceed three square feet in area.
   (e)   Real estate for sale, sold, rental or lease signs limited to no more
than eight square feet in area, no more than six feet in height, and with one
sign per lot. Sold signs may be posted for a period not to exceed ten calendar
days. A maximum of three off-premise directional signs shall be permitted in
conjunction with an open house, not to exceed 48 consecutive hours and eight
total days per month. During the hours of the open house, one additional sign
indicating that the house is open will be permitted on the property. For
property with a lot size exceeding 20 acres, real estate for sale, sold, rental
or lease signs are permitted to be a maximum of 32 square feet in area for any
one display area with a total display area not to exceed 64 square feet and no
more than eight feet in height.
   (f)   Signs for the civic promotion of schools, church, or community service
activities which may be displayed for a maximum of 30 calendar days.
   (g)   Flags, signs and sources of illumination clearly in the nature of
decorations customarily associated with any national, state, local or religious
holiday, and containing no advertisement.
   (h)   Traffic directional signs indicating points of entry or exit to off-
street parking, provided such signs are not larger than four square feet in
area. Such signs shall not be located in a public right-of-way and shall not
obstruct the view of motorists for the purposes of ingress and egress.
   (i)   Window signs not larger than 25% of the aggregate window area. For
uses that are located in the second or higher floors of a building, window
signs shall meet the requirements of this section.
   (j)   One sandwich board sign not to exceed four feet in height as measured
from the sidewalk and shall not exceed three feet in width per side. Such signs
shall be limited to three colors, shall be displayed only during daylight hours
and shall not be located on a sidewalk less than seven feet in width. Damage to
sandwich signs and any liability shall be the responsibility of the owner.
Sandwich boards shall be placed on or at the sidewalk in front of the relevant
business in such a way as to leave at least four feet to allow for passage.
   (k)   Personal property "For Sale" signs limited to one per residential
dwelling, not to exceed four square feet in area and four feet in height, and
posted not more than three consecutive days. Off-premises directional signs
shall be permitted for a single 48 hour period.
   (l)   Home occupation uses may provide one on-premises wall sign not to
exceed one square foot in area and not to exceed six feet in height. As a part
of a conditional use application, signage shall be considered by Council as a
part of the approval process.
   (m)   A maximum of two directional signs for any bona fide church, religious
sect or congregation located within the corporate boundaries of Commercial
Point shall be permitted provided that such signs do not exceed four square
feet in area, do not exceed six square feet in height and are located outside a
public right-of-way.
   (n)   A sign(s) located inside a building, whether or not the same are
visible from the exterior.
   (o)   Signs of a duly constituted government body.
   (p)   Banners, ribbons, pennants and streamers may be installed as part of
window signs provided
such elements are displayed for a period of not longer than 30 calendar days.
   (q)   Elevated signs posted to indicate special parking locations for the
handicapped, imprinted with the international symbol of accessibility.
   (r)   Flags, pennants, or insignia of any educational institution.
   (s)   Signs pertaining to political parties, candidates, elections, or
ballot issues.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1189.03 ALTERATIONS.
   No display sign shall hereafter be altered, rebuilt, enlarged, extended or
relocated except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The
repainting of signs shall not be deemed to be an alteration within the meaning
of this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1189.04 EXISTING SIGNS; CONTINUANCE.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided, nothing in this chapter shall
require removal or discontinuance of an existing on-premises or existing off-
premises sign. Such signs shall not be enlarged or extended and the same shall
be deemed a nonconforming sign under the terms of this Zoning Code.
   (a)   Outdoor advertising signs shall be limited to signs pertaining to
advertising exclusively for the use established or goods sold or services
rendered on the premises.
   (b)   Colors. Not more than three primary colors and two accent colors may
be used on the sign or signs for any one building. Different shades of a color
shall be treated as one color for the purpose of this requirement.
   (c)   Illumination and Eye-Catching Devices. All signs and advertising
structures may be illuminated internally or by reflected light provided the
source of light is not directly visible and is so arranged as to reflect away
from the adjoining properties and provided that such illumination shall not be
so placed as to cause confusion or a hazard to traffic or conflict with traffic
control signals or signs. Illuminated signs within a residential district shall
have the light pattern confined to the premises. Display signs illuminated by
electricity or equipped in anyway with electric devices or appliances shall
conform with respect to wiring and appliances to the provisions of the
ordinances relating to electric installations. Any external electric supply
lines shall be brought to the sign by underground supply.
   (d)   Wall Signs. All wall signs shall be mounted on the building which
houses the business establishment advertised by said signs, shall be located on
or along a wall of such building which faces a street, parking lot or service
drive, and shall not project above the roof line or the cap of parapets of such
building, whichever is higher. No wall sign shall project above the wall to
which it is attached.
      (1)   All wall signs in shopping centers shall be parallel to the wall on
which they are installed, and shall be as nearly flush with such wall as is
practical, it being hereby intended to limit signs projecting outward from the
wall. Wall signs to be erected, other than in shopping centers, projecting
outward from the wall at right angles or otherwise over public streets or
sidewalks shall not exceed eight square feet. Each zoning certificate issued
for the erection or maintenance of a new or existing wall sign over a public
street or sidewalk shall contain a condition that the certificate holder
furnish a bond set by Council to hold the municipality harmless from any
liability for injury to third persons.
      (2)   No part of any wall sign shall be less than eight feet above the
sidewalk or ground level, if such wall sign projects forward off the wall on
which it is mounted to such an extent as to constitute a hazard or
inconvenience to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. No part of any wall sign
shall be closer to either end of the building face (including any wall
extension) on which it is erected than 18 inches. Where more than one wall sign
is erected on the same face of a building, there shall be a distance of at
least three feet between said signs.
      (3)   The aggregate sign area or display surface of all exterior wall
signs of every nature shall not exceed one square foot for every two feet of
linear building perimeter. The total wall sign area of any building may not
exceed 400 square feet. The total wall sign area on any one side of a building
shall not exceed 40% of the allowable area for the entire building as computed
in accordance with the foregoing rules.
      (4)   In the case any side of a non-residential property is adjacent to a
residential district, a wall sign shall not be located on the side of the
building to which the nearest said residential district is less than 150 feet.
   (e)   Free Standing and Monument Signs. All free standing and monument signs
shall meets the following requirements:
      (1)   The maximum height thereof does not exceed eight feet above the
average grade of the site when the sign is located 15 feet from the primary
frontage street right-of-way line. For each additional three feet setback from
the street right-of-way line, an additional one foot in height will be
permitted for a freestanding sign up to a maximum of 20 feet high.
      (2)   The total display area of all surfaces does not exceed 15 square
feet when the sign is located 15 feet from the primary frontage street right-
of-way line. For each additional one foot setback from the street right-of-way
line, an additional three square feet of display area will be permitted for the
sign up to a maximum of 64 square feet.
      (3)   The display area of any one surface of the sign does not exceed 32
square feet.
      (4)   No part of the sign may be located closer to any street right-of-
way line than 15 feet, nor closer to any other property line than the
applicable building setback line, if the adjoining property is in a residential
district.
      (5)   The sign will be in harmony with the building on the site, and will
not detract from the appearance of the general neighborhood in which it is
located or adversely affect property values in such neighborhood.
      (6)   The sign will not constitute a traffic hazard or contribute to
traffic problems through confusion with traffic control devices, interference
with the field of vision of motorists using streets or driveways in the area,
or by creating a visual distraction for such motorists. In making a
determination, the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall take into
consideration all pertinent factors relating to the compatibility of such sign
with the surrounding neighborhood, including, but not limited to, its size,
shape, color, brightness, design and its general appearance.
      (7)   Not more than one free standing or monument sign may be authorized
for any one business establishment. Where more than one business establishment
is located on a single tract of land, having an entrance or entrances or
parking area or areas used in common by the customers of such establishments,
only one free standing or monument sign may be authorized for the entire tract.
The existence and boundaries of such tract shall be determined by community
use, rather than by the ownership thereof, it being intended by this provision
to limit each shopping center or similar joint operation to one free standing
or monument sign, except in the case of a shopping center which is contiguous
to two streets which do not intersect each other at a point adjacent to such
shopping center, in which case, one free standing or monument sign, fronting on
each street, may be authorized. Such signs used for identification of joint
activities shall comply with the provisions of comprehensive development
signage as indicated in this section.
   (f)   Comprehensive Development Signage. Comprehensive development signage
requires the approval of Council before a sign permit may be issued by the
Planning and Zoning Administrator, pending compliance with all applicable
sections of this Zoning Code. For the purposes of these sign regulations,
comprehensive development signage shall be considered appropriate in the
following categories:
      (1)   Comprehensive on-site sign system. A comprehensive on-site system
may be authorized by Council, provided that a written set of graphic design
criteria regulation provided by the applicant and applying to present and all
future development are approved by Council, a copy of a standard contractual
signage agreement is approved by Council, any changes to the approved system
require approval by Council as a conditional use, and meeting the following
requirements:
         A.   One joint identification free standing sign not to exceed 80
square feet in area and 20 feet in height, and meeting a minimum setback of 15
feet from all right(s)-of-way. Such sign may list individual uses and serve as
a means of identification of the center of development.
         B.   One wall sign shall be permitted for each individual use not to
exceed one square foot for every lineal foot of the building width of each
individual use that fronts any shopping center drive or parking area, not to
exceed 30 square feet in sign area. (This shall not prohibit a sign as
permitted in § 1189.02(d).)
         C.   No free standing signs other than one joint identification sign
shall be permitted within the development.
      (2)   Single-family subdivision and multi-family development signs. Major
permanent entrance features indicating the project entrance(s) to a single-
family subdivision may be authorized by Council. Up to two entrance features
are permitted at each subdivision entrance. Such feature should include a free
standing sign mounted on a constructed base and supported from substantial
construction. Each sign shall not exceed 20 square feet and shall be a maximum
five feet in height. The constructed base, and the sign mounted within, shall
be a maximum of six total feet in height, shall not exceed 40 square feet, and
shall not be located closer than 15 feet from the closest right-of-way and no
closer to any property line than the applicable building setback requirement if
the adjoining property is in a residential zoning district.
   (g)   Directional Signs. Traffic directional signs indicating points of
entry or exit to off-street parking, provided such signs are not larger than
five square feet in area per display surface. Such signs may not have more than
two display surfaces. Such signs may not be greater than three and one-half
feet in height. Such signs shall not be located in a public right-of-way and
shall not obstruct the view of motorists for the purposes of ingress and
egress.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1189.05 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following signs and types of signs shall be prohibited in Commercial
Point:
   (a)   No display signs except those exempted in §
1189.02, church sign, comprehensive subdivision type signage, and temporary
signs shall be permitted in any residential district, excluding parcels
occupied by commercial uses in PRD.
   (b)   Signs shall not be placed within any public right-of-way.
   (c)   Flashing, moving, rotating, intermittently lighted signs or other
mechanical devices.
   (d)   Roof signs.
   (e)   Electronic variable message signs and portions of signs, and reader
boards (not including "time and temperature" signs). Electronic variable
message signs may be approved as a conditional use for institutional uses where
the building, structure or land is used for public purpose.
   (f)   Billboards and all off-premises signs except for church and
institutional directional signs provided for in § 1189.06, personal property
"For Sale" signs, and special event signs provided for in § 1189.07(c).
   (g)   Any sign not included under the types of signs permitted in any
district regulations or in this chapter.
   (h)   Any sign in a non-residential district within 150 feet of an abutting
residential district in which the sign faces.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1189.06 CHURCH AND INSTITUTIONAL DIRECTIONAL SIGNS.
   Any bona fide church, religious sect or congregation, or other public
institution such as a school or hospital and which is located in Commercial
Point may erect signage subject to the following requirements:
   (a)   Directional Signs. Not more than three directional signs may be
erected in Commercial Point provided the following requirements are met:
      (1)   Signs are not located within the public right-of-way.
      (2)   All church signs shall be of uniform design, size and construction
as specified by Council.
      (3)   The church or institution shall secure in writing permission from
the owner of the property on which such signs shall be located. Such permission
shall be filed with the Planning and Zoning Administrator who will issue the
required sign permit upon authorization by Council.
      (4)   No sign shall exceed four square feet in area nor shall it exceed
six feet in height.
   (b)   Church and Institutional Bulletin Board. Any bona fide church,
religious sect or congregation, community center or public or semi-public
similar institutional use may erect and maintain for their own use a bulletin
board or announcement sign not over 12 square feet in area located on the same
premises upon which such use is located. If not attached flat against a
building, such sign shall be at least 12 feet from all street right-of-way
lines.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1189.07 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   A sign permit shall be issued by the Planning and Zoning Administrator prior
to the erection or construction of any temporary sign. No sign shall contain
more than two faces. The maximum square footage allowed for a temporary sign
shall apply to each face.
   (a)   Subdivision Signs. Signs advertising the sale of platted lots in a
subdivision may be erected and displayed in such subdivision provided that not
more than one such sign facing on any one street shall be permitted in any
subdivision. Such signs may also be used to advertise the sale or lease of
multi-family units or store or office space in a commercial development,
however, such signs shall not be utilized to advertise the sale, lease or
development of land. Such signs shall be limited to 24 square feet in area, be
not more than eight feet in height and be located not closer than 15 feet from
any public right-of-way. Such signs shall be permitted for a one year period if
ownership of a minimum of 60% of the platted lots are transferred.
   (b)   Banner Signs. Banner signs may be installed subject to the following
requirements:
      (1)   That the size of the banner shall not exceed 40 square feet.
      (2)   That a banner sign may only be displayed for a period not to exceed
30 calendar days in any calendar quarter, and no more than four times per
calendar year.
      (3)   That a banner sign shall not be displayed above the roof line of
any structure.
      (4)   That a banner sign shall not have more than three colors. For the
purpose of this section, black and white shall be considered colors.
      (5)   For the purpose of this section, representations of any flag or
national, state or local emblem shall be considered as part of the banner sign
and not exempt as permitted under §
1189.02 (a) or (g).
      (6)   Each property or establishment shall be permitted one banner sign
permit per year.
      (7)   Each property or business establishment shall display only one
banner sign at a time.
      (8)   All banner signs shall be safely secured to the primary structure
on the property.
   (c)   Special Event Signs. Special event signs shall be defined as signs
which are used to present knowledge regarding some special event of community
importance such as a community festival. Such signs shall be considered as
temporary signs, must be authorized by the Planning and Zoning Administrator
before erection and are subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Not more than two such signs regarding the same topic shall be
erected at any given time and located no closer than 1,000 feet from each
other.
      (2)   Not more than four special event signs shall be permitted at any
given time regardless of topic.
      (3)   No more than three colors shall be included on such sign(s). For
the purposes of this section, black and white shall be considered colors.
      (4)   Where such signs are proposed to be located in or above a public
right-of-way, no solid portion of the sign shall be located within 15 feet
horizontally of any vehicular pavement not less than 18 feet above such
pavement, or not within ten feet horizontally of any sidewalk nor less than 12
feet above such sidewalk. No fastening or tying device shall be located within
ten feet horizontally of any vehicular pavement nor less than 15 feet above
such pavement, or not within five feet horizontally of any sidewalk nor less
than ten feet above such sidewalk.
      (5)   Such signs shall not be illuminated.
      (6)   Such signs shall not be displayed for a period more than 30
calendar days before the event and shall be removed within 48 hours after the
event if located in any public right-of-way or within five calendar days if
located elsewhere.
      (7)   Flexible type signs such as banners shall be provided with internal
air vents to adequately relieve wind pressure.
   Each temporary sign permit issued for the erection or maintenance of any
sign located over a public street or sidewalk shall contain a condition that
the permit holder furnishes a bond set by Council to hold the municipality
harmless from liability for injury to third persons.
   (d)   Portable Signs. Portable signs shall be limited to unlighted signs and
shall be permitted for not more than two weeks per year for each business. Such
signs shall be not more than four feet high and not more than eight feet wide
and mounted such that the overall height is not greater than seven feet above
the ground. Portable signs shall not be located in any right-of-way and shall
be located such that they do not obstruct the view of motorists for the
purposes of ingress and egress.
   (e)   A sign announcing the names of contractors, material men, developers
and financial institutions participating in the construction of a building or
announcing the name and nature of the business or development shall be
permitted only during the actual time of construction. Only one sign per
building is permitted, the sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in area for a
residential project and 32 square feet for a non-residential project, shall not
exceed four feet in height for a residential project and ten feet in height for
a non-residential project, and shall be located no closer than 15 feet from any
public right-of-way. Such signs shall be removed within 30 calendar days after
the certificate of occupancy is issued.
   (f)   Air Actuated Attraction Devices. Devices used to attract the attention
of the public which are either air filled or air floating shall be regulated as
temporary signs. Such devices shall be permitted for not more than two weeks
per year for each business. Such devices shall be not more than 30 feet in
height above the ground and located such that the device is at least the
divided height from any public right-of-way, lot lines, or overhead utility
lines and fastened in such a manner that the device shall not shift more than
three feet horizontally under any wind condition.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1189.08 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Applicability of this Chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall
apply to all advertising or display signs of every nature, whether portable or
attached to the realty, except as otherwise provided herein, either
specifically or by necessary implication.
   (b)   Attachment of Signs to Other Structures. No display or advertising
sign shall be attached to the standards of a free standing sign, other than the
display surface originally constructed as a part of such sign. The standard of
the free standing sign shall be finished in only one color. No display or
advertising sign shall be attached to or painted or otherwise displayed on a
light standard, gasoline pump, fence, wall, post or other structure, or to any
portable supporting device, except as specifically authorized by this chapter.
   (c)   Bed and Breakfast Inns. One on-premises sign shall be permitted for
each bed and breakfast inn. Such sign shall not exceed six square feet in
display area per side and shall not exceed four feet in height. A wall sign
shall not exceed six square feet in area and shall not exceed eight feet in
height. Wall signs shall not be roof mounted and shall not extend above the
eave. Such signs shall not be internally illuminated.
   (d)   State Routes 104 and 762 Corridor Sign District. For commercial,
suburban office and institutional and limited manufacturing zoned properties
abutting state routes, the following standards for freestanding signs located
in that yard area between state routes and the principal structure apply:
      (1)   Corridor defined: The state routes corridors shall be defined as
those properties directly abutting the state routes right-of-way, and shall not
include approaches or ramps. This corridor is intended to serve those abutting
properties with sign visibility on state routes and is not intended to serve
any other right-of-way.
      (2)   The minimum height thereof does not exceed five feet above the
average grade of the site when the sign is located 15 feet from state route
right-of-way lines.
      (3)   The distance the sign is located from any other right-of-way must
equal or exceed the distance the sign is located from the state route.
      (4)   A limit of two display surfaces.
      (5)   The total display area of all surfaces does not exceed 20 square
feet when the sign is located 15 feet from the right-of-way line. For each
additional one foot setback from State Route 104 or 762 right-of-way line, an
additional three square feet of display area will be permitted up to a maximum
of 128 square feet.
      (6)   The display area of any one surface does not exceed 32 square feet.
      (7)   Not more than three colors are used. For the purpose of this
section, black and white shall be considered colors.
      (8)   No part of such sign shall be located closer to any street or
right-of-way line than 15 feet, nor closer to any other property line than the
applicable building setback line.
      (9)   Such sign will be in harmony with the building on the site, and
will not detract from the appearance of the general neighborhood in which it is
located or adversely affect property values in such neighborhood.
      (10)   Such sign will not constitute a traffic hazard or contribute to
traffic problem through confusion with traffic control devices, interference
with the field of vision of motorists using streets of driveways in the area,
or by creating a visual distraction for such motorists.
      (11)   Certain temporary signs meeting the location definition provided
above shall be subject to the following:
         A.   Shall meet all size, setback and other criteria as set forth in
divisions (d)(2) through (10) above.
         B.   The location of any sign on a site not containing a structure
shall clearly be oriented toward the state route.
         C.   A temporary sign permit may be issued for a period not to exceed
two years and shall conform to the following table:
 
TYPE OF SIGN               TIME LIMIT (calendar days)
Construction               Thirty days from issuance of certificate of
                           occupancy
Real estate                Ten days from date of sale
Subdivision identification One year or after 60% of lots are sold, whichever
                           occurs first
 
      (12)   All other requirements of this Zoning Code shall apply to this
district.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1189.09 MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   Duty to Keep in Good Repair. The owner of a sign and the owner of the
realty upon which the sign is located shall each have the duty to keep such a
sign in a state of good repair and to see that the sign is not permitted to
deteriorate or fall into disrepair to such an extent that it becomes dangerous
or unsightly. Visible rot or rust, falling parts, or broken parts shall be
prima facia evidence that a sign is not in a state of good repair.
   (b)   Notice to Repair. When the Planning and Zoning Administrator
determines that such a sign exists in a state of disrepair, the Planning and
Zoning Administrator shall issue to the owner of the sign and the owner of the
real estate a notice of such disrepair and the need for corrective action.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1189.10 ABANDONED.
   (a)   Abandonment Defined. If any sign shall become abandoned, in a manner
defined herein, such sign is declared a public nuisance by reason that
continued lack of use results in lack of reasonable and adequate maintenance,
thereby causing deterioration and creating a blighting influence on nearby
properties. An abandoned sign shall be any sign that meets any of the following
conditions:
      (1)   Any sign associated with the abandoned nonconforming use.
      (2)   Any sign that remains after the termination of a business. A
business shall be considered terminated if it has ceased operations for at
least 180 consecutive days. Seasonal businesses are exempted from this
determination.
      (3)   Any sign that is not maintained in accordance with §
1189.09.
   (b)   Determination of Abandonment. When the Planning and Zoning
Administrator finds, upon investigation, that a sign has been abandoned, the
Planning and Zoning Administrator shall notify the owner of said sign and the
owner of the property upon which such sign is located, of any findings, in
accordance with §
1137.07. Such notice shall advise the owner of the sign that said sign has been
declared abandoned and must be removed within 30 calendar days from the date of
mailing of said notice. The owner of the sign or the owner of the property may
appeal such decision to Council as provided in §
1135.04(c). The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall maintain a photograph
of said sign along with a written report of any finding in a permanent file.
   (c)   Right to Remove. If the sign is not removed as ordered, the same may
be removed by the municipality at the expense of the lessee or owner. If the
municipality is not reimbursed for the cost of removal within 30 calendar days
of such removal, the amount thereof shall be certified to the County Auditor
for collection as a special assessment against the property upon which such
sign is located.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1189.11 VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND REMEDIES.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any requirement or prohibition of
this chapter shall be considered in violation of this Zoning Code. Failure to
comply within 30 calendar days of receipt of notification of violation, unless
extended by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, shall render such person,
firm or corporation subject to the penalties provided in § 1135.12.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1191
Landscaping and Screening
1191.01   Purpose and definitions.
1191.02   Preservation of trees and wooded areas.
1191.03   Tree replacement.
1191.04   Landscape standards.
1191.05   Development standards
1191.06   Off-street parking standards.
1191.07   Signage.
1191.08   Screening of service courts and loading dock areas.
1191.09   Submittal requirements.
1191.10   Installation and maintenance.
1191.11   Tree removal permits.
1191.12   Public spaces.
1191.13   Private streets.
§ 1191.01 PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose and intent of this chapter is the preservation
and promotion of landscaping as a suitable and necessary aspect of land
development, as a component of municipal development character, as an important
beneficial element of the microclimate through the provision of shade and as
buffers, and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare. It is
further the purpose of this chapter to promote the preservation and, when
necessary, replacement of major trees removed in the course of land
development, to promote the proper utilization of landscaping as a buffer
between certain land uses to minimize conflicts, and to protect, preserve and
promote the character of the municipality.
   (b)   Definitions.
      CALIPER. The caliper of a tree shall be measured at six inches above
grade. For this chapter the term "caliper" only applies to new trees.
      DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (dbh). The dbh of a tree shall be measured at four
and one-half feet above ground level. For this chapter the term "diameter
breast height (dbh)” only applies to existing trees.
      MAJOR TREE. For the purposes of this section, a major tree is defined by
having a diameter breast height of six inches or greater.
      WOODLANDS. For the purposes of this section, a woodland is an area of
trees and unique site characteristic that is located on any undeveloped parcel
of property within Commercial Point.
(Ord. 2021-20, passed 7-19-2021)
§ 1191.02 PRESERVATION OF TREES AND WOODED AREAS.
   (a)   All major trees shall be preserved unless exempted as follows:
      (1)   An existing tree will be located within a public right-of-way or
easement.
      (2)   An existing tree is located within the area to be covered by a
proposed structure or within 12 feet from the perimeter of such structure(s)
and such structure(s) cannot be located in a manner to avoid removal of an
existing tree at the same time permitting desirable, logical and appropriate
development of the lot.
      (3)   An existing tree will be located within a proposed driveway
designed to service a single-family home.
      (4)   An existing tree is damaged, diseased or a safety hazard.
      (5)   The tree is an undesirable species in its present condition.
      (6)   Established single-family lots shall be exempt from this section,
however; new subdivision development of single-family lots shall not be exempt.
   (b)   When preparing and reviewing subdivision plans and landscape plans,
good faith effort shall be made to preserve natural vegetation areas. Streets,
lots, structures and parking areas shall be laid out to avoid the unnecessary
destruction of wooded areas or outstanding tree specimens. Developers of land
are encouraged to designate wooded areas as park reserves.
   (c)   Significant Trees. All significant trees shall be protected and
preserved to ensure that the value provided to Commercial Point and its
citizens by the cultural, historical, biological, or horticultural significance
of any tree is continued into the future.
(Ord. 2021-20, passed 7-19-2021)
§ 1191.03 TREE REPLACEMENT.
   (a)   Major Tree Replacement. During the course of development of a single
lot or a subdivision, including woodlands, the developer or owner shall be
required to replace major trees removed pursuant to §
1191.02 in accordance with the following schedule.
 
Major Tree Replacement Schedule
DBH                       Replacement Schedule
6 inches up to 12 inches  One-for-one
12 inches up to 18 inches Two-for-one
18 inches up to 24 inches Three-for-one
24 inches and greater     Four-for-one
 
      (1)   Replacements for major trees shall have a trunk diameter at
planting of at least two and one-half inches caliper.
      (2)   The requirement for major tree replacement shall be considered as
being in addition to any other landscaping required by §§
1191.02 through
1191.05.
   (b)   Replacement Schedule for Woodlands. In addition to the provisions in
division (a) of this section, the developer or owner of a woodland shall,
during the course of development, be required to retain a minimum of 40% of the
woodland.
   (c)   Where it is impractical or not feasible to replace all of the trees on
the affected lot or within the affected subdivision, Council may approve one,
or any combination of the following alternatives as a means of meeting the tree
replacement requirements:
      (1)   Replace as many trees as is practical on the affected lot;
      (2)   Replace as many trees as is practical within this affected
subdivision phase;
      (3)   Replace as many trees as is practical within the affected
subdivision;
      (4)   For those trees that cannot be replaced through steps one through
three above, the developer shall be required to replace the trees elsewhere in
the village; or
      (5)   Use larger caliper replacement trees to achieve a planting of equal
or greater value with fewer numbers.
(Ord. 2021-20, passed 7-19-2021)
§ 1191.04 LANDSCAPE STANDARDS.
   (b)   Deciduous Trees. Deciduous trees shall be species having an average
mature crown spread of greater than 15 feet in Central Ohio and having trunk(s)
which can be maintained with over five feet of clear wood in areas which have
visibility requirements, except at vehicular use area intersections where eight
foot clear wood requirements will control. Trees having an average mature
spread of crown less than 15 feet may be substituted by grouping of the same so
as to create the equivalent of a 15 foot crown spread. Deciduous trees shall be
a minimum of five feet in height with a minimum dbh of one and three-fourth
inches at planting. Deciduous trees are recommended as appropriate for
municipal environment and encouraged for use in meeting the requirements of
this chapter.
   (c)   Evergreen Trees. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of five feet in
height with a minimum dbh of one and one-half inches at planting.
   (d)   Shrubs and Hedges. Shrubs and hedges shall be at least two feet in
average height when planted.
   (e)   Earth Mounds. Earth mounds shall be physical barriers, which when
planted block or screen the view just as a hedge or low wall would. Mounds
shall be constructed of clean fill, top soil and similar materials, and shall
be designed with proper plant material to prevent erosion and facilitate
drainage. Earth mounds shall not exceed four feet in height and shall be
planted completely by plant material, which may include mulching limited to the
immediate base of plantings, of which no greater than 50% shall be turf.
   (f)   Screening Materials. Screening may consist of walls, fences, natural
vegetation or a combination thereof acceptable to Council and with an opacity
of no less than 75%, except where superseded under this division (f). Only
masonry and brick walls or solid wood privacy fencing is permitted for built
screening. Such screening shall be between four and six feet in height and
shall be maintained in good condition. Landscaping provided in lieu of such
wall or fence shall consist of dense evergreen bushes planted no less than four
feet in height.
   (g)   Monoculture. Monoculture, or the extensive use of a single species of
trees, shall be limited in order to minimize the potential for disease or pest
to strike a particular species resulting in significant same-species loss. The
following limits shall apply:
 
Maximum Use of Same Genus
Number of Trees on Site Maximum % of Same Genus
10 – 19               50%
20 – 39               33%
40 – 59               25%
Over 60                 15%
 
(Ord. 2021-20, passed 7-19-2021)
§ 1191.05 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (a)   Non-Residential Uses. For all new construction, building additions, or
land development for which a building permit and/or zoning permit is required,
the following shall apply:
      (1)   All non-residential uses shall provide 30 square feet of landscaped
area for every 1,000 square feet of building ground coverage area, or fraction
thereof. All areas of a lot not covered by buildings, structures, paving, or
the landscaping required herein shall be covered by natural turf at a minimum.
      (2)   All commercial structures and industrial warehouse structures shall
be required to plant the required minimum landscaping listed below:
 
Minimum Tree Planting Required per Building Size
Square Feet of Building          Number of Trees per Square Feet
Up to 30,000 sq. ft.             One tree per 1,000 sq. ft.
30,001 sq. ft. to 60,000 sq. ft. One tree per 2,000 sq. ft.
60,001 sq. ft. to 90,000 sq. ft. One tree per 4,000 sq. ft.
90,001 sq. ft. and greater       Two trees per 8,000 sq. ft.
 
         A.   In no instance shall the number of trees required to be planted
exceed 500 trees.
      (3)   All office uses, institutional uses, convalescent and nursing homes
and child daycare facilities, shall be required to plant the required minimum
landscaping listed below:
 
Minimum Tree Planting Required per Building Size
Square Feet of Building          Number of Trees per Square Feet
Up to 30,000 sq. ft.             One tree per 1,000 sq. ft.
30,001 sq. ft. to 60,000 sq. ft. One tree per 1,500 sq. ft.
60,001 sq. ft. and greater       One tree per 2,000 sq. ft.
 
         A.   In no instance shall the number of trees required to be planted
exceed 100 trees.
   (b)   Residential Uses. For all new construction, building additions, or
land development for which a building permit and/or zoning permit is required
the following shall apply:
      (1)   Multi-Family Perimeter Treatment. For all multi-family residential
uses, a 15 foot land-scaped perimeter shall be provided where such development
is adjacent to or abuts a residential zoning district or public right-of-way,
excluding on-site access drives. Such landscaping shall include a combination
of trees, shrubs, hedges, earth mounds, and other natural features. No more
than 80% of natural landscaping material shall consist of turf.
         A.   Screening between multi-family developments and non-residential
zoned property. Screening shall consist of walls, fences, or natural vegetation
in combination with a minimum four foot mounding. Said screening shall have an
opacity of no less than 50%, except where superseded under §
1191.04(f). Screening between multi-family residential and non-residential
developments shall be reviewed for approval by Council. Only masonry and brick
walls or solid wood privacy fencing is permitted for built screening, shall be
maintained in good condition, and comply with §
1181.07. Landscaping provided in lieu of such wall or fence shall consist of
dense evergreen bushes planted no less than two feet in height or evergreen
trees at no more than 30 feet spacing at five feet in height at the time of
planting. A minimum of one evergreen tree and four evergreen or deciduous
shrubs per 1,000 square feet of landscaped area for areas in all combinations
of screening materials will be planted.
         B.   The opacity of 50% will take into consideration existing
vegetation to be preserved and shall contain at least the minimum evergreen
trees and shrubs. The minimum tree shall be five feet in height with a minimum
caliper of one and three-quarters inches at the time of planting. The minimum
shrub shall be two feet in height at the time of planting.
   (c)   Existing Trees. Existing healthy trees and shrubs shall be preserved
and incorporated into the overall site and landscape design to the maximum
extent practical as determined by the village. Existing trees may be credited
towards minimum tree planning requirements.
      (l)   No credit shall be given for existing preserved trees that are:
         A.   Not located on the actual development site;
         B.   Not properly protected from damage during the construction
process;
         C.   Dead, dying, diseased, or infested with harmful insects.
      (2)   No new tree planting shall be required if existing trees to remain
on site after development, and the aggregate trunk sizes of such trees, meet or
exceed the requirements set forth above.
   (d)   Any combination of existing and new trees may be used to meet the
requirements of this section.
(Ord. 2021-20, passed 7-19-2021)
§ 1191.06 OFF-STREET PARKING STANDARDS.
   (a)   Off-Street Parking Areas. Off-street parking areas for more than five
vehicles shall be effectively screened on each side which abuts a residential
zoning district or public right-of-way by a masonry wall or solid wood fence.
Such wall or fence shall be no higher than four feet and shall be maintained in
good condition. Landscaping provided in lieu of such wall or fence shall
consist of a strip of land not less than 15 feet in width planted with an
evergreen hedge or dense planting of evergreen shrubs not less than four feet
in height. This division shall apply to bed and breakfast inns regardless of
the size of off-street parking area.
      (1)   All off-street parking areas shall provide one tree of no less than
two inches caliper, for every six parking spaces. A minimum of 50% of the off-
street parking trees shall be planted in parking lot islands. The remainder
must be planted within ten feet of the perimeter of the parking lot.
         A.   Parking lot islands. Each landscaped tree island in a single
loaded parking stall design shall have a minimum area of 162 square feet with a
minimum width of nine feet. Each landscaped tree island located in a double
loaded parking stall shall have a minimum area of 324 square feet, with a
minimum width of nine feet.
      (2)   All parking lot islands and peninsulas shall be designed to provide
a minimum of three feet in depth, for soil in a friable condition for healthy
tree and plant growth.
      (3)   All trees shall be balled and burlapped or containerized/potted
when planted. The top 18 inches of the burlap bag and cage shall be removed
when planting.
      (4)   All trees shall be maintained in a healthy condition.
(Ord. 2021-20, passed 7-19-2021)
§ 1191.07 SIGNAGE.
   A landscaped area totaling a minimum of 50 square feet shall be provided
centered on the base of all freestanding signs and should be comprised of a
variety of natural materials, such as turf, ground cover, shrubs, and hedges.
No more than 50% of natural landscaping material shall consist of turf. Low
maintenance plant materials should be utilized. A sketch plan drawn to scale
and indicating plant material by type (Latin/Botanical names) and quantity
shall be provided with the application for a sign permit.
(Ord. 2021-20, passed 7-19-2021)
§ 1191.08 SCREENING OF SERVICE COURTS AND LOADING DOCK AREAS.
   (a)   Screening of Service Courts and Loading Dock Areas. All areas used for
service, loading and unloading activities shall be screened along the entire
lot line if adjacent to or abutting a residential zoning district or public
right-of-way. The requirements of §
1191.04(f) shall apply.
   (b)   Screening of Trash Container Receptacles. For all non-single family
residential uses requiring trash container receptacles, such as dumpsters, all
such containers or receptacles shall be enclosed on all sides by walls or
fences with an opacity of 100% and a minimum height of six feet. Such
containers or receptacles when located adjacent to or abutting a residential
zoning district shall in addition be landscaped on all sides visible from such
districts by shrubs and hedges with an opacity of 75%. Trash containers and
receptacles shall be located behind the building line and shall be located to
the rear of non-residential uses. Trash containers and receptacles shall
conform to side and rear yard setback requirements and for non-residential uses
adjacent to a residential zoning district, such containers and receptacles
shall be located no closer than 25 feet to any property line.
(Ord. 2021-20, passed 7-19-2021)
§ 1191.09 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Procedure. Landscaping plans shall be submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Administrator whenever an application is filed for a non-single family
residential use as a part of a request for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance,
zoning map amendment, conditional use permit, and in conjunction with the
submittal requirements for Planned Districts.
   (b)   Plan Contents. The landscaping plan shall be prepared by a licensed
design professional or landscape architect and shall include the following
information:
      (1)   Plot plan drawn to scale indicating property lines, easements,
proposed improvements, natural features, drainage, adjacent uses and
structures, and proposed landscaping which shall include botanical and common
names, dbh of deciduous trees, installation size, on-center planting dimensions
where applicable, and a summary of all landscaping materials used on-site, new
and existing, by type, common name, and quantity.
      (2)   In the case where trees are to be removed as part of any site
development, the plot plan shall, in addition to items included in division (b)
(1) above, also specifically indicate any trees to be removed and include
botanical and common names and location of any major trees and any significant
trees.
      (3)   Title block with the pertinent names and addresses of property
owner, applicant, design professional or landscape architect including the
architect's seal, scale, date, north arrow, address of the subject property,
and name of the subdivision (if applicable).
   (c)   Criteria for Review. The submitted landscaping plan shall be reviewed
to determine if proposed improvements comply with the requirements and
standards of this chapter and commonly accepted landscaping and design
standards. Council and/or the Planning and Zoning Administrator may call upon
professional services from either the public or private sectors to provide an
evaluation relative to any submitted landscaping plan.
(Ord. 2021-20, passed 7-19-2021)
§ 1191.10 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   Installation. Landscaping plans and the improvements identified
therein meeting the requirements of this chapter shall be completely installed
no later than six months subsequent to the date of issuance of a Temporary
Certificate of Use and Occupancy. A single three month extension may be granted
by the Planning and Zoning Administrator upon request of the applicant upon
demonstration that such extension is warranted because of adverse weather
conditions or unavailability of approved landscaping material. All landscaping
material shall be installed in a sound, professional manner and according to
accepted landscaping and planting procedures.
   (b)   Maintenance. All landscaping material shall be maintained in proper
and healthful condition. Property owners shall maintain landscaped areas in a
proper, neat and orderly appearance, and free from refuse and debris. Upon
issuance of a citation, corrective action shall be completed within 60 calendar
days unless the Planning and Zoning Administrator determines that weather
constraints require one additional 60 calendar day period. Failure to meet the
requirements of this section shall constitute violation of this Zoning Code and
enforcement and penalty requirements of Chapter 1135 shall apply.
   (c)   Dead or Diseased Trees. It shall be unlawful for any property owner to
maintain or permit to stand on his or her property, dead, diseased, or damaged
trees, shrubs, evergreens or other plants which are deemed by the municipality
to be a menace to the public peace, health, and safety.
(Ord. 2021-20, passed 7-19-2021)
§ 1191.11 TREE REMOVAL PERMITS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following without first having obtained
a tree removal permit in accordance with the provisions of these regulations:
      (1)   Remove, damage, or destroy any tree or similar woody vegetation of
any dbh in a woodland;
      (2)   Remove, damage, or destroy any tree or similar woody vegetation of
six-inch dbh or greater which is not located in a woodland;
      (3)   Conduct any tree clearing activities.
   (b)   Exceptions.
      (1)   The removal or trimming of any trees by or on behalf of a resident
owner of a one-family dwelling unit, one-family cluster-housing unit, site
condominium unit, or residential condominium unit from an area under the
owner's exclusive control. This exception shall not apply to removal of trees
from common areas.
      (2)   Upon prior approval by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, the
removal of or trimming of trees necessitated by the installation, repair or
maintenance work performed in a public utility easement or approved private
easement for public utilities.
      (3)   The removal or trimming of trees if performed by or on behalf of
Commercial Point, Franklin or Pickaway County, Ohio Department of
Transportation, Franklin or Pickaway County Public Works Office or other public
agencies, or a public utility company in a public right-of-way, upon public
property, or upon a private easement for public utilities in connection with a
publicly awarded construction project, the installation of public streets or
public sidewalks, or installation of public utilities within a private or
public easement established for such purpose.
      (4)   The trimming and pruning of trees as part of normal maintenance of
landscaping or orchards, if performed in accordance with accepted forestry or
agricultural standards and techniques.
      (5)   The removal or trimming of dead, diseased or damaged trees if
performed by or on behalf of Commercial Point, Franklin or Pickaway County,
Ohio Department of Transportation, Franklin or Pickaway County Public Works
Office or other public agencies in a public right-of-way or upon public
property if done to prevent injury or damage to persons or property.
      (6)   The removal or trimming of dead, diseased or damaged trees provided
that the damage resulted from an accident or non-human cause, and provided
further that the removal or trimming is accomplished through the use of
standard forestry practices and techniques.
      (7)   The removal or transplanting of trees during the operation of a
commercial nursery, tree farm or practicing sustained-yield forestry (land
stays a productive forest).
      (8)   Actions made necessary by an emergency, such as a tornado,
windstorm, flood, freeze, dangerous and infectious insect infestation or
disease or other disaster, in order to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property or restore order.
   (c)   Content of Application.
      (1)   Required information. An applicant for a tree removal permit for a
parcel of one acre or more, if required by this section, shall submit the
following materials to the municipality:
         A.   A completed tree removal permit application on a form prescribed
by Zoning Administrator, which such application shall include the following
information:
            1.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and/or
the applicant's agent.
            2.   The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
property.
            3.   The project location, including as applicable, the address,
the street, road, or highway, section number, lot or unit number, and the name
of the subdivision or development.
            4.   A detailed description and statement of the activity to be
undertaken.
         B.   A tree removal permit application fee in the amount as
established by the adopted fee schedule.
         C.   If the applicant is not the owner of the property, a written
authorization from the owner allowing the proposed activity.
         D.   Five copies of a plan for proposed tree removal containing all of
the following information:
            1.   The shape and dimensions of the property, and the location of
any existing and proposed structure or improvement.
            2.   The location of all existing trees of six-inch or greater dbh,
identified by common and/or botanical name. Trees proposed to remain, to be
transplanted, or to be removed shall be designated. A cluster of trees may be
designated as a "stand" of trees, and predominant species, estimated number,
and average size shall be indicated. Clusters of trees located within an
approved open space which is to be preserved may be designated as an "open
space stand" and identified in the same manner as a "stand" without individual
identification and location.
            3.   A description of tree species, size, density, health and
vigor.
            4.   The location and dimension of all setbacks required by
existing zoning requirements.
            5.   A statement that all retained trees will be identified by a
method, such as painting or flagging. If protective barriers are deemed
necessary by Commercial Point, the statement shall include a description of how
the retained trees are to be protected, with an acknowledgment that the
barriers must be in place before operations commence.
            6.   A general grading plan prepared by a registered engineer or
land surveyor showing the anticipated drainage patterns, including the location
of any areas where cut and fill operations are likely to occur, to enable
Commercial Point to determine the impact of the proposal on the viability of
the existing trees.
   (d)   Application Review Procedures.
      (1)   Procedure. Commercial Point shall review the submitted application
for a tree removal permit required by this section to determine that all
required information has been provided. At the request of the applicant or the
municipality, an administrative review meeting may be held to review the
request in light of the purpose and the review standards of this section. A
field inspection of the site may be conducted by the Zoning Administrator.
Where the site proposed for development requires review or approval by Council
of the subdivision layout, qualification for one-family cluster, or special
land use approval, Council shall be responsible for approval or denial of the
request for a tree removal permit (subject to affirmance, reversal or
modification by the Council of Commercial Point with respect to tentative
preliminary plat approval, or any other approval for which Council has final
authority). In all other instances, the review of tree removal permit requests
shall be the responsibility of the Zoning Administrator. All decisions shall be
made in accordance with the review standards of this section.
      (2)   Denial. If an application for a tree removal permit is denied, the
permit applicant shall be notified in writing of the reasons for denial by the
Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   Approval; Conditions; Performance Requirements. If an application
for a tree removal permit is granted, the reviewing authority may do any or all
of the following:
         A.   Attach to the granting of the permit reasonable conditions
considered necessary by the reviewing authority to ensure the intent of this
section is fulfilled and to minimize damage to, encroachment in, or
interference with natural resources and processes within wooded areas.
         B.   Set a reasonable time frame within which to complete tree removal
operations.
         C.   Require a permit holder to deposit a performance bond, or other
acceptable security, equal to 100% of the cost of the improvements to ensure
compliance with the terms of this section, including the planting of any
required replacement trees. Once the trees designated to be removed have been
removed and any required replacement trees have been planted and inspected, the
municipality shall release the bond or security. If the permit holder has
provided a bond or other performance guarantee to the municipality under any
other ordinance or regulation, and such bond or guarantee is deemed adequate by
the municipality to ensure compliance with this section, no additional
performance guarantee shall be required under this section.
   (e)   Term of Permit.
      (1)   Any and all tree removal permits issued by the municipality to a
developer shall expire (unless extended) at the same time as the
contemporaneous approval granted by the municipality for the development, if
any (e.g., preliminary plat, preliminary site plan, special land use, site plan
approval, etc.).
      (2)   Any and all tree removal permits issued by the municipality to any
person for an activity regulated under this section for which a contemporaneous
approval of the development is not required (e.g., removal of trees by a
builder in connection with construction of a residence upon a lot or parcel)
shall expire one year from the date of issuance.
      (3)   Any activity regulated under this section which is to be commenced
after expiration of a tree removal permit shall require a new application,
additional fees, and new review and approval.
   (f)   Protection of Trees and Woodlands during Construction; Display of
Permit.
      (1)   No individual shall conduct any activity within ten feet of the
drip line of any tree designated to remain, including but not limited to
placing solvents, building material, construction equipment, or soil deposits
within the drip line.
      (2)   During construction, no individual shall attach a device or wire to
any remaining tree, except to cordon off protected areas.
      (3)   Before development, land clearing, filling, or any property
alteration for which a tree removal permit is required, the developer or
builder shall erect and maintain suitable barriers such as snow fencing,
cyclone fencing, etc., to protect remaining trees. Wood, metal, or other
substantial material shall be utilized in the construction of barriers.
Protective barriers shall remain in place until the Zoning Administrator
authorizes their removal. Barriers are required for all trees designated to
remain, except in the following cases:
         A.   Street right-of-way and utility easement may be cordoned by
placing stakes a minimum of 25 feet apart and tying ribbon, plastic tape, or
other brightly visible materials at least two and one-half feet above the
ground from stake to stake along the outside perimeters of areas to be cleared.
         B.   Large property areas separate from the construction or land
clearing area onto which no equipment will venture shall be cordoned off.
      (4)   The permit holder shall conspicuously display the tree removal
permit on-site. The permit shall be displayed continuously while trees are
being removed or while activities authorized under the permit are performed,
and for ten days following completion of those activities. The permit holder
shall allow the Zoning Administrator to enter and inspect the premises during
reasonable business hours. Failure to allow an inspection is a violation of
this section.
   (g)   Enforcement and Administration. To ensure enforcement of this section
and the approved plan for tree removal, various inspections will be performed
at the site by the Zoning Administrator. The applicant will be responsible for
all inspection fees in accordance with the inspection fees set and established
by ordinance of the Council.
   (h)   Penalties and Remedies.
      (1)   In addition to the penalties as set forth in §
1135.12, any person who violates any provision of this section shall forfeit
and pay a civil penalty equal to the total value of those trees illegally
removed or damaged, as computed from the International Society of Arboriculture
shade tree value formula. Such sum shall accrue to the municipality and may be
recovered in a civil action brought by the municipality.
      (2)   Any person authorized or designated by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator to enforce or administer this section may issue a stop work order
to any person conducting any operation in violation of this section. A person
shall not continue, or cause or allow to be continued, any operation in
violation of such an order, except as authorized by the enforcing agency to
abate a dangerous condition or remove the violation.
      (3)   If a stop work order is not obeyed, the enforcing agency or person
may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for any order enjoining the
violation of the order. This remedy is in addition to, and not in limitation
of, any other remedy provided by law or ordinance, and does not prevent
criminal prosecution for failure to obey the order.
      (4)   Any person aggrieved by a stop work order may request review by the
Zoning Administrator of the stop work order within one working day of its
issuance. The Zoning Administrator shall then determine whether the stop work
order was properly issued due to operations being conducted in violation of the
terms of this section. The Zoning Administrator may lift the stop work order if
the operations are determined to be in compliance with this section.
      (5)   Any use or activity in violation of the terms of this section is
hereby declared to be a nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any
court of competent jurisdiction. In addition to other remedies, the
municipality may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent,
abate, or restrain the violation. All costs, fees and expenses in connection
with such action, including attorney fees incurred by the municipality, shall
be assessed against the violator.
(Ord. 2021-20, passed 7-19-2021)
§ 1191.12 PUBLIC SPACES.
   Within the public right-of-way and on public properties, no person or entity
other than the municipality shall plant a tree, shrub, evergreen, woody shrub
or other obstruction on public property without the written consent of the
Village of Commercial Point. The enforcement and penalty provisions of
Chapter 1135 shall apply to this section.
   (a)   Tree Topping. No person shall, as a normal practice, top any tree
within the public right-of-way. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back
of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown
to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy or disfigure the tree. With
an immature tree, removing more than 25% of the canopy will be considered
topping.
   (b)   Height of Limbs Over Sidewalks and Streets. Tree limbs extending over
a sidewalk shall be trimmed to such an extent that no portion of the same shall
be less than ten feet above the sidewalks. Tree limbs extending over streets
shall be trimmed to such an extent that no portion of the same shall interfere
with the normal flow of traffic.
   (c)   Municipal Rights. The municipality shall have the right to plant,
prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the rights-of-way of
all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes and other public grounds as may be
necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the environmental
quality and beauty of such public grounds. The Zoning Administrator may cause
or order to be removed any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition
or which by reason of its nature poses a threat to the interruption of service
to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public
improvements.
   (d)   Reducing Tree Lawn. No person shall by any type of construction reduce
the size of a tree lawn without first securing permission from the Zoning
Administrator.
   (e)   Utility Companies. Utility companies shall provide written evidence to
the Zoning Administrator, of adherence to established guidelines (as
recommended by the National Arborists Association) for line clearance work.
These guidelines shall cover the following areas:
      (l)   Tree trimming/pruning;
      (2)   Tree removal;
      (3)   Brushing;
      (4)   Right-of-way clearance for new transmission conductors on private
rights-of-way; and
      (5)   Chemical brush control and appropriate precautions.
   (f)   Removal, Replanting and Replacement in Public Places. Wherever it is
necessary to remove a tree(s) or shrub(s) from any municipally owned property,
in connection with the paving of a sidewalk, or the paving or widening of a
portion of a street, alley, or highway used for vehicular traffic, or any other
reason, the Zoning Administrator must be contacted. At that time, the Zoning
Administrator will determine if replacement of the trees and/or shrubs is
feasible.
   (g)   Public Tree Care.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the Village Council those
locations at which he or she deems the removal of street trees is necessary.
The Zoning Administrator will notify the adjacent property owner(s) of the
municipality's intentions to remove the tree(s).
      (2)   The municipality shall have the right to enter private property to
gain access to trees adjacent to public areas for the purpose of proper
pruning, after reasonable prior notice has been given to the property owner. To
ensure that street trees thrive, homeowners are encouraged to confer with the
Zoning Administrator, and water and mulch the trees as needed.
      (3)   No person or contractor, unless working on behalf of the
municipality, shall attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising poster,
decoration, decorative lighting, or other contrivance to any tree on
municipally owned property. No person shall permit any fire to burn where such
fire or heat therefrom, or heat from any source will injure any portion of any
tree on municipally owned property. No person or contractor, unless working on
behalf of the municipality, shall use herbicides or other chemicals on any
trees, shrubs or evergreens located on municipally owned property.
      (4)   No person shall hinder, prevent, or interfere with the agents or
employees of the municipality while the agents or employees are engaged in
planting, maintaining, or removing any tree, shrub, evergreen, or other plant
material on municipally owned property.
      (5)   No person shall excavate any ditch, tunnel, trench, or lay any
drive within ten feet from the dripline of any tree, shrub, evergreen, or other
plant material standing on any municipally owned property.
      (6)   It shall be unlawful for any person or contractor, unless working
on behalf of the municipality, to break, deface, injure, mutilate, kill, or
destroy any tree, shrub, or evergreen on any municipally owned property.
   (h)   Removal of Stumps. All stumps of street trees shall be removed 12
inches below the surface of the ground. Stumps shall be removed or shall be
ground at the site. All residual material shall be removed from the site at the
time the tree is removed and the site shall be restored as approved by the
Zoning Administrator.
   (i)   Arborist License and Bond. It shall be unlawful for any person or
contractor working on behalf of the municipality, to act as an arborist in the
business or occupation of planting, pruning, treating, or removing street trees
within the municipality without providing documentation as a certified arborist
or as the authorized representative of a certified arborist. Each applicant
shall file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum amount
of $1,000,000 indemnifying the municipality or any person injured or damaged
resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as herein described.
   (j)   Appeal Procedures. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning
Administrator may appeal the decision to Council as prescribed in §
1135.04(c).
(Ord. 2021-20, passed 7-19-2021)
§ 1191.13 PRIVATE STREETS.
   No trees may be planted along private streets without first obtaining a
permit from the Zoning Administrator. The permit application must contain a map
illustrating the location and botanical and common name of all trees to be
planted along with the street.
(Ord. 2021-20, passed 7-19-2021)
CHAPTER 1193
Wireless Communication Facilities
1193.01   Intent and purpose.
1193.02   Private non-commercial antennas, satellite dish antennas, and antenna
support structures.
1193.03   Amateur radio antennas and antenna support structures.
1193.04   Commercial, public, and semi- public antennas, support and equipment
structures.
§ 1193.01 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   The intent of this chapter is to balance the diverse interests in wireless
communication; to improve citizen access and use of new and existing
technologies; to assure the right of business the exercise of free trade; and
to protect the community from uncontrolled proliferation of antennas and
antenna support structures. More specifically, the purpose is to provide for
the proper location of private as well as public and commercial wireless
facilities, including antennas, dish antennas, antenna support structures, and
accessory equipment structures; to encourage multiple use of antenna support
structures; to ensure compatibility with nearby uses; in particular to minimize
negative impacts on residential areas; and otherwise to assure the public
health, safety and general welfare of the community. It is also the purpose of
this chapter to conform with the federal preemption pertaining to amateur radio
operations per 101 FCC 2d 952 (1985) and with exemptions for antennas utilized
by amateur radio operators who are duly licensed by the FCC under Part 97 Rules
Section 153(q) of Title 47 USC.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1193.02 PRIVATE NON-COMMERCIAL ANTENNAS, SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS, AND ANTENNA
SUPPORT STRUCTURES.
   Private non-commercial antennas, satellite dish antennas, and antenna
support structures are permitted accessory uses in any zone district under the
following conditions:
   (a)   Exclusion: This section does not apply to satellite dish antennas 3.3
feet or less in diameter in residence zones or 6.6 feet or less in commercial
and industrial zones.
   (b)   Dish antennas greater than five feet in diameter may not be placed on
the roof of a principal or accessory building in any residential zone because
of objectionable aesthetic impact on surrounding dwellings and views therefrom.
   (c)   Structures controlled under provisions of this section, including
guys, are prohibited in any front or side yard of a lot or parcel in any
residential or commercial zone and shall not encroach upon any side yard
setback line, nor be placed within ten feet of the rear property line, provided
that guy wire anchors may be located within one foot of property lines that
define the rear yard. In addition, an antenna support structure in residential
and commercial zones shall be set back from the nearest property line a
distance equal to structural height.
   (d)   Height of any antenna support structure covered under this section
shall be controlled by the height regulation of the zone in which it is
located, provided that an antenna on such support structure shall be permitted
up to 25 feet of additional height in excess of the zone limit.
   (e)   Structures covered under this section, for which an in-ground
foundation or substructure must be constructed or which are roof mounted and
extend more than 15 feet above the ridge line of the roof, shall require a
building permit prior to erection, enlargement, increase in height or
relocation. The application for a permit shall include address of lot or
parcel, type of structure and height, and placement on lot or parcel shown on
an illustration drawn to scale. Also required is information on method of
installation including, as appropriate, details on structural support,
footings, foundations, guys, braces, anchors, and grounding. As part of the
permitting process the applicant will affirm receipt of a Safety Advisory
Bulletin concerning safety issues, grounding, anti-climb devices, guying and
wire sizes, and maintenance and inspections.
   (f)   Climbable antenna support structures shall be completely enclosed by a
fence six feet in height or shall have an effective anti-climb device attached
as described in the Safety Advisory Bulletin. If fenced, the fence shall
restrict the passage of a two inch diameter sphere.
   (g)   Lots or parcels in residential zones shall be limited to not more than
one antenna support structure per building containing one or more dwelling
units.
   (h)   An antenna support structure shall be inspected annually and
maintained in a safe condition by the owner or operator. Such owner or operator
shall notify the Planning and Zoning Administrator if requisite safety
standards are no longer being met and what steps are being taken to remedy the
situation. The owner or operator of such structure shall maintain a record of
inspections on file and a log of routine maintenance as well as work undertaken
in response to inspections.
   (i)   Upon cessation of ownership or leasehold rights in an antenna support
structure, the operator or property owner shall remove such structure within 90
calendar days, or within 30 calendar days of receipt of final written notice
from the municipality to do so, provided that the new owner or leaseholder may
retain said structure, after its inspection and written notice to the Planning
and Zoning Administrator of the intention to retain such structure and to
assume responsibility for same under this section.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1193.03 AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNAS AND ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURES.
   Amateur radio antennas and antenna support structures are permitted
accessory uses in any zone district under the following conditions:
   (a)   Exclusion: This section does not apply to satellite dish antennas 3.3
feet or less in diameter in residence zones or 6.6 feet or less in commercial
and industrial zones, and wire antennas erected unobtrusively for the purpose
of amateur radio communications.
   (b)   Dish antennas greater than five feet in diameter may not be placed on
the roof of a principal or accessory building in any residential zone because
of objectionable aesthetic impact on surrounding dwellings and views therefrom.
   (c)   Structures controlled under provisions of this section are prohibited
in any front or side yard of a lot or parcel in any residential or commercial
zone, provided that guy wire anchors may encroach into the side yard. Guy wire
anchors and structural foundations may be located not closer than one foot of
property lines that define the rear yard, and in the case of guy wire anchors,
in the side yard, provided that antennas may encroach within the one foot
setback, and may even protrude over the lot line, where written permission to
do so is provided by the current affected property owner and is on file with
the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
   (d)   The overall antenna height shall be limited to 100 feet above grade
whether freestanding or mounted on a structure. If the Council determines it
necessary to consult with an expert in considering an increase in overall
antenna height, all reasonable costs and expenses associated with such
consultation shall be borne by the person seeking to exceed such height limit.
   (e)   Structures covered under this section, for which an in-ground
foundation or substructure must be constructed, and/or which exceed 35 feet in
height above grade, or which are roof-mounted and extend more than 15 feet
above the ridge line of the roof, shall require a building permit prior to
erection, enlargement, increase in height or relocation. The application for a
permit shall include address of lot or parcel, type of structure and height,
and placement on lot or parcel shown on an illustration drawn to scale. Also
required is information on method of installation including, as appropriate,
details on structural support, footings, foundations, guys, braces, anchors,
and grounding. As part of the permitting process the applicant will affirm
receipt of a Safety Advisory Bulletin concerning safety issues, grounding,
anti-climb devices, guying and wire sizes, and maintenance and inspections.
   (f)   Climbable antenna support structures shall be completely enclosed by a
fence six feet in height or shall have an effective anti-climb device attached
as described in the Safety Advisory Bulletin. If fenced, the fence shall
restrict the passage of a two inch diameter sphere.
   (g)   Lots or parcels in residential zones shall be limited to not more than
one antenna support structure in excess of 35 feet in height above grade per
building containing one or more dwelling units. A second support structure,
which is 35 feet or less in height, shall be permitted, and may be accompanied
by antenna(s) of up to 25 feet of additional height.
   (h)   An antenna support structure shall be inspected annually and
maintained in a safe condition by the owner or operator. Such owner or operator
shall notify the Planning and Zoning Administrator if requisite safety
standards are no longer being met and what steps are being taken to remedy the
situation. The owner or operator of such structure shall maintain a record of
inspections on file and a log of routine maintenance as well as work undertaken
in response to inspections.
   (i)   Upon cessation of ownership or leasehold rights in an antenna support
structure, the operator or property owner shall remove such structure within 90
calendar days, or within 30 calendar days of receipt of final written notice
from the municipality to do so. Where the new owner or leaseholder is a
licensed amateur radio operator, such person may retain said structure after
its inspection and written notice to the Planning and Zoning Administrator of
intention to do so and to assume responsibility for same under this section.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1193.04 COMMERCIAL, PUBLIC, AND SEMI-PUBLIC ANTENNAS, SUPPORT AND EQUIPMENT
STRUCTURES.
   Commercial, public, and semi-public antennas, radio and television antennas,
microwave and other wireless communication antennas, dish antennas, antenna
support structures, and equipment structures, are permitted as primary or
accessory uses, subject to Site Plan Review of
Chapter 1141 under the following conditions:
   (a)   Antenna support structures with antenna may be located as follows:
      (1)   On property or existing buildings in any commercial or industrial
zone where located not closer than 500 feet from any residential unit in any
residential zone, subject to review by Council. Support structures shall be
excluded from municipality park, cemetery, and museum property, provided that
public communication structures qualifying as essential services as defined in
this chapter shall not be so excluded.
      (2)   On property or existing buildings in any residential zone where
located not less than 500 feet from any residential unit in any residential
zone, subject to review by Council. Support structures shall be excluded from
municipality park, cemetery, and museum property, provided that public
communication structures qualifying as essential services as defined in this
chapter shall not be so excluded.
   (b)   Antennas and antenna arrays, independent of antenna support structures
normally accompanying their use, may be located as follows:
      (1)   On existing buildings or structures in commercial and industrial
zones.
      (2)   In any zone on existing tall structures, excluding those provided
for in §
1193.02 and
1193.03, such as communication towers, power transmission towers and poles,
stadium and athletic field lighting standards, water storage tanks, street
light standards along expressways and major and regional streets as defined by
the municipality's thoroughfare plan, and on or within other similar tall
structures as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
   (c)   Structures for housing of equipment required to operate an antenna,
not higher than 12 feet above grade nor greater than 300 square feet in area,
may be constructed in proximity to an antenna support structure or existing
tall structure as accessory to each antenna array or user of an antenna support
structure. A single, larger structure may be built for multiple users, provided
that total floor area does not exceed 600 square feet. An equipment structure
may also be treated as a mechanical appurtenance or penthouse on the roof of an
existing building on which the antenna, antenna array, or antenna support
structure is erected. Where the equipment structure is erected at grade, color
and character of the exterior surface shall be aesthetically and
architecturally compatible with buildings in the surrounding area.
   (d)   Except in LM and PID Zones, antenna support structures shall maintain
a setback from the nearest property line a distance at least equal to the
height of the structure, provided that a structure mounted on the roof of a
building shall not be so restricted.
   (e)   Overall antenna height covered under this section shall be limited to
not more than 150 feet above grade.
   (f)   Required submittals accompanying applications:
      (1)   Applicant must provide a written statement that the proposed
antenna and antenna support is compliant with: antenna and antenna support
structure site federal registration; maximum exposure to non-ionizing radiation
and ionizing radiation standards, singly or as co-located, recertified
biannually.
      (2)   Applicant must provide an analysis of the visual impact of the
antenna support structure on the surrounding area. Such analysis shall include
points-of-view renderings of the structure to scale in its proposed setting,
with special attention to adjoining residential areas, including proposed
landscaping to screen the structure base and accessory building.
   (g)   No placement of new antenna support structures shall be permitted
unless Council finds credible evidence establishing to a reasonable certainty
one or more of the following:
      (1)   No existing antenna support structure, tall structure or building
is located in the area in which the applicant's equipment must be located, or
      (2)   No existing antenna support structure, tall structure or building
in the area is of sufficient height to meet the applicant's requirements and
the deficiency cannot be remedied at reasonable cost, or
      (3)   No existing antenna support structure, tall structure or building
within the area has sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's
equipment and the deficiency cannot be remedied at reasonable cost, or
      (4)   Electromagnetic interference would occur between the applicant's
and existing equipment and such interference cannot be eliminated at reasonable
cost, or
      (5)   The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner to
co-locate on existing antenna support structure, tall structure or building are
unreasonable relative to industry norms, or
      (6)   The applicant demonstrates that there are other factors that render
existing antenna support structures, tall structures or buildings unsuitable or
unavailable for co-location. The cost of eliminating impediments to co-
location shall be deemed reasonable if it does not exceed by 25% of the cost of
constructing a new antenna support structure on which to mount the applicant's
equipment.
   (h)   If Council determines it necessary to consult with an expert in
considering the factors listed in division (g) of this section, all reasonable
costs and expenses associated with such consultation shall be borne by the
applicant. Failure to pay such costs and expenses or provide information
requested by Council shall be grounds for denial or the withholding of the
issuance of a building permit until such costs have been paid.
   (i)   Unless shown to be unreasonable, a condition of approval shall be to
construct an antenna support structure so as to accommodate the co-location of
at least three additional antenna arrays similar in size and function to that
placed by the applicant. The additional co-location-sites shall be made
available at prevailing rates in the industry and under standard contractual
provisions. Failure to do so shall be considered grounds for denying approval
or voiding of approvals given.
   (j)   Any modification which significantly alters the appearance, height, or
structural integrity of an antenna support structure or which involves the
installation of antenna equipment differing in size or function from that
previously installed shall require the approval of Council.
   (k)   Additional approval by Council shall not be required for co-location
on an existing antenna support structure, provided the co-located antenna array
and equipment is similar in size and function to that installed by the
applicant of the approved antenna support structure. Such co-location shall be
subject to review and approval of the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
   (l)   No advertising or business signs shall be allowed on structures
covered under this section.
   (m)   No signals, lights or illumination not required by the FCC, FAA, or
municipality may be placed on structures covered by this section. Any such
required signal or light shall be shielded to prevent downward transmission of
light.
   (n)   Antenna support structures shall have an exterior finish that
preserves their structural integrity and visual appearance.
   (o)   Structures covered under this section shall require a building permit
prior to erection, enlargement, increase in height or relocation. The
application for a permit shall include construction drawings showing the
proposed method of installation, including details of structural support,
footing, foundation, guys, braces, anchors, and such other information as
required by the Planning and Zoning Administrator to assure proper engineering
practice. A site plan and other illustration drawn to scale shall be provided
showing the lot or parcel on which the structure is to be erected, all
structures on site, all structures within 200 feet of the site, all structural
elements, and all other relevant information.
   (p)   Antenna support structures shall be inspected annually and maintained
in a safe condition by the owner or operator. Such owner or operator shall
notify the Planning and Zoning Administrator if requisite safety requirements
are no longer being met and the steps being taken to remedy the situation. The
owner or operator shall maintain inspection reports on file and a log of
routine maintenance as well as work undertaken in response to inspection
reports.
   (q)   The owner or operator of an antenna or antenna support structure shall
give notice to the Planning and Zoning Administrator when such equipment is no
longer in use. Any such equipment no longer used for a continuous period of six
months or which no longer meets safety standards in the view of the Planning
and Zoning Administrator shall be removed; it shall be removed within 60
calendar days of written notice by the municipality to do so. If not removed
within such 60 calendar day period, the municipality may remove it at the
owner's expense.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1195
Accessory Uses and Structures
1195.01   Accessory uses and structures permitted.
1195.02   (Reserved)
1195.03   Permit required.
1195.04   Residential location, exterior, size and maintenance.
1195.05   Commercial/industrial location, exterior, and maintenance.
§ 1195.01 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES PERMITTED.
   Unless otherwise specified, accessory uses and structures shall be permitted
on a lot in a residential zoning district in association with a principal use
or structure provided the accessory use or structure meets the requirements of
this chapter, the development standards of the applicable residential zoning
district.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020; Ord. 2020-30, passed 1-4-2021; Ord. 2020-30,
passed 1-4-2021)
§ 1195.02 RESERVED
§ 1195.03 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A permit or certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued prior to the
erection, addition or alteration of an accessory structure located on any lot
in conjunction with a permitted principal use.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1195.04 RESIDENTIAL LOCATION, EXTERIOR, SIZE AND MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   Location. All accessory uses and accessory structures, excluding
fences, sidewalks, driveways, garages, porches, poles, signs, decks, patios and
towers shall be located in the rear yard of a residential lot. No accessory
uses and accessory structures, excluding fences, sidewalks, driveways, garages,
porches, poles and signs, shall be allowed in the front yard of a residential
lot. Accessory uses and accessory structures shall meet the front, rear and
side yard setback requirements of the applicable residential zoning district.
Accessory uses and accessory structures shall not be located within a recorded
easement.
   (b)   Exterior. In order to protect property values and encourage
neighborhood stability, an accessory structure shall have an exterior which is
compatible in appearance to the principal structure on the lot.
   (c)   Size of Structure. The maximum permitted size of an accessory
structure placed on a lot in a residential zoning district shall be no larger
than 10% of the total lot area.
      (1)   Lot size two acres or less. An accessory structure shall contain no
more than one story nor shall it exceed a total height of 15 feet as measured
from the floor to the top of the roof. No door serving the accessory structure
shall exceed nine feet in height.
      (2)   Lot size over two acres. An accessory structure shall not exceed a
total height of 25 feet as measured from the floor to the top of the roof.
   (d)   Maintenance. All structures shall be maintained in compliance with
this chapter and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
   (e)   Density. All accessory structures, when combined with the principal
structure, shall not exceed 60% lot coverage.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020; Am. Ord. 2020-30, passed 1-4-2021)
§ 1195.05 COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL LOCATION, EXTERIOR, AND MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   Location. For all commercial, industrial, and warehousing lots and
parcels, accessory uses and structures, shall be located completely to the rear
or side of the principal structure and shall be no closer than ten feet from
any part of the principal structure. Accessory uses and structures shall meet
the rear and side yard setback requirements of the applicable zoning district.
Accessory uses and structures shall not be located within a recorded easement.
   (b)   Exterior. In order to protect property values and encourage
neighborhood stability an accessory structure shall have an exterior that meets
this standard and is compatible in appearance to the principal building on the
parcel or lot.
   (c)   Maintenance. Accessory uses and structures shall be maintained in
conformance with the requirements of this Code.
   (d)   Site Plan Required. Accessory uses and structures shall be indicated
on an approved site plan in conformance with the requirements of
Chapter 1141.
   (e)   Utilities Facilities Construction Impact Fee Required. At the time an
application for Certificate of Zoning Compliance is submitted for an accessory
structure on a commercial, industrial, or warehousing lot or parcel that is not
otherwise part of an approved site plan application under
Chapter 1141, utilities facilities construction impact fee described in §
1117.04(c) shall be paid. The square footage of parking lots shall not be
considered when calculating the overall impact fee owed.
(Ord. 2022-07, passed 2-8-2022)
CHAPTER 1197
Right-of-Way Use
1197.01   Purpose and scope.
1197.02   Types of permits or franchises; grants of authority.
1197.03   Procedure for permits; terms.
1197.04   Criteria for granting permits or franchises.
1197.05   Obligation of permittees and franchisees; conditions of permits and
franchises.
1197.06   Notice of right-of-way work; joint planning.
1197.07   Use of permittee facilities.
1197.08   Indemnification.
1197.09   Removal of facilities.
1197.10   Remedies and revocation.
1197.11   Reservation of rights.
1197.12   Street vacation.
1197.13   Temporary movement of facilities.
1197.14   Foreclosure and receivership.
1197.15   Nonenforcement and waivers by municipality.
1197.16   Public right-of-way construction standards.
1197.17   Obstruction of right-of-way.
§ 1197.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide requirements for the use or
occupation of any and all rights-of-way and public property in the
municipality, the issuance of permits to persons for such use or occupancy and
to set forth the policies of the municipality related thereto.
   (b)   This chapter does not take the place of any franchise, license, or
permit which may be additionally required by law. Each permittee shall obtain
any and all such additional franchises, licenses or permits necessary to the
operations and conduct of its business.
   (c)   No person shall use, occupy, own or operate facilities in, under or
over any rights-of-way within the municipality unless such person first obtains
a franchise and/or permits conforming to the requirements set forth therein and
in this chapter.
   (d)   The policy of Commercial Point with regards to rights-of-way is hereby
declared to be:
      (1)   To promote public safety and protect public property;
      (2)   To promote the utilization of rights-of-way for the public health,
safety, and welfare and to promote economic development in the municipality;
      (3)   To promote the availability of a wide range of utility,
communication, and other services, including the rapid development of new
technologies and innovative services, to the municipality's citizens and
taxpayers at reasonable rates;
      (4)   To promote cooperation among the municipality and franchisees and
permittees in the occupation of rights-of-way, and work therein, in order to
minimize public inconvenience during work in the rights-of-way and avoid
uneconomic, unneeded and unsightly duplication of facilities;
      (5)   To ensure adequate public compensation for the regulation of the
private use of the rights-of-way and the regulation thereof; and
      (6)   To promote and require reasonable accommodation of all uses of
rights-of-way and to establish the following priority of use of rights-of-way,
when all requested usage of rights-of-way by permittees cannot be accommodated:
         A.   Use by the municipality.
         B.   Use by another governmental entity with the municipality's
concurrence or other uses required by law.
         C.   Telecommunications and utility and general permittees and
franchisees shall have third priority.
         D.   Special permittees shall have fourth priority.
         E.   Residential permittees shall have the fifth priority; provided,
however, that the Planning and Zoning Administrator may reasonably require
right-of-way permittees and franchisees to cooperate to accommodate use by
other permittees and franchisees and provided further that the Planning and
Zoning Administrator may alter this priority when the Planning and Zoning
Administrator reasonably determines a deviation here from to be in the public
interest.
   (e)   Nothing in this chapter should be construed to apply the provisions of
this chapter to facilities owned or operated by the municipality or any of its
operations.
   (f)   Unless otherwise specifically stated in a permit, all permits or
franchises granted hereunder shall be non-exclusive.
   (g)   Definitions.
      (1)   APPLICANT means any person applying for a permit hereunder.
      (2)   BEST EFFORTS means the best reasonable efforts under the
circumstances, taking into consideration, among other appropriate matters,
safety, expedition, available technology and human resource and cost.
      (3)   EMERGENCY means a reasonable unforeseen occurrence with a potential
to endanger personal safety or health, or cause substantial damage to property
that calls for immediate action.
      (4)   PERMITTEE means any person issued a permit or franchise pursuant to
this chapter to use or occupy all or any portion of the rights-of-way in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
      (5)   RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY means the surface of and the space
above and below any public street, public road, public highway, public freeway,
public lane, public path, public way, public alley, public court, public
sidewalk, public boulevard, public parkway, public drive, leisure trail,
bicycle path, or any public easement or right-of-way now or hereafter held by
the municipality which shall, within its proper use, entitle a permittee, in
accordance with the terms hereof and of any permit, to the use thereof for the
purpose of installing or operating any facilities as may be ordinarily
necessary and pertinent to the provisions of the utility, cable television,
communications or other services as set forth in any permit. Right-of-way shall
also include publicly owned property, but only to the extent the use or
occupation thereof is specifically granted in a permit or by regulation.
      (6)   RIGHT-OF-WAY WORK PERMIT means a permit authorizing actual physical
work by the permittee in the right-of-way.
      (7)   SOFT SURFACE means areas of sod, soil, mulch or other landscape
materials and contains no hard surfaces.
      (8)   HARD SURFACE means any pavement, sidewalk, path, or travel way
composed of asphalt, concrete, gravel or other surface treatment.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1197.02 TYPES OF PERMITS OR FRANCHISES; GRANTS OF AUTHORITY.
   (a)   The following type of permits and franchises are available:
      (1)   Cable television franchise agreement. Granted to providers of cable
television service;
      (2)   Telecommunication and utility permit. Permit granted to persons who
desire and are granted authority to utilize rights-of-way to provide a public
utility and/or telecommunications service, other than cable television service.
      (3)   Special permit. Permit granted to persons for a specific, limited
use of the rights-of- way or a specific portion thereof; and
   (b)   All permits shall specify the use or uses for which such permits or
franchises are granted and contain such other non-discriminatory terms and
conditions as are appropriate and as are set forth in this chapter or
conditions negotiated and agreed to by the municipality and the permittee to
provide for the public safety or welfare.
   (c)   Permits and the rights of permittees thereunder are not transferable
without the express written approval of the municipality.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1197.03 PROCEDURE FOR PERMITS; TERMS.
   (a)   Applicants for cable television franchises shall be granted a cable
television franchise pursuant to the municipality's franchise agreement;
provided, however, that a cable franchise shall only entitle the franchise to
utilize the rights-of-way, in accordance with the municipality's policies and
regulations, for purposes directly related to the provision of the cable
television service. Any other right-of-way use by such franchisee shall require
a separate permit.
   (b)   Applicants for telecommunication and utility permits, or renewals
thereof shall file an application therefore in such form as the Planning and
Zoning Administrator may require along with an application fee of two thousand
dollars ($2,000). The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall determine if the
applications are in order and, if so, forward the application to Council to
determine whether or not, in accordance with § 1197.04, the applicant should be
granted a permit hereunder. Council shall make a final determination as to
whether or not such permit should be granted and if so, upon what terms and
conditions.
   (c)   Applicants for special permits or renewals thereof, shall file an
application therefore, in such form as the Planning and Zoning Administrator
requires along with an application fee of five hundred dollars ($500). The
Planning and Zoning Administrator shall determine if the application is in
order and is in accordance with the criteria set forth in §
1197.04 and grant or renew such permit. The terms of such permits shall be
determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator but shall in no event
exceed ten years.
   (d)   Any applicant may appeal the failure of the Planning and Zoning
Administrator to grant a permit or to recommend it to be granted upon terms and
conditions acceptable to the applicant. In order to perfect such appeal, the
applicant shall file, within ten calendar days of the Planning and Zoning
Administrator's determination or recommendation, or within 90 calendar days of
the filing of the application if the Planning and Zoning Administrator has
taken no action, and appeal to Council. Council shall then review the matter
and render a final determination after affording the applicant an opportunity
to be heard either in person or in writing. Except to the extent otherwise
appealable by law, Council's decision shall be final.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1197.04 CRITERIA FOR GRANTING PERMITS OR FRANCHISES.
   (a)   Cable television's franchises shall be granted pursuant to the
municipality's policies and regulations.
   (b)   Telecommunications and utility and special permits shall be granted to
persons based upon a determination that the following criteria are met.
      (1)   The granting of the permit will contribute to the public health,
safety, or welfare in the municipality.
      (2)   The granting of the permit will be consistent with the policy of
the municipality as set forth in §
1197.01 and
1197.05.
      (3)   That the permittee has and will continue to have liability
insurance which names the municipality as an additional insured, in effect in
such amounts and for such liability as the municipality may require or be self-
insured pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
      (4)   That the applicant is a proper person to hold a permit and will
fulfill all its obligations hereunder.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1197.05 OBLIGATION OF PERMITTEES AND FRANCHISEES; CONDITIONS OF PERMITS AND
FRANCHISES.
   (a)   In addition to the other requirements set forth herein each
telecommunication and utility and special permittee shall:
      (1)   Use its best efforts to cooperate with other franchisees and
permittees and the municipality for the best, most efficient, most aesthetic
and least obtrusive use of right-of-way, consistent with safety, and to
minimize traffic and other disruptions including street cuts;
      (2)   Participate in joint planning and advance notification of right-of-
way work, excepting such work performed in emergencies or other exigent
circumstances;
      (3)   Cooperate with other permittees and franchisees in utilization of,
construction in and occupancy of private rights-of-way, but only to the extent
the same is not inconsistent with the agent thereof or state or federal law;
      (4)   Upon written notice of, and at the direction of, Planning and
Zoning Administrator and at the permittees' sole cost, promptly remove or
rearrange facilities as necessary, e.g. during any construction, repair or
modification of any street, sidewalk, municipal utility or other governmental
uses, or if additional or subsequent municipal or other public uses of rights-
of-way are inconsistent with then current uses of franchisees and permittees or
for any other reasonable cause as determined by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator.
      (5)   All persons granted a permit on or after the effective date of this
section shall provide maps or other information in such form and at such times
as the municipality may reasonably require. Said maps and information shall
locate, describe and identify all structures and facilities of such permittee,
of and in the rights-of-way;
      (6)   Perform all work, construction, maintenance or removal of
structures and facilities within the right-of-way in accordance with good
engineering and construction practice, including any appropriate safety codes
and in accordance with the best efforts to repair and replace any street, curb
or other portion of the right-of-way, or facilities or structure located
therein, to a condition materially equivalent to this condition prior to such
work, and to do so in a manner which minimizes inconvenience to the public, the
municipality and other franchisees and permittees, all in accordance with all
applicable regulations;
      (7)   Register with all appropriate underground reporting services; and
      (8)   Unless otherwise set forth in a permit, not enter into leases or
other agreements for physical space in or on permittee's facilities located
within the rights-of-way without prior notification of the municipality. Such
notice shall include a general description of the uses to be made of the
facilities.
   (b)   Construction and Technical Standards.
      (1)   Upon grant of the permit and in order to construct, operate and
maintain a telecommunications system or utility in the municipality, the
permittee may enter into contracts with any public utility companies or any
other owner or lessee of any poles or underground areas located within or
without the municipality, obtain right-of-way permits from appropriate
municipal, state, county, and federal officials necessary to cross or otherwise
use highways or roads under their respective jurisdiction; obtain permission
from the Federal Aviation Administration to erect and maintain antennas; and
obtain whatever other permits the municipality, county, state or federal agency
may require.
      (2)   In those areas of the municipality where telephone and electric
services are provided by underground facilities, all new facilities shall be
placed underground. In all other areas, the permittee, upon request of the
municipality, shall use its best efforts to place facilities underground.
However, the term "facilities" as used in the preceding sentence shall not
include equipment, which is customarily placed on or above the ground in
conjunction with underground transmission facilities (e.g. splice and terminal
pedestals, equipment cabinets and transformers). Where not otherwise required
to be placed underground by this chapter, the permittee's system shall be
located underground at the request of the adjacent property owner, provided the
placement of such system shall be consistent with the permittee's construction
and operating standards and provided that the excess cost over the aerial
location shall be borne by the property owner making the request. All cable to
be installed under the roadway shall be installed in conduit. In no
circumstance shall new poles be located in any area of the municipality where
they are not replacing existing poles without written approval of the Planning
and Zoning, which shall not be unreasonably withheld.
      (3)   The permittee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its
system in a manner consistent with all laws, ordinances, construction
standards, governmental requirements and FCC technical standards, and those
standards are incorporated by reference herein. The system shall be designed,
constructed, operated and maintained for 24 hour a day continuous operation.
      (4)   The permittee shall comply with the municipality's normal
permitting process prior to commencing any work in the rights-of-way except for
emergencies and otherwise as provided in this chapter. No work in the rights-
of-way shall be commenced until all required permits have been issued by the
municipality. The municipality shall not unreasonably withhold the granting of
any permit.
      (5)   Any contractor proposed for work of construction, installation,
operation, maintenance, and repair of system equipment must be properly
licensed under laws of the state, and all local ordinances. The contractor's or
permittee's system and associated equipment erected by the contractor or
permittee within the municipality shall be so located as to cause minimum
interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and
places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable
convenience of property owners who adjoin any of said streets, alleys or other
public ways and places. No pole or other fixtures placed in any public ways by
the contractor or permittee shall be placed in such a manner as to interfere
with normal travel on such public way.
      (6)   The municipality does not guarantee the accuracy of any maps
showing the horizontal or vertical location of existing substructures. In
public right-of-way, where necessary, the location shall be verified by
excavation.
      (7)   Construction, installation, operation, and maintenance of the
utility or telecommunications system shall be performed in an orderly and
workmanlike manner, in accordance with the permittee's then current corporate
construction and maintenance practices. When consistent with the safety codes
and standards set forth in this section, all cables and wires shall be
installed, where possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines. Multiple
configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for
engineering consideration.
      (8)   The permittee shall at all times comply with applicable Nation
Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards); applicable National
Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters); and applicable FCC or
other federal, state and local regulations; and standards as set forth in the
permit.
      (9)   In any event, the system shall not endanger or interfere with the
safety of persons or property in the permit area or other areas where the
contractor or permittee may have equipment located.
      (10)   The franchisee or permittee shall provide either a performance
bond (or self-bonding by permittee having capitalization in excess of five
million dollars ($5,000,000) as determined by the Mayor), an irrevocable letter
of credit acceptable to the municipality or a certified check in an amount
determined by the Mayor to pay the cost of restoration of the right-of-way
should the permittee fail to perform restoration required by this chapter or
the permit or to pay the cost of removal or relocation of the system required
by this chapter should the permittee fail to perform said removal or
relocation.
   (c)   Right-of-Way Work Permit Required. All permittees shall obtain a
right-of-way work permit from the Planning and Zoning Administrator prior to
beginning the erection, installation or maintenance including tree trimming, of
any lines or equipment. Prior municipal approval shall not be required for
emergency repairs, routine maintenance and repairs, operation which do not
require excavation in the public right-of-way, blockage of any street or alley
or material disruption to any landscaping or structures and/or irrigation
systems. The permittee, and/or its subcontractors shall leave the streets,
alleys, and other public places where such work is done in as good condition or
repair as they were before such work was commenced and to the reasonable
satisfaction of the municipality. Such right-of-way work permit shall be issued
in writing and is subject to conditions that may be attached by the Planning
and Zoning Administrator including, but not limited to, requirements concerning
traffic control, safety scheduling, notification of adjoining property owners,
and restoration with seed, sod or specific plant material as directed by the
municipality. The permittee and/or its subcontractors shall endeavor to
complete in a timely manner repairs to the right-of-way. All workmanship and
materials used by the permittee and/or its subcontractors to repair the streets
and roadways shall conform to the current municipal standards and
specifications and be subject to the inspection and approval of the Planning
and Zoning Administrator or authorized agent and shall be warranted for a
period of two years from the date of completion for any failure due to
workmanship or quality of materials. Permittees shall provide the municipality
with a work permit fee in an amount set forth in division (d) of this section
and shall post a performance bond in an amount determined by the Technical
Review Group. Said fees are payable at the time application is made for the
work permit, or in the case of an emergency repair, at the earliest time
possible.
   (d)   Fee Schedule. Work permit fees shall be provided by the permittee to
the municipality to ensure adequate public compensation for monitoring
compliance with municipal requirements and protection of public property.
      (1)   Single new service line/tap, soft surface, fifty dollars ($50.00).
      (2)   Single new service line/tap, hard surface, two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00).
      (3)   Single isolated repair, soft surface, fifty dollars ($50.00).
      (4)   Single isolated repair, hard surface, two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
      (5)   Relocation of utility main, fee will be established by the
Technical Review Group based on project schedule, location and impact to public
infrastructure.
      (6)   New construction of utility main, fee will be established by the
Mayor based on project schedule, location and impact to public infrastructure.
   Fees may be adjusted for inflation by the Technical Review Group, however,
not more than once per calendar year.
   (e)   As Built Drawings. Permittee shall furnish "as-built" drawings not
later than 120 calendar days after construction has been completed. Drawings
shall show ownership of conduits, ducts, poles and cables used for the
telecommunications or utility system. Drawings shall be drawn to an appropriate
scale using the standard format adopted by the municipality. Permittee shall
provide one set of CD's, in pdf format, and one set of blue or black line "as-
built" drawings. State plane coordinates shall be shown for benchmarks, curb
lines, and structures. Drawings shall show horizontal dimensions from the curb
line and elevations.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1197.06 NOTICE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY WORK; JOINT PLANNING.
   (a)   All applicants for right-of-way work permits under §
1197.05 shall file a written notice with the Planning and Zoning Administrator
at least seven calendar days before working in or on the right-of-way, unless
waived by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, except in the case of
emergency as determined by the Planning and Zoning Administrator. In addition
to such other information this chapter shall require, this notice shall contain
or indicate, to the extent applicable:
      (1)   The right-of-way affected;
      (2)   A description of any facilities to be installed, constructed or
maintained;
      (3)   Whether or not any street will be opened or otherwise need to be
restricted, blocked or closed;
      (4)   An estimate of the amount of time needed to complete such work;
      (5)   A description and timetable of any remedial measures planned to
close any street opening or repair any damage done to facilitate such work;
      (6)   A statement verifying that other affected or potentially affected
permittees and franchisees have been notified;
      (7)   A statement that any consumers of any utility, cable television,
communications or other service which will be adversely affected by such work
have been or will be notified in conformance with applicable rules and
regulations of the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio;
      (8)   An attached plan sheet detailing the work to be performed;
      (9)   The contractors name, contact person, address and telephone
numbers;
      (10)   The utility owners name, contact person, address and telephone
numbers; and
      (11)   A maintenance of traffic plan if any street, sidewalk or path will
be opened or otherwise need to be restricted, blocked or closed.
   (b)   All applicants for right-of-way work permits under §
1197.05 shall submit a bond guaranteeing completion of all restoration work as
required by the Mayor.
   (c)   Permittees and contractors may, under emergency or other exigent
circumstances, work in the right-of-way so long as the permittees use best
efforts to provide the municipality the notice required by this section at the
earliest possible time and satisfy the requirements of §
1197.05(c).
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1197.07 USE OF PERMITTEE FACILITIES.
   (a)   The municipality shall have the right to install and maintain, free of
charge, upon any poles and within any underground pipes and conduits or like
facilities of any telecommunication and utility or special permittee,
communications facilities ("municipal facilities") solely for governmental use
desired by the municipality unless:
      (1)   Such installation and maintenance unreasonably and materially
interferes with existing and future operations of the permittee, or
      (2)   Such installation and maintenance would be unduly burdensome to
such permittee.
   (b)   Each permittee and franchisee shall cooperate with the municipality in
the planning and design of its facilities so as to accommodate the
municipality's reasonable disclosed governmental requirements. Neither the
municipal facilities nor the capacity of bandwidth thereon shall be leased,
licensed or otherwise made available to third parties. The municipality's use
and occupancy or a permittee's conduit shall be limited to the right to occupy
a single inner duct in any given conduit and a single attachment to any given
pole. The municipality's right to use and occupancy of a permittee's poles or
conduit shall be subject to any and all reasonable terms and conditions the
permittee requires of other third party uses of its poles and conduit.
   (c)   The municipality shall pay the permittee the reasonable cost to make
the poles or conduit ready for the municipality's use and occupancy. Nothing
herein shall be construed to require a permittee to construct poles or conduits
where none exist or to rearrange, modify or alter its facilities on a pole or
conduit in order to provide space for municipal facilities where space is not
otherwise available.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1197.08 INDEMNIFICATION.
   (a)   To the fullest extent permitted by law, all permittees shall, at their
sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the
municipality, its officers, public officials, boards and commissions, agents,
and employees from and against any and all lawsuits, claims (including without
limitation, Workers' Compensation claims against the municipality or others),
causes of actions, actions, liability and judgments for injury or damages
(including but not limited to expenses for reasonable legal fees and
disbursements assumed by the municipality in connection therewith):
      (1)   To persons or property, in any way arising out of or through the
acts or omissions of permittee, its subcontractors, agents or employees
attributable to the occupation by the permittee of the right-of-way to which
permittee's negligence shall in any way contribute, and regardless of whether
the municipality's negligence or the negligence of any other party shall have
contributed to such claim, cause of action, judgment, injury or damage.
      (2)   Arising out of any claim for invasion of the right of privacy, for
defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or the violation or infringement
of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent or any other
right of any person, firm and corporation by the permittee, but excluding
claims arising out of or related to municipal programming.
      (3)   Arising out of permittee's failure to comply with the provisions of
any federal, state, or local statute, ordinances or regulations applicable to
permittee in its business hereunder.
   (b)   The foregoing indemnification is conditioned upon the municipality:
      (1)   Giving permittee prompt notice of any claim or the commencement of
any action, suit or proceeding for which indemnification is sought;
      (2)   Affording the permittee the opportunity to participate in and fully
control any compromise, settlement, or other resolution or disposition of any
claim or proceeding subject to indemnification; and
      (3)   Fully cooperating in the defense of such claim and making available
to the permittee all pertinent information under the municipality's control.
   (c)   The municipality shall have the right to employ separate counsel in
any such action or proceeding and to participate in the investigation and
defense thereof, and the permittee shall pay the reasonable fees and expense of
such separate counsel if employed with the approval and consent of the
permittee or if representation of both permittee and the municipality by the
same attorney would be inconsistent with accepted canons of professional
ethics.
   (d)   Each permittee shall maintain insurance coverages (or self-insurance
coverage by permittees having capitalization in excess of five million dollars
($5,000,000), as determined by the Mayor) in accordance with the following:
      (1)   General liability insurance. The permittee shall maintain, and by
its acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder, specifically agrees, that it
will maintain throughout the term of the permit, general liability insurance
insuring the franchisee in the minimum of:
         A.   One million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence;
         B.   Two million dollars ($2,000,000) annual aggregate;
         C.   One million dollars ($1,000,000) excess general liability per
occurrence and annual aggregate.
   Such general liability insurance must be written on a comprehensive coverage
form, including the following: premises/operations, explosion and collapse
hazard, underground hazard, products/completed operations hazard, contractual
insurance, broad form property damage, and personal injury.
      (2)   Automobile liability insurance. The permittee shall maintain, and
by its acceptance of any permit granted hereunder, specifically agrees that is
will maintain throughout the term of the permit, automobile liability insurance
for owned, non-owned, or rented vehicles in the minimum amount of:
         A.   One million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence; and
         B.   One million dollars ($1,000,000) excess automobile liability per
occurrence.
      (3)   Workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance. The
franchisee shall maintain and by its acceptance of any franchise granted
hereunder specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the
franchise, workers' compensation and employer's liability valid in the State of
Ohio in the minimum amount of:
         A.   Statutory limit for workers' compensation;
         B.   One million dollars ($1,000,000) for employer's liability per
occurrence;
         C.   One million dollars ($1,000,000) excess employer liability.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1197.09 REMOVAL OF FACILITIES.
   (a)   In the event any permittee intends to remove, excluding normal repairs
and maintenance, or abandon any facilities within the rights-of-way, such
permittee shall submit a notice to the Planning and Zoning Administrator
describing the portion of the facilities to be removed or abandoned and the
date of removal or abandonment, which date shall be less than 30 calendar days
from the date such notice is submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Administrator. The permittee may not remove, destroy or permanently disable any
such facilities after such notice without the written approval of the
Construction Services Administrator. The permittee shall remove and secure such
facilities as set forth in the notice unless directed by the Planning and
Zoning Administrator to abandon such facilities in place.
   (b)   Upon such abandonment the municipality may elect to accept title to
the abandoned facility. Such acceptance shall be in writing and upon such
acceptance, full title and ownership of such abandoned facilities shall pass to
the municipality without the need to pay compensation to the permittee or
franchisee. The permittee shall, however, continue to be responsible for all
taxes on such facilities or other liability associated therewith, until the
date the same was accepted by the municipality.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1197.10 REMEDIES AND REVOCATION.
   (a)   In case of any failure of permittee's physical plant, whether due to
damage, age, lack of maintenance or any other cause, the municipality shall
notify permittee or franchisee who shall, within a reasonable time stipulated
by the municipality, respond and repair such failed plant. Should the permittee
fail to act as required, or in cases where protection of public safety required
an immediate response, the municipality may take any required, correction
action and recover the costs of same from the permittee.
   (b)   The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall give the permittee 60
calendar days prior written notice of the municipality's intent to revoke the
permit under the provisions of this chapter stating the reasons for such
action. If the permittee cures the stated reason within the 60-day notice
period, or if the permittee initiates efforts satisfactory to the municipality
to remedy the stated violation, the municipality shall not revoke the permit.
If the permittee does not cure the stated violation or undertake efforts
satisfactory to the municipality to remedy the stated violation then, after
granting the permittee or contractor an opportunity to be heard in person or in
writing, the Council may revoke the permit.
   (c)   In the event the permit is revoked, all facilities located in the
rights-of-way or located upon public property pursuant to this permit shall be
removed from the streets and public places of the municipality at the sole
expense of the permittee.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1197.11 RESERVATION OF RIGHTS.
   (a)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the municipality
from constructing, maintaining, repairing or relocating any municipal utility,
communications or like facilities; grading, paving, maintaining, repairing,
relocating or altering any street or right-of-way; or constructing,
maintaining, relocating or repairing any sidewalk or other public work or
improvement.
   (b)   Nothing in this chapter should be construed so as to grant any right
or interest in any right or way or public property other than that explicitly
set forth herein or in a permit.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1197.12 STREET VACATION.
   Unless preempted by state or federal law, in the event any street or right-
of-way used by a permittee or franchisee shall be vacated by the municipality
during the term of any permit granted pursuant to this chapter, the permittee
shall, at the permittee's expense forthwith remove its facilities therefrom
unless specifically permitted by the municipality to continue the same or such
continuance of use is permitted by state law, and upon the removal thereof,
restore, repair, or construct the area where such removal has occurred to a
condition materially equivalent to that existing before such removal took
place. In the event of failure, neglect or refusal of the permittee after 30
calendar days written notice by the municipality to remove the facilities or to
repair, restore, reconstruct, improve or maintain such vacated area, the
municipality may, if in accordance with applicable law, do such work or cause
it to be done, and the cost thereof as found and declared by the municipality
shall be paid by the permittee as directed by the municipality and collection
may be made by any available remedy.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1197.13 TEMPORARY MOVEMENT OF FACILITIES.
   In the event it is necessary temporarily to move or remove any of the
permittee's wires, cables, poles or other facilities placed pursuant to this
chapter, in order to lawfully move a large object, vehicle, building or other
structure over the streets of the municipality, upon two weeks written notice
by the municipality to the permittee, the permittee shall at the expense of the
person requesting the temporary removal of such facilities, comply with the
municipality's request.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1197.14 FORECLOSURE AND RECEIVERSHIP.
   (a)   Foreclosure. Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of the
permittee's facilities located within the right-of-way, the permittee shall
notify the municipality of such fact and its permit shall be deemed void and of
no further force and effect.
   (b)   Receivership. The municipality shall have the right to cancel any
permit granted pursuant to this chapter subject to any applicable provisions of
law, including the Bankruptcy Act, 120 calendar days after the appointment of a
receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of the permittee
whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or
proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated
prior to the expiration of said 120 days or unless:
      (1)   Within 120 calendar days after election or appointment, such
receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all the provisions of this
chapter and the relevant permit and remedied all defaults thereunder; and
      (2)   Such receiver or trustee, within said 120 days, shall have executed
an agreement, duly approved by the Court having jurisdiction in the premises
whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and
every provision of this chapter and the relevant permit.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1197.15 NONENFORCEMENT AND WAIVERS BY MUNICIPALITY.
   The permittee or franchisee shall not be relieved of its obligation to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter due to any failure of the
municipality to enforce prompt compliance. However, the Planning and Zoning
Administrator may in individual instances and upon a request in writing
establishing hardship and for good cause shown waive, in writing, any
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1197.16 PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   The specifications, rules, and regulations governing the repair,
construction, or reconstruction of sidewalks, driveways, curbs, and gutters in
streets, alleys, and public ways of the municipality are as found in R.C. §§
717.19, 717.01, 723.01, and Village Standard Drawings and Specifications.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1197.17 OBSTRUCTION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   The public right-of-way must not be obstructed in any way. This includes,
but is not limited to, vehicles, portable sports equipment, and irrigation
systems. Plantings, landscaping rocks and similar landscaping materials are
also prohibited except when provided adjacent to mailboxes.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/971b3752a8826f975aed878adc724b7ecdeedd43/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3300.png]
 
A - Width of right-of-way from property line to property line
B - Width of street from face of curb to face of curb
F & J - Typical tree lawn between face of curb and sidewalk
E & I - Sidewalk.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 1199
Commercial Development Standards
1199.01   Purpose.
1199.02   Applicability.
1199.03   Building design.
1199.04   Site design.
1199.05   Parking lot design.
1199.06   Site lighting.
1199.07   Signage.
1199.08   Storm water detention.
§ 1199.01 PURPOSE.
   (a)   Commercial development in Commercial Point has a direct effect on the
character and livability of the community. Commercial Point, therefore, has a
responsibility to adopt standards to promote desirable commercial development.
   (b)   These Commercial Development Standards aspire to create a high quality
built environment throughout Commercial Point and to protect the municipality's
character. Through architectural and site standards, this chapter aims to
enhance commercial development in Commercial Point.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1199.02 APPLICABILITY.
   Applications for new non-residential construction shall require the
developer to satisfy these Commercial Development Standards in addition to the
Zoning Code, Subdivision Regulations and other applicable documents and
standards. The Commercial Development Standards shall be applicable as follows:
   (a)   Only non-residential structures located within the General Commercial,
Neighborhood Commercial, Suburban Office, Planned Commercial District, Planned
Unit District, or Planned Industrial District zoning districts shall be subject
to the Commercial Development Standards. Any standards specifically stated in
an adopted zoning text shall supersede the related standard found in the
Commercial Development Standards.
   (b)   Properties located within the Old Town Overlay shall not be required
to meet the Commercial Development Standards.
   (c)   New additions or accessory structures that have a square footage of
less than 50% of the existing buildings square footage shall only be required
to meet § 1199.03 (Building Design) of these Commercial Development Standards.
If an addition or accessory structure is 50% or larger than the existing
building, the entire building and site shall be subject to all Commercial
Development Standards.
   (d)   All newly constructed parking areas shall meet the requirements of the
Commercial Development Standards.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1199.03 BUILDING DESIGN.
   Buildings shall be designed to be seen from 360 degrees and have the same
caliber of finish on all elevations. Building additions and accessory
structures, whether attached or detached, shall be of similar design,
materials, and construction to that of the existing or principal structure.
   (a)   Architectural Features. The purpose of requiring four-sided
architecture is to avoid large areas of blank exterior. For every 100 feet of
elevation width, each side and rear elevation must contain at least two design
elements and each front elevation must contain at least three design elements.
For multi-story buildings, each story on a single elevation shall contain at
least two design elements. Typical design elements are as follows:
      (1)   A door of at least 28 square feet in area with an awning, window,
faux window or other feature subject to approval by Council.
      (2)   A window of at least six square feet in area. Windows closer than
ten feet shall be considered as one element. A set of adjacent windows, such as
double or bay windows, shall be considered as one element.
      (3)   A chimney.
      (4)   An articulated gable vent of at least four square feet in area.
      (5)   Porches, decks or similar structures.
      (6)   A similar significant permanent architectural feature consistent
with the style of the building upon approval by Council.
   (b)   Articulation. A building frontage that exceeds a width of 50 feet
shall incorporate articulation and offset of the wall plane to inhibit a large
expanse of blank wall and add interest to the facade.
   (c)   Materials. All exterior walls shall be comprised of 80% natural
material with brick or stone as the predominant material. Other natural
materials may also be incorporated into the building's exterior design. Use of
"newer" materials is subject to approval by Council. Stucco, drivit and like
materials may be used as accents provided the total square footage of accent
material does not exceed 20% of the gross exterior building wall square
footage.
   (d)   Glass. Elevations facing the primary street shall be a minimum of 40%
glass between the height of two feet and ten feet and have an unobstructed view
of the building interior to a depth of four feet. The use of black, gold,
green, silver, or any other reflective colored glass on a building is
prohibited. The use of spandrel glass is also prohibited. Frosted glass may be
permitted in some cases, subject to approval of Council.
   (e)   Building Orientation. Buildings shall be oriented to face the primary
street right-of-way. An entryway shall be located on the front of the building.
Corner entrances are acceptable to meet this requirement if one side of the
corner entrance faces the primary street right-of-way.
   (f)   Roofing. All pitched roofs shall be of dimensional shingles, standing
seam metal, slate, or simulated slate.
   (g)   Mechanical Equipment. All external and rooftop mechanical equipment,
including satellite antennas, and trash dumpsters shall be screened from view
at all property lines on which the building is located. Screening materials
shall be complimentary to those used on the majority of the building. For
ground mounted equipment, landscaping is the preferred method of screening. If
two or more buildings are located on the same property, rooftop equipment shall
not be visible at ground level within 50 feet from any building.
   (h)   Drive Thru Features. A drive thru, if deemed appropriate for the site
by Council via a conditional use of the applicable zoning district, shall be
designed as an integral part of the structure it serves. Features incorporated
with a drive through, including, but not limited to canopies, awnings and
support posts, shall match the materials and color scheme of the building they
are serving. Drive thru features shall not have any pick-up windows, ordering
areas, signage, or other related items located on the front elevation of a
building or located between the front of the building and a street right-of-
way.
   (i)   In-Line Retail Exemption. Side or rear elevations of in-line retail
developments may be exempt from the building design standards of this section
if such elevations are not visible to customer traffic, a public right-of-way
or if a future phase of the inline retail development is forthcoming adjacent
to the elevation. Such exempt elevations shall use materials complimentary to
the primary elevation and be screened by landscaping, mounding, fencing, or a
combination thereof, as outlined in division (f) of this section, and as deemed
appropriate by Council.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1199.04 SITE DESIGN.
   (a)   Build-To Line. To promote quality streets, buildings shall meet build-
to lines along public roadway frontages. Build-to lines shall be 50 feet from
the right-of-way on major arterials as designated on the Commercial Point
Transportation Thoroughfare Plan and 25 feet from the right-of-way on all other
streets.
      (1)   In order to achieve quality streetscapes, variation from the build-
to line will be permitted to allow for added green space, amenities, outdoor
seating and the like. Buildings may be located further from the right-of-way
than the established build-to line per the following:
 
Building Height      Variation from Build-To Line
One Story Building   0 feet to 5 feet
Two Story Building   0 feet to 10 feet
Three Story Building 0 feet to 15 feet
 
      (2)   At least 50% of the building's front elevation shall be located
within the applicable variation from the build-to line range.
      (3)   Uncovered seating areas or architectural features may project up to
five feet closer to the right-of-way than the established build-to line.
      (4)   Buildings larger than 20,000 square feet or attached to existing
in-line retail space shall be exempt from the build to line requirements if
located more than 300 feet from the right-of-way.
   (b)   Sidewalks and Multi-Purpose Paths. A sidewalk, or multi-purpose path
as designated in the Commercial Point Comprehensive Plan, shall be constructed
along all public streets. In addition, a sidewalk shall connect the building
entrance with the sidewalk or multi-purpose path along the primary public
street.
   (c)   Adjacent Pavement. Pavement is prohibited directly adjacent to any
building elevation, except for loading zone areas, vehicular building
entrances, drive thru windows, or at entrance walk ways into the building.
   (d)   Trash Containers, Service Areas and Loading Zones. Trash containers,
service areas and loading zones shall be located at the rear of the building.
Trash containers, service areas and loading zones may be permitted on the side
of a building if not oriented towards a public or private street and properly
screened from public or private streets and residential zoning districts.
   (e)   Utility Boxes. Utility boxes shall be located to the rear of the
building and painted the same, or primary, color of the building elevation
where the utility box is located.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1199.05 PARKING LOT DESIGN.
   Parking lot areas shall be designed to reduce their visual impact,
production of excess heat and effect on drainage. Appropriately sized
landscaped areas shall be provided within each parking lot area allowing for a
variety of shade trees to be planted that will not buckle the parking lot's
surface and at the same time provide shade. Therefore, all off-street parking
lot areas shall be designed using the "parking bay" concept, which consists of
parking spaces grouped together and each parking bay separated by landscaped
tree islands.
   (a)   Parking Lot Location. All parking spaces, drives or other structures
for vehicular parking or movement shall be located to the rear or side of the
principal building with no more than 50% of such parking area located to the
side of the principal building.
      (1)   Buildings larger than 20,000 square feet or attached to existing
in-line retail space shall be permitted to have parking to the front of the
building if the building is located more than 300 feet from the right-of-way
and the parking lot is located no closer than 200 feet from the right-of-way.
      (2)   If a drive thru is deemed appropriate by Council and designed per §
1199.03(h) of this Zoning Code, a drive lane may be permitted to be located in
front of the building. In such case, the building shall be moved the furthest
away from the build-to line as indicated in §
1199.04(a)(1) of the Commercial Development Standards.
   (b)   Parking Bays. No parking bay shall contain more than 24 total parking
spaces, with a maximum of 12 spaces in a single row.
   (c)   Maximum Number of Parking Spaces. Off street parking areas shall only
be permitted to have 25% more spaces than stated as the applicable minimum in §
1185.03.
      (1)   Parking spaces above the maximum shall be permitted with an
additional 60 square feet of landscaping provided for every one additional
parking space. The provided additional landscaping shall be in addition to the
minimum landscaping required in §
1191.02(c)(2).
      (2)   Additional landscaping shall include a mix of trees and shrubs and
be clearly identified as additional landscaping on the site's landscaping plan.
   (d)   Parking Lot Islands. Each landscaped tree island in a single loaded
parking stall design shall have a minimum area of 162 square feet with a
minimum width of nine feet. Each landscaped island located in a double loaded
parking stall design shall have a minimum area of 324 square feet, with a
minimum width of nine feet. The landscaped tree island(s) shall contain at
least one shade tree and include at least 50 square feet of other plant
materials.
   (e)   Bio-swales. Bio-swales, also referred to as rain gardens, may be
incorporated in the overall parking lot design. In addition to separating
parking bays, when properly designed bio-swales/rain gardens can also assist
with stormwater quality and quantity management.
   (f)   Intersection Site Distance. When a drive isle intersects with an
internal service road, nothing shall materially impede the vision between a
height of two and one-half feet and ten feet for the area bounded by the
intersecting street lines of those roadways and a line joining points along
said roadways 15 feet from the point of intersection.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1199.06 SITE LIGHTING.
   Site lighting shall be required for all developments and be designed to
sufficiently illuminate the site and minimize spillover off of the property.
   (a)   Design. All external lighting shall be decorative or historic in
design. Typical "shoe box" light fixtures are not acceptable. Pack light, wall
pack lights and similar lights that primarily shine perpendicular to (away
from) a building's elevation are not permitted on any building elevation.
Decorative wall lights that shine parallel to (up or down) a building's
elevation are subject to approval by Council.
   (b)   Lighting Intensity. Foot candles measure the intensity of light. One
foot candle is equal to the amount of light generated by one candle shining on
a square foot surface one foot away. All parking lot areas shall have lighting
intensity meeting the following standards as measured at grade:
 
Maximum Intensity 20 Foot Candles
Average Intensity 1 to 3 Foot Candles
 
   (c)   Light Spillage. All outdoor lighting shall be directed, reflected or
shielded so as not to be of excessive brightness or cause glare hazardous to
pedestrians or drivers, create a nuisance or unreasonably interfere with a
neighboring property owner's right to enjoy his property. Light spillage shall
not exceed one tenth foot candles when adjacent to a residential district or
existing residential use.
   (d)   Light Pole Height. Pole heights should be in harmony with the parcel,
building and parking lot size as well as the surrounding area. Smaller parcels
in a more dense condition pole height should be limited in height to respond to
the smaller parcels and more human scale of the site. In large commercial
centers with large building footprints, parcels and parking lots, the pole
heights can be higher to reduce the number of poles needed to adequately light
the site. Parking lots with 30 or less spaces shall have a maximum lighting
pole height of 18 feet. Parking lots with more than 30 spaces shall have a
maximum lighting pole height of 30 feet.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1199.07 SIGNAGE.
   (a)   Monument Signs. All freestanding signs shall be monument-type, have a
base consistent with the primary building material and have a minimum of 50
square feet of year-round landscaping around all sides of the monument sign.
   (b)   Multi-Tenant Buildings. For multi-tenant buildings, signs for first
floor tenants shall not extend above the window sill of the second story unless
the tenant is located on the second floor.
   (c)   Prohibited Signs. Cabinet box, exposed neon, exposed LED, changeable
copy (manual or electronic), roof-mounted, monopole, rotating, signs with
flashing messages or bare bulbs, signs on backlit awnings, off-premise signs,
billboards, and bench signs are not permitted.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 1199.08 STORM WATER DETENTION.
   (a)   Detention Basins. Dry detention basins are prohibited. All detention
basins shall be wet basins and may require aeration devices in their design.
The requirement of aeration devices and their installation detail shall be
determined and approved by the Technical Review Group.
   (b)   Bio-retention Basins. Bio-retention basins, also known as rain
gardens, may be used only when approved by the municipality.
   (c)   Maintenance of Detention Basins. The maintenance of detention basins
shall be the responsibility of the property owner or property owners’
association, as applicable, and not the Village of Commercial Point. Such
maintenance shall ensure that water in each detention basin or flowing through
the detention basin outlet does not restrict the flow of the public storm sewer
system.
(Ord. 2021-28, passed 8-16-2021)
APPENDIX A: ZONING MAP
   Appendix A is the Commercial Point Comprehensive Development Plan.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
APPENDIX B: TEXT AMENDMENTS
   Appendix B is this table of supplemental building standards:
 R-1 R-3  TND
               R-1              R-3                            TND
Min. Lot Area  25,000 sq. ft.   14,375 sq. ft.   Min. Lot Area 16 acres
Max. Lot       30%              30%              Max. Lot Area 200 acres
Coverage
Min. Lot Width 100 ft.          80 ft.           Density       min. 8 du/ac;
                                                               max 12 du/ac
                                                               allow residents
Lot Width on   60 ft. at street 45 ft. at street               to walk to
Curving Street 100 ft. at bldg. 80 ft. at bldg.  Neighborhood  neighborhood
or Cul-De-Sac  line             line             Size:         square in 5-10
                                                               minutes (1,320
                                                               ft.)
Front Yard     60 ft.           30 ft.
Setback
Side Yard      15 ft. per side  10 ft. each side
Setback
Rear Yard      40 ft.; 8 ft.    30 ft.; 8 ft.    See
Setback        for acc. bldg.   for acc. bldg.   Chapter 1159 for further TND
Max. Building  35 ft. or 2-     35 ft. or 2-     District requirements
Height         stories          stories
Basement       over 20 ft. or 1 over 20 ft. or 1
Required       1/2 stories      1/2 stories
Public Open    15% of net site  15% of the net
Space                           site
 
 MF-A and MFC NC GC SO LM
              MF-A and MFC  NC          GC          SO          LM
              15,000 sq.
Min. Lot Area ft.; 7,094    No Minimum  No Minimum  No Minimum  No Minimum
              sq. ft. per
              dwelling unit
Max. Lot      35%           No Maximum  No Maximum  No Maximum  No Maximum
Coverage
Min. Lot      80 ft.        No Minimum  No Minimum  No Minimum  No Minimum
Width
Lot Width on  45 ft. at
Curving       street 80 ft. Not         Not         Not         Not Applicable
Street or     at bldg. line Applicable  Applicable  Applicable
Cul-De-Sac
Front Yard    25 ft.        50 ft.      50 ft.      50 ft.      50 ft.
Setback
Side Yard     10 ft.        20 ft.      20 ft.      20 ft.      20 ft.
Setback
Rear Yard     25 ft.; 8 ft.
Setback       for acc.      25 ft.      25 ft.      20 ft.      20 ft.
              bldg.
Building Size               max. 5,000
                            sq. ft.
Max. Building 35 ft. or 2   35 ft. or 2 40 ft. or 3 40 ft. or 3 40 ft. or 3
Height        1/2 stories   1/2 stories stories     stories     stories
Public Open   20% of the
Space         net site
 
NOTE: A Conditional Use may require higher development standards. Non-
residential next to residential may require higher development standards.
 PRD PCD PID PUD PCND
                  PRD            PCD  PID PUD            PCND
Min. Lot Area     5              None 10  20             10
Min. Lot Width at 350            350  500 750            350
building line
Min. Frontage     250            250  400 600            250
Max. Coverage     N/A            45%  50% N/A            N/A
Max. Building     35             40   40  40             35
Height
Max. Density      4.0 du/acre             4.0 du/acre    4.0 du/acre
Public Open Space 25% of the net          25% of the net 50% of the net site
                  site                    site
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
APPENDIX C:    Standard Drawings
Commercial Point Zoning Code Table of Permitted Uses and Conditional Uses by
                             Zoning District
Commercial Point Zoning Code               Table of Permitted Uses and Conditional Uses
                                           by Zoning District
Use                                        R- R- MF-
P = Permitted                              1  3  A   MFC SO NC GC LM PRD PCD PID PUD PCND
CU = Conditional
Residential dwellings and Associated and Public Uses
Accessory buildings and uses               P  P  P   P               P           P   P
Accessory structures used as private       CU CU CU  CU
kennels
Apartments                                       P   P
Bed & Breakfast Inns                       CU CU
Cluster housing units                                                                P
Common wall single-family attached                                                   P
dwelling units
Condominiums (attached & detached)               P   P
Family care homes & group care homes                                                 P
Home occupations (see                      CU CU                     P           P   P
Ch. 1187)
Residential quarters as an integral part         CU  CU  P               P       P
and subordinate to a permitted use
Residential structures containing between
2 & 4 dwelling units
Nursing & rest homes                       CU
Single-family detached dwellings           P  P
Single-family, two-family & multi-family                             P           P   P
Single-family zero lot line, attached twin
singles, townhouses or other innovative                                              P
forms of residential plans.
Institution
Colleges & universities                                  P               P       P
Elementary & secondary schools                           P               P       P
Hospitals                                                P               P       P
Museums & art galleries                                  P               P       P
Libraries                                                P               P       P
Nonprofit educational & scientific                       CU              P       P
research services
Professional schools                                     P               P       P
Religious organizations                                  P               P       P
Research, development & testing                          CU       CU     P   P   P
laboratories
School & educational services not                        CU              P       P
elsewhere classified
Vocational schools                                       P               P       P
Other Uses
Agricultural operations, customary         CU CU
Athletic fields & paved parking areas
Children's nurseries, day care centers &   CU CU         CU P        P           P   P
preschool
Churches & other similar places of worship CU CU CU  CU  P           P           P   P
Crops, grazing & other agricultural uses
Forest & wildlife preserves                                                          P
Management for watershed, fish & wildlife,
and fishing
Minor improvements such as picnic tables &
park benches
Paved surfacing (i.e., bike paths, drives)
Picnic shelter, playground equipment,
seating/viewing stands, restrooms,
concession stands, equipment storage
buildings
Private kennels                            P  P
Projects specifically designed for
watershed protection, conservation of soil                                           P
or water or flood control
Public buildings and/or uses supported in
whole or in part by taxes or by special                                              P
public assessment
Public & private schools                   CU CU CU  CU
Public uses:
   Parks                                CU CU CU  CU              P           P   P
   Play grounds                         CU CU CU  CU              P           P   P
   Recreational & community center      CU CU CU  CU              P           P   P
building
   Golf courses                         CU CU CU  CU              P           P   P
   Public swimming pools                CU CU CU  CU              P           P   P
   Tennis courts & similar recreational CU CU CU  CU              P           P   P
uses
Recreational uses except publicly-owned
and operated parks & recreational
facilities
Residential lawns
Tree & sod farming
Unpaved paths & drives
Business & Professional Offices
Administrative, business and professional                P     P  CU     P   P   P
offices
Accounting, auditing & bookkeeping                       P     P         P       P
services
Architects                                               P     P  CU     P   P   P
Chiropractors                                            P  P  P         P       P
Combination of real estate, insurance,                      P            P       P
loan & law offices
Commercial & stock savings banks                            P     CU     P   P   P
Credit agencies other than banks                            P            P       P
Dentists & dental surgeons                               P  P  P  CU     P   P   P
Engineers, engineering                                   P     P  CU     P   P   P
Financial services                                             P         P       P
Graphic arts & interior design                           P     P  CU     P   P   P
Health & allied services not elsewhere                   P     P         P       P
classified
Health care maintenance & emergency                         P  P         P       P
services
Insurance agents, brokers & service                         P  P         P       P
Landscape architects                                     P     P  CU     P   P   P
Legal services                                           P  P  P         P       P
Medical & allied services                                         CU         P
Medical & dental laboratories                            P     P         P       P
Osteopathic physicians                                   P               P       P
Personal credit institutions                                P     CU     P   P   P
Physicians & surgeons                                    P  P  P  CU     P   P   P
Professional services not elsewhere                      CU              P       P
classified
Real estate agents, brokers & managers                      P            P       P
Urban planning                                           P     P  CU     P   P   P
Veterinarian offices & animal hospitals                  CU    CU        P       P
Organizations & Associations
Business associations                                    P               P       P
Charitable organizations                                 P               P       P
Civic, social & fraternal associations                   P               P       P
Labor unions & similar labor organizations               P               P       P
Nonprofit membership org. not elsewhere                  CU              P       P
classified
Political organizations                                  P               P       P
Professional membership organizations                    P               P       P
Personal & Consumer Services
Beauty shops                                             CU P  P  CU     P   P   P
Barber shops                                             CU P  P  CU     P   P   P
Business services not elsewhere
classified, except research, development &                        CU     P   P   P
testing laboratories
Commercial photography studios                           CU    P         P       P
Consumer credit reporting agencies                                CU     P   P   P
Electrical repair                                              P         P       P
Funeral services & crematories                           CU    P         P       P
Furniture repair                                               P         P       P
Garment repair & alteration                                 P            P       P
Laundromats                                                    P         P       P
Misc. personal service                                         P         P       P
Pressing, alteration & garment repair                       P  P  CU     P   P   P
Recycling ctrs, not to include                                    CU         P
manufacturing
Re-upholstery repair                                           P         P       P
Shoe repair                                                 P  P  CU     P   P   P
Watch, clock & jewelry repair                                  P         P       P
Retail
Accessories & personal furnishing stores                       P         P       P
Advertising stores                                             P         P       P
All auto-related uses, e.g., sales &                           CU CU
services
Antique & secondhand stores                                    P         P       P
Automobile car wash                                            CU        P       P
Automobile convenience markets                                 CU CU     P   P   P
Automobile parking                                             CU        P       P
Automobile repair services & garages                           CU CU     P   P   P
Automobile service stations                                    CU CU     P   P   P
Bicycle shops                                                  P         P       P
Blueprinting                                                   P  CU     P   P   P
Bowling                                                        CU        P       P
Camera & photographic supply stores                            P         P       P
Candy, nut & confectionary stores                           P  P         P       P
Cigar stores                                                   P         P       P
Clothing stores                                                P         P       P
Commercial kennels                                             CU CU     P   P   P
Commercial retail, subordinate to another
permitted use & limited to no more than                           P      P   P   P
25% of total gross floor area of all
structures on the subject lot(s)
Convenience food markets                                    P            P       P
Custom tailors                                                 P         P       P
Dairy products stores                                       P  P         P       P
Dance halls & studios; dance schools                           CU        P       P
Department stores                                              P         P       P
Drive-up window service in association                   CU CU CU        P       P
with a principal permitted use
Drug stores & proprietary stores                            P  P         P       P
Duplicating                                                    P         P       P
Eating & drinking establishments with no                    P            P       P
drive-thru window service
Eating & drinking places                                 CU    P         P       P
Electrical supply equipment                                    P         P       P
Electronic products                                         P  P         P       P
Farm equipment                                                 P         P       P
Florists                                                    P  P         P       P
Fruit stores & vegetable markets                            P  P         P       P
Furniture & home furnishings stores                            P         P       P
Furriers & fur shops                                           P         P       P
Gasoline service stations
General merchandise, miscellaneous                             P         P       P
Gift, novelty & souvenir shops                                 P         P       P
Grocery stores                                                 P         P       P
Hardware stores                                             P  P         P       P
Heating & plumbing equipment                                   P         P       P
Hotels & motels                                                CU        P       P
Household appliance stores                                     P         P       P
Jewelry stores                                                 P         P       P
Liquor stores                                                  P         P       P
Lumber & other building materials                              P         P       P
Mail order houses, mailing                                     P  CU     P   P   P
Meat and fish (seafood) markets                             P  P         P       P
Misc. apparel & accessory stores                               P         P       P
Misc. business services not elsewhere                          P         P       P
classified
Misc. retail stores not elsewhere                              P         P       P
classified
Music stores                                                   P         P       P
News dealers                                                   P         P       P
Optical goods stores                                           P         P       P
Organizational hotels & lodging houses on                CU              P       P
a membership basis
Photocopying                                                   P  CU     P   P   P
Private employment agencies                                       CU         P
Radio stores                                                   P         P       P
Retail bakeries                                             P  P         P       P
Shoe stores                                                    P         P       P
Skating rinks                                                  CU        P       P
Sporting goods stores                                          P         P       P
Supermarkets                                                   P         P       P
Stationary stores                                              P         P       P
Stenography                                                    P  CU     P   P   P
Swimming pools                                                 CU        P       P
Television stores                                              P         P       P
Theaters                                                       CU        P       P
Variety stores                                                 P         P       P
Video rental stores                                         P  P         P       P
Manufacturing
Amusements                                                        P      P       P
Automobile accessories & electronic                               P          P
components
Beverage industries                                               P          P
Bookbinding & related industries                                  P          P
Boot & shoe cut stock & findings                                  P          P
Bakery products, candy & other                                    P          P
confectionary products
Books, magazines & other publications                             P          P
Broad & narrow woven fabric mills                                 P          P
Commercial printing                                               P          P
Canning & preserving fruits, vegetables &                         P          P
seafood
Communication equipment                                           P          P
Costume jewelry                                                   P          P
Costume novelties, buttons and misc.                              P          P
notions except precious metal
Dairy products                                                    P          P
Dyeing & finishing                                                P          P
Electronic components & accessories                               P          P
Electrical lighting & wiring equipment                            P          P
Equipment                                                         P          P
Floor covering mills                                              P          P
Footwear                                                          P          P
Fur goods                                                         P          P
Glass products made of purchased glass                            P          P
Gloves & mittens                                                  P          P
Grain mill products                                               P          P
Greeting cards                                                    P          P
Household appliances                                              P          P
Household & office furniture                                      P          P
Instruments for measuring, controlling &                          P          P
indicating physical characteristics
Jewelry, silverware & plated ware                                 P          P
Leather goods not elsewhere classified                            P          P
Luggage, handbags & other personal leather                        P          P
goods
Manifold business forms                                           P          P
Men's, youth's & boys' clothing                                   P          P
Misc. apparel & accessories                                       P          P
Misc. electrical machinery, equipment &                           P          P
supplies
Misc. fabricated textile products                                 P          P
Misc. textile goods                                               P          P
Musical instruments & parts                                       P          P
Nonferrous foundries                                              P          P
Ophthalmic goods                                                  P          P
Optical instruments & lenses                                      P          P
Pens, pencils & other office and artists'                         P          P
materials
Pharmaceuticals                                                   P          P
Photographic equipment & supplies                                 P          P
Plastic products                                                  P          P
Publishing & printing of newspapers                               P          P
Sausages & other prepared meat products                           P          P
Service industries for the printing trade                         P          P
Sheet metal work & machine shops, jobbing                         P          P
& repair
Sporting & athletic goods                                         P          P
Surgical, medical & dental instruments &                          P          P
supplies
Toys                                                              P          P
Watches, clocks, clockwork operated                               P          P
devices & parts
Women's, misses', children's & infants                            P          P
clothing
Yarn & thread mills                                               P          P
Service Industries
Carpentering & wood flooring                                      P          P
Concrete work                                                     P          P
Electrical work                                                   P          P
General construction contractors                                  P          P
Masonry, stonework, tile setting &                                P          P
plastering
Misc. special trade contractors                                   P          P
Painting, paperhanging & decorating                               P          P
Plumbing, heating & air conditioning                              P          P
Roofing & sheet metal work                                        P          P
Water well drilling                                               P          P
Wholesaling
Beer, wine & distilled alcoholic beverages                        P          P
Dry goods & apparel                                               P          P
Electrical goods                                                  P          P
Furniture & home furnishings                                      P          P
Groceries & related products                                      P          P
Hardware, plumbing & heating equipment &                          P          P
supplies
Machinery equipment & supplies                                    P          P
Paper & its products                                              P          P
Pharmaceuticals, chemicals & allied                               P          P
products
Tobacco & its products                                            P          P
Wholesaling, Warehousing & Transportation Services
Farm products & raw materials                                     P          P
Electrical goods                                                  P          P
Hardware, plumbing & heating equipment &                          P          P
supplies
Machinery, equipment & supplies                                   P          P
Mini-warehouses                                                   P          P
Misc. wholesalers except scrap & waste                            P          P
materials
Public warehousing & freight forwarding                           P          P
Terminal & joint terminal maintenance
facilities for motor freight                                      P          P
transportation & misc. services incidental
to transportation
Trucking - local & long distance                                  P          P
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 6-15-2020)
 
PART FOURTEEN: BUILDING AND HOUSING
                  TITLE TWO - Building Standards
         
Chap. 1420. Ohio Basic Building Code.
         
Chap. 1422. CABO One, Two and Three Family Dwelling Code.
                  TITLE FOUR - Miscellaneous Building Regulations
         
Chap. 1440. Permits and Fees.
         
Chap. 1442. Numbering of Buildings.
         
Chap. 1444. Flood Damage Reduction.
TITLE TWO - Building Standards
               
Chap. 1420. Ohio Basic Building Code.
               
Chap. 1422. CABO One, Two and Three Family Dwelling Code.
CHAPTER 1420
Ohio Basic Building Code
1420.01   Adoption of Building Code.
1420.02   Enforcement authority.
CROSS REFERENCES
   Removal of unsafe structures - see Ohio R.C. 715.26(B), 715.261
   Adoption of technical codes by reference - see Ohio R.C. 731.231
   Power to enact further and additional regulations - see Ohio R.C. 3781.01
   Enforcement - see Ohio R.C. 3781.03, 3781.031, 3781.10(E), 3781.102, 3781.19
   Final jurisdiction - see Ohio R.C. 3781.04
   Application - see Ohio R.C. 3781.06, 3781.061, 3781.10(A), 3781.11(A)
   Dead bolt locks in apartment buildings - see Ohio R.C. 3781.103
   Smoke detection system for apartments and condominiums - see Ohio R.C.
3781.104
   Use of public buildings by handicapped persons - see Ohio R.C. 3781.111
   Submission of plans - see Ohio R.C. 3791.04
   Abandoned service stations - see Ohio R.C. 3791.11 et seq.
   Safety standards for refuse containers - see Ohio R.C. 3791.21
§ 1420.01 ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE.
   (a)   The Council of the Village of Commercial Point, State of Ohio, for the
safety and well being of the village deems it necessary to adopt a Building
Code.
   (b)   The Building Code will be adopted from the State of Ohio, Department
of Industrial Relations, Board of Building Standards, and titled Village of
Commercial Point, Ohio, Building Code.
   (c)   This document, titled Building Code is a compilation of regulations
for the erection, construction, repair, alteration, and maintenance of one,
two, and three family dwelling houses.
   (d)   This Building Code will be in force after it is voted upon by Council
members and after the earliest period prescribed by law, and changes and
revisions will be made whenever seen fit by Council members.
(Ord. 1900.00, passed 6-7-1976)
§ 1420.02 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   (a)   The Mayor of the Village of Commercial Point is hereby authorized and
directed to sign and submit an application to the Ohio Board of Building
Standards requesting the Board to certify the Village of Commercial Point to
enforce the Ohio Basic Building Code with the condition that the Pickaway
County Building Department perform all inspections and exercise enforcement
authority as necessary in accordance with the Ohio Basic Building Code within
the limits of the village, and to enter into an agreement with Pickaway County
for such purpose.
   (b)   The Village of Commercial Point through its Mayor and its Clerk, is
hereby authorized and directed to enter into an agreement with Pickaway County
for the enforcement of the Ohio Basic Building Code within the limits of the
village, whereby the Pickaway County Building Department will exercise all
enforcement authority and accept and approve plans and specifications and make
inspections necessary within the village in accordance with the provisions of
the Ohio Basic Building Code pursuant to O.A.C. Rule 4101:2-1-03, except
Plumbing, O.A.C. Chapter 4101:2-51 (plumbing - Pickaway County Board of
Health).
   (c)   The terms of the agreement shall grant to the county full authority to
do all things necessary to administer and enforce the Ohio Basic Building Code
within the limits of the Village of Commercial Point and in consideration
therefor to allow the county to retain all permit and inspection fees
authorized by the State of Ohio for such purposes.
   (d)   The legislative authority of the Village of Commercial Point further
agrees to hold the county harmless for all claims or causes of action of every
kind and nature arising from the acts of the county, its agents, employees, and
representatives in the administration and enforcement of the Code.
(Ord. 2200.3, passed 6-7-1976)
CHAPTER 1422
CABO One, Two and Three Family Dwelling Code
1422.01   Adoption of CABO Building Code.
1422.02   Enforcement.
1422.03   Authorization for the village to enter into an agreement for services
and inspections.
CROSS REFERENCES
   Adoption of technical codes by reference - see Ohio R.C. 731.231
§ 1422.01 ADOPTION OF CABO BUILDING CODE.
   The Building Code relative to regulating the construction of one and two
family dwellings drafted by the Council of American Building Officials and
commonly known as CABO, a copy of which is on file in the office of the Fiscal
Officer and incorporated herein by reference, is hereby adopted by the Village
of Commercial Point, Ohio for the purpose of regulating the fabrication,
erection, construction, inspection, enlargement, alteration, location and use
of detached one and two family dwellings together with their appurtenances and
accessory structures.
(Ord. 2200.4, passed 5-3-1993)
§ 1422.02 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Building Inspector of the Village of Commercial Point, Ohio and his or
her designates are hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of CABO within
the limits of the Village of Commercial Point, to issue permits relative to the
provisions of this code, to enforce any penalties for the violation of these
provisions, and to otherwise provide for the administration and enforcement of
CABO within the village.
(Ord. 2200.4, passed 5-3-1993)
§ 1422.03 AUTHORIZATION FOR THE VILLAGE TO ENTER INTO AN AGREEMENT FOR SERVICES
AND INSPECTIONS.
   (a)   The Mayor and the Clerk of the Village of Commercial Point are hereby
authorized and directed to sign and submit an application to the Ohio Board of
Building Standards requesting the Board to certify the Village of Commercial
Point to enforce the OBBC with the condition that the City of Circleville
perform all inspections and exercise enforcement authority as necessary in
accordance with the OBBC within the limits of the Village of Commercial Point,
and to enter into an agreement with the City of Circleville for such purpose.
   (b)   The Village of Commercial Point, through its Mayor and its Clerk, is
hereby authorized and directed to enter into an agreement with the City of
Circleville for the enforcement of the OBBC and the CABO Codes within the
limits of the Village of Commercial Point, whereby the City of Circleville will
exercise all enforcement authority, accept and approve plans and
specifications, and make inspections necessary within the Village of Commercial
Point in accordance with the provisions of the OBBC pursuant to O.A.C. Rule
4101:2-1-03 (including Plumbing, O.A.C. Chapter 4101:2-51), and Chapter One of
the CABO Code.
   (c)   The terms of the agreement shall grant to the City of Circleville full
authority to do all things necessary to administer and enforce the OBBC and the
CABO Codes within the limits of the Village of Commercial Point and in
consideration therefor to allow the City of Circleville to retain all permit
and inspection fees authorized by the State of Ohio and the City of Circleville
for such purposes.
   (d)   The adjudication process in disputes, differences, and interpretation
of the Codes shall be followed. In the case of the OBBC, by the adjudication
process established in the O.A.C. 4101.3 with the Ohio Board of Building
Appeals; and in the case of the CABO code, the adjudication process will be in
accordance with the established procedures through the City of Circleville.
(Ord. 2202, passed 3-7-1994)
TITLE FOUR - Miscellaneous Building Regulations
               
Chap. 1440. Permits and Fees.
               
Chap. 1442. Numbering of Buildings.
               
Chap. 1444. Flood Damage Reduction.
CHAPTER 1440
Permits and Fees
1440.01   Building plan approval.
1440.02   Fees.
1440.03   Permit required; qualifications   .
1440.04   Permit application.
1440.05   Notification of alterations to plan.
1440.06   Plans; specifications; construction layout; exceptions.
1440.07   Effect of permit issuance.
1440.08   Permit expiration.
1440.09   Fees required; double fees.
1440.10   Use or occupancy; certificates required.
1440.11   Requirements for certificate.
1440.12   Certificate issuance.
1440.13   Requirements for temporary certificate.
1440.14   Posting.
1440.15   Fees for certificate.
1440.16   Electrical permits; fee; revocations.
1440.17   Site inspection prior to covering   .
1440.18   Heating, ventilating and air conditioning permits.
1440.99   Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to regulate building erection - see Ohio R.C. 715.26, 715.29, 737.28
   Ohio State Building Standards - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3781
§ 1440.01 BUILDING PLAN APPROVAL.
   (a)   Any builder or developer seeking final or preliminary development plan
approval shall pay to the village, the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00)
for development plan approval.
   (b)   Any builder or developer seeking building plan approval shall pay to
the village the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00).
(Ord. 65-93, passed - -1993)
§ 1440.02 FEES.
    All fees shall be computed on a square foot (sq. ft.) per floor basis,
including basement and sub-basements, measuring the outside tensions at each
floor level, except where fixed.
Use Fee
Use                                 Fee
One Family Residential              $300.00 per building
Two and Three Family Residential    $300.00 for the first unit; $200.00 each
                                    additional unit
Multi-family                        $300.00 for the first unit and $150.00
                                    for each additional unit per building
Additions, Garages, Accessory
Buildings in Residential Areas      $75.00 up to and including 700.00 square
including Attached Carports, Patios feet
and Porches, Enclosed Patios and
Porches and Decks
                                    Over 700 square feet, $50.00 plus $5.00
                                    per 100 square feet or fraction thereof
                                    $15.00 for open decks with no solid roofs
Ohio Basic Building Code
   All other building and additions thereto as defined in the Ohio Basic
Building Code Occupancy Chapters.
                                    $50.00 per structure or addition plus
                                    $3.00 per each 100 square feet or
                                    fraction thereof; the maximum fee for a
Plan examination fee                single structure shall not exceed
                                    $2,000.00; plan examination is payable
                                    upon application for building permit and
                                    is nonrefundable
Development Fee
Commercial                          $200.00 per acre or fraction thereof,
                                    plus $0.02 per square foot of building
Residential                         $200.00 for each unit
In addition to the above fees, the builder or developer shall pay any late
surcharges applicable
Occupancy Permit Fees
Commercial                          $100.00 per unit or per final inspection
Residential                         $50.00 per building unit
Water Tap Fees
   For that portion of the village served by the well system
Size of Water Tap                   Charge
3/4 inch                            $1,385.00
1 inch                              $2,822.00
1-1/2 inch                          $7,160.00
2 inches                            $12,341.00
3 inches                            $25,945.00
   For that portion of the village served by the Columbus water system, the
Columbus rate plus the following surcharges
Size of Water Tap                   Charge
3/4 inch                            $120.00
1 inch                              $216.00
1-1/2 inch                          $480.00
2 inches                            $858.00
3 inches                            $1,932.00
4 inches                            $3.432.00
6 inches                            $7,716.00
8 inches                            $13,716.00
10 inches                           $21,432.00
When there are separate taps for domestic and fire protection, the village
collects the full tapping application fee for the domestic tap and five
percent of the regular tapping fee for the fire line.
Sewer Tapping Fees
   Since Commercial Point’s fees are based on City of Columbus sewer fees,
Commercial Point fees are subject to change, if and when the City of Columbus
has a fee increase.
   Fees are based on the size of the water tap. Listed below are the fees
that will be charged.
Size of Water Tap                   Sewer Tap Charge
3/4 inch                            $1,000.00
1 inch                              $1,650.00
1-1/2 inch                          $4,300.00
2 inches                            $7,400.00
3 inches                            $15,400.00
4 inches                            $24,100.00
6 inches                            $54,400.00
8 inches                            $96.500.00
10 inches                           $149,900.00
12 inches                           $216,750.00
16 inches                           $240,000.00
Building Permit Fee                 $100.00 plus $4.00 per each 100 square
                                    feet or fraction thereof
 
(Ord. 65-93, passed - -1993)
§ 1440.03 PERMIT REQUIRED; QUALIFICATIONS.
   (a)   No person shall commence to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
move, improve, remove, convert or demolish any building or structure in the
village or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a separate permit
for each such building or structure from the Building Inspector.
   (b)   No building permit shall be issued until a grading plan showing
existing and proposed grades and drainage from or onto adjacent property has
been approved by the Village Engineer.
   (c)   No building permit shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation
who is in violation of this Building Code, who is under citation by the
inspector for any violation of the Building Code, or who has willfully failed
to comply with a lawful order of the inspector.
(Ord. 65-93, passed - -1993)
§ 1440.04 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (a)   To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application
therefor in writing on a form furnished for that purpose.
   (b)   Each application shall:
      (1)   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done, by lot,
block, tract, and street address or similar description that will readily
identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work;
      (2)   Show the use or occupancy of all parts of the building;
      (3)   Be accompanied by plans and specifications as are required in §
1440.06;
      (4)   State the valuation of the proposed work: and
      (5)   Give all other information as reasonably may be required by the
Building Inspector.
(Ord. 65-93, passed - -1993)
§ 1440.05 NOTIFICATION OF ALTERATIONS TO PLAN.
   (a)   If, during the prosecution of work under a permit, it is necessary to
make any changes in the plans or contract, the permit holder shall notify the
Building Inspector in writing of the proposed changes.
   (b)   If approved, the changes shall be added to the original permit file,
and if the cost of the work is thereby increased so much as to require a higher
permit fee, the additional sum shall be collected in accordance with the
schedule set forth herein.
(Ord. 65-93, passed - -1993)
§ 1440.06 PLANS; SPECIFICATIONS; CONSTRUCTION LAYOUT; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by three sets of
plans and specifications.
   (b)   (1)   Plans and specifications for buildings shall be prepared by a
licensed architect, engineer or qualified draftsman and be drawn to scale upon
a substantial paper or cloth of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and
extent of the work proposed and to show in detail that it will conform to the
provisions of the Building Code and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations.
      (2)   A.   The first sheet of each set of plans shall give the lot number
and subdivision name, the street address of the work and the name of the owner
or agent and person who prepared them.
         B.   Plans shall include a plot plan signed by a registered surveyor
showing the location of the proposed building and of every existing building
adjacent on the property and shall conform to the regulations of the Zoning
Code.
   (c)   The outline of the proposed building shall be staked out on the ground
by a registered surveyor with sufficient permanency that the inspector may
determine that the footers and walls are constructed according to the layout
stakes.
(Ord. 65-93, passed - -1993)
§ 1440.07 EFFECT OF PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   (a)   The issuance of granting of a permit or approval of plans and
specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for an approval of any
violation of any provisions of the Building Code.
   (b)   The issuance of a permit based upon plans and specifications shall not
prevent the Building Inspector from thereafter requiring the correction of
errors in such plans and specifications or from preventing building operations
being carried on thereunder when in violation of the Building Code or any other
ordinances of the village.
(Ord. 65-93, passed - -1993)
§ 1440.08 PERMIT EXPIRATION.
   A permit under which no work is commenced within six months after issuance
of under which work is commenced and later discontinued for at least six months
shall expire by limitation and a new permit shall be secured before work is
started or resumed, as the case may be.
(Ord. 65-93, passed - -1993)
§ 1440.09 FEES REQUIRED; DOUBLE FEES.
   (a)   Any person desiring to do or cause to be done any work for which a
permit is issued shall pay to the Director of Finance a fee in the amount fixed
by this Building Code.
   (b)   Where work for which a permit is required by the Building Code is
started or proceeded with prior to obtaining such a permit, the fees shall be
doubled but the payment of double fees shall not relieve any persons from fully
complying with requirements of the Building Code in the execution of the work
nor from any other penalties prescribed.
(Ord. 65-93, passed - -1993)
§ 1440.10 USE OR OCCUPANCY; CERTIFICATES REQUIRED.
   (a)   Nonresidential. No new building or structure in a nonresidential
classification shall be used or occupied and no change in the existing
occupancy of any building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until
the Building Inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as
provided herein.
   (b)   Residential. No building or structure, or any portion thereof, used or
intended for use as a private residence or apartment dwelling shall be so used
or occupied until the Building Department has issued a certificate of occupancy
therefor.
   (c)   Certificate of occupancy required. No builder, general contractor,
owner or tenant shall knowingly permit a building or structure as described in
divisions (a) and (b) hereof to be used or occupied until such time as there
has been issued a certificate of occupancy as required by those divisions.
(Ord. 65-93, passed - -1993)
§ 1440.11 REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTIFICATE.
   The following department requirements must be fulfilled and approved prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
   (a)   Building Department. The building or structure is constructed and
completed as per plans and specifications.
   (b)   Water Department. The curb box and water valve are installed properly.
   (c)   Street Department. The curb, driveway approach and public sidewalk are
free from cracks and constructed as per the requirements of the village.
   (d)   Sewer Department. All manholes and sewers located on private property
are free from debris and installed properly and to grade.
   (e)   Engineering Department. All final grades are completed as per accepted
plot and grading plans, as built plans are required.
   (f)   Township Fire Department. The location of fire extinguishers, exit
signs and the acceptance of any required fire fighting apparatus.
(Ord. 65-93, passed - -1993)
§ 1440.12 CERTIFICATE ISSUANCE.
   If, after final inspections by all involved departments of the village, it
is found that the building or structure and the site there located on complies
with all provisions of the code of ordinances and Fire Department, the Building
Inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy which shall contain the
following:
   (a)   A statement of the use and occupancy for which the certificate is
used;
   (b)   A statement that the floor load sign and other maximum seating
capacity signs have been installed (except residential and apartments);
   (c)   A certification that the building or structure complies with the
provisions of this code; and
   (d)   All site improvements including sidewalks, curbs and gutters, hard
surface driveways, final grading, lot pinning, seeding and/or sodding has been
completed.
(Ord. 65-93, passed - -1993)
§ 1440.13 REQUIREMENTS FOR TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE.
   (a)   On the following conditions, a temporary certificate of occupancy may
be granted by the Building Inspector only during the months of December through
May when weather conditions have caused a delay in completion of the project:
      (1)   The requirements of §
1440.11(a) of the Building Department have been met;
      (2)   The requirements of §
1440.11(f) of the Fire Department have been met; and
      (3)   The requirements of §
1440.11(b), (c), (d) and (e) that have not been met may be delayed for valid
reasons by the Building Department without endangering the health and safety of
any resident of the village.
   (b)   At the time of the issuance of a temporary certificate, the time of
complete compliance with the requirements for an occupancy permit shall be
stated on the temporary certificate of occupancy. Failure to obtain a final
occupancy permit within six months of issuance of the temporary certificate of
occupancy may result in the refusal of future building permits.
(Ord. 65-93, passed - -1993)
§ 1440.14 POSTING.
   The certificate of occupancy shall be posted by the builder or general
contractor in a conspicuous place on the premises and shall not be removed
except by the Building Inspector.
(Ord. 65-93, passed - -1993)
§ 1440.15 FEES FOR CERTIFICATE.
 
Certificate                         Fee
Certificate of occupancy            $50.00 and is nonrefundable
Certificate of occupancy for multi- $50.00 for the first unit and $25.00 for
family dwellings                    each additional unit per building
Temporary certificate of occupancy  $75.00 and is nonrefundable
Nonresidential certificate          $100.00
 
(Ord. 65-93, passed - -1993)
§ 1440.16 ELECTRICAL PERMITS; FEE; REVOCATIONS.
   (a)   Permits. No person shall commence or proceed with the installation,
alteration or repair of any electrical equipment in or about any building in
the village without first obtaining from the building inspector, a permit to do
such work. No permit shall be required for such work as repairing drop cords,
repairing existing heating, ventilating, air conditioning and refrigerating
equipment and provided that in cases where an emergency or urgent necessity
exists such electrical work may be proceeded with, prior to the obtaining of a
permit, if a person obtains the necessary permit as soon as the office of the
inspector is open for business. Correct information shall be furnished by the
applicant for a permit on blanks furnished by the inspector, giving the
location of the premises by house number where work is to be done, name of
owner, number of outlets or fixtures, motors or other equipment and any other
information pertaining to the work that may be required.
   (b)   Fees. The base fee for an electrical permit shall be twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) plus the following:
      (1)   The service entrance fee shall be three cents ($0.03) per ampere
rating of the switch for each permanent and/or temporary service.
      (2)   The first 100 outlets and fixtures, including switches and
receptacles shall be thirty-three cents ($0.33) each. Over 100 outlets and
fixtures including switches and receptacles shall be thirty cents ($0.30) each.
      (3)   Fees for ventilating fans, dishwashers, disposals, furnaces,
electric hotwater tanks, dryers, ranges and ovens shall be one dollar and fifty
cents ($1.50) each.
      (4)   A.   All motor outlets - Seventy-five cents ($0.75) each
         B.   Connected solid - One dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) each,
including motors, generators, rectifiers and air-conditioners.
      (5)   Radiant panel heater. Each radiant panel, up to ten shall be eighty
cents ($0.80) per panel with a minimum fee of five dollars ($5.00). For over
ten panels, the fee shall be fifty cents ($0.50) per panel. Maximum fee for any
one dwelling unit shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
   (c)   Double fees.
      (1)   The amount of any and all fees as herein established shall be
doubled if any electrical work for installation has been commenced before an
application for a permit for such work is obtained, as provided for under
division (a) hereof.
      (2)   The above fees shall cover the visit of inspection made necessary
by the progress of the work. When extra inspections are made because of the
work being found not in accordance with the provisions of the Building Code or
because of inaccurate information furnished by the applicant for a permit, a
fee of one dollar ($1.00) may be charges for each additional trip made by the
inspector.
   (d)   Revocations; notice. Each permit issued by the inspector shall be
subject to revocation by the inspector whenever it appears that such work is
being constructed as to violate any of the terms or conditions of this Building
Code, or any other subsection hereof or any state statute relating to the
installing of electrical work in buildings. Revocation of the permit shall be
in writing and served upon the owner or upon the superintendent or contractor
in charge of the work and posted upon the building or structure for which such
permit was granted. From and after revocation of the permit and the posting of
such notice, all work of every kind and character that will prevent or obstruct
the necessary changes or additions to the electrical work on such building or
structure shall be discontinued.
(Ord. 65-93, passed - -1993)
§ 1440.17 SITE INSPECTION PRIOR TO COVERING.
   All electrical wire conduit outlets, receptacles, switches and circuit
breakers shall be installed on the job site and no drywall or wall covering
shall be installed until same has been inspected.
(Ord. 65-93, passed - -1993)
§ 1440.18 HEATING, VENTILATING AND AIR CONDITIONING PERMITS.
   (a)   Permit required.
      (1)   Upon checking for compliance with this chapter or any other
ordinance governing such work, an approval of the plan, except on work done by
an owner on his or her own residence, a heating, ventilating, air conditioning
or portable heating appliance permit shall be secured from the inspector by the
holder of a license to do such work or by the firm or corporation employing a
holder of such license or by an owner on his or her own residence, before any
work is started on the installation, upon payment
of the fee as required in division (b) hereof, and the permit or copy thereof
shall be posted at the site at all times during the course of construction.
      (2)   This permit shall be required to install or replace any heating,
ventilating or air conditioning unit, or to add any air outlets or heating
units, including central heating plane, conversion burner, direct-fired unit
heater, space heater, portable heating appliance and floor furnace. Permits
will not be required for ventilating systems without duct-work.
   (b)   Space heating appliances. The permit fee for the installation or
replacement of each space heating appliance, as defined in Article 10 of the
Ohio Basic Building Code and Part IV of the BOCA Code, is based on BTU input
for warm air furnaces, including duct work, boilers, incinerators, commercial
conversion burners and commercial dryers.
   (c)   Fee schedule.
Residential                                                       (In Dollars)
Heating (warm air, heat pump, and the like)                       $30.00
Cooling                                                           $30.00
When installing heating and cooling at the same time              $50.00
NOTE: Each unit in a multi-family dwelling shall be considered as a single
unit and permitted as such.
Alteration to existing systems                                    $15.00
Commercial, industrial and the like
Warm air furnaces and boilers
   Up to 100,000 BTU or 29,300 watts                           $30.00
   200,000 BTU or 58.6 KW                                      $45.00
   300,000 BTU or 87.9 KW                                      $55.00
   Over 300,000 BTU or 87.9KW add for each additional 100,000 B$15.00
Electric perimeter radiant beatings
   The fee for electric baseboard or radiant heating shall be based on the
total wattage as set forth above.
Heat pumps
   1/2 ton but not 1 ton                                       $40.00
   1 ton but not 5 tons                                        $50.00
   5 tons but not 10 tons                                      $60.00
   Each additional 5 tons or fraction                          $15.00
Air conditioning systems
   All up to but not 5 tons                                    $25.00
   Per ton over 5 tons                                         $1.00
Ventilating systems
   201 to 1,000 cfm                                            $12.50
   1,001 to 5,000 cfm                                          $17.50
   5,000 to 10,000 cfm                                         $22.50
   Each additional 10,000 cfm                                  $12.50
Commercial alterations, where unit not being changed
Per opening                                                       $5.00
Fireplaces and chimneys
Prefabricated, solid fuel fireplaces either free-standing or
constructed exposed against wall, will be considered as a heating $20.00
appliance and require a permit fee
NOTE. Flues extended above roof more than three feet or exposed to exterior
shall be encased in a decorative chase matching in appearance the exterior
finish or dwelling or structure.
Steam or hot water heating plant fee
New installation, each boiler                                     $10.00
Replacement of boiler or units                                    $10.00
 
(Ord. 65-93, passed - -1993)
§ 1440.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no other
penalty is provided is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
   (b)   Each day in which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
(Ord. 65-93, passed - -1993)
CHAPTER 1442
Numbering of Buildings
1442.01   Adoption of plan.
1442.02   Dwelling owners’ duties.
1442.03   Numbering generally.
1442.04   Village Fiscal Officer as official custodian.
1442.99   Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to regulate building numbering - see Ohio R.C. 715.26
§ 1442.01 ADOPTION OF PLAN.
   The Council of the Village of Commercial Point does hereby adopt as their
official plan for the numbering of buildings in the municipality, that certain
plan dated the June 4,1974, which was prepared by members of the Council and is
now on file in the office of the Village Fiscal Officer.
(Ord. 4-74, passed 6-4-1974)
§ 1442.02 DWELLING OWNERS’ DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the owners of all dwellings, commercial
establishments and other buildings shown on the plan, to number such buildings
with numerals at least three inches high in colors contrasting with the
background in such manner and location as to be plainly visible from the
street. Numbers shall be placed on such houses and buildings within 30 days
from the time the owners are notified by the Village Fiscal Officer either by
mail, publication or telephone of the assignment of numbers to the houses and
buildings.
(Ord. 4-74, passed 6-4-1974)
§ 1442.03 NUMBERING GENERALLY.
   All buildings which shall be hereafter erected or moved into the Village of
Commercial Point shall be numbered by the owners as in this chapter provided,
with numbers to be ascertained by them from the Village Fiscal Officer. On or
before the January 31 each year hereafter, it shall be the duty of the Village
Fiscal Officer to prepare a certificate stating the numbers assigned during the
preceding calendar year, and attach the certificate to the numbering system
prepared by the Village Council which is referred to in §
1442.01 of this chapter.
(Ord. 4-74, passed 6-4-1974)
§ 1442.04 VILLAGE FISCAL OFFICER AS OFFICIAL CUSTODIAN.
   The Village Fiscal Officer shall be the official custodian of the building
number map and shall allot new numbers to new buildings and do such things as
may be necessary to keep the map up to date.
(Ord. 4-74, passed 6-4-1974)
§ 1442.99 PENALTY.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building to fail to number his or
her building in accordance with the village plan and if he or she fails to do
so, after ten days written notice sent to him or her through the mail, to his
or her last known address, he or she shall be subject to a fine of not more
than twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
(Ord. 4-74, passed 6-4-1974)
CHAPTER 1444
Flood Damage Reduction
1444.01   Statutory authorization.
1444.02   Findings of fact.
1444.03   Statement of purpose.
1444.04   Methods of reducing flood loss.
1444.05   Lands to which these regulations apply.
1444.06   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
1444.07   Abrogation and greater restrictions.
1444.08   Interpretation.
1444.09   Warning and disclaimer of liability.
1444.10   Severability.
1444.11   Definitions.
1444.12   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.
1444.13   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
1444.14   Floodplain development permits.
1444.15   Application required.
1444.16   Review and approval of a floodplain development permit application.
1444.17   Inspections.
1444.18   Post-construction certifications required.
1444.19   Revoking a floodplain development permit.
1444.20   Exemption from filing a development permit.
1444.21   Map maintenance activities.
1444.22   Data use and flood map interpretation.
1444.23   Substantial damage determinations.
1444.24   Use and development standards for flood hazard reduction.
1444.25   Use regulations.
1444.26   Water and wastewater systems.
1444.27   Subdivisions and large developments.
1444.28   Residential structures.
1444.29   Nonresidential structures.
1444.30   Accessory structures.
1444.31   Recreational vehicles.
1444.32   Above ground gas or liquid storage tanks.
1444.33   Assurance of flood carrying capacity.
1444.34   Appeals Board established.
1444.35   Powers and duties.
1444.36   Appeals.
1444.37   Variances.
1444.38   Procedure at hearings.
1444.39   Appeal to the court.
1444.40   Compliance required.
1444.41   Notice of violation.
1444.99   Violations and penalties.
§ 1444.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   Article XVIII, Section 3 of the Ohio Constitution grants municipalities the
legal authority to adopt land use and control measures for promoting the
health, safety, and general welfare of its citizens. This chapter adopts
regulations for areas of special flood hazard that are necessary for
participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   Commercial Point has special flood hazard areas that are subject to periodic
inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base.
Additionally, structures that are inadequately elevated, flood proofed, or
otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
hereinafter set forth, these regulations are adopted.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare, and to:
   (a)   Protect human life and health;
   (b)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (c)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (d)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (e)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
   (f)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the proper use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to protect property and
minimize future flood blight areas;
   (g)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions;
   (h)   Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within and
near flood prone areas;
   (i)   Ensure that the flood storage and conveyance functions of the
floodplain are maintained;
   (j)   Minimize the impact of development on the natural, beneficial values
of the floodplain;
   (k)   Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or environmentally
incompatible; and
   (l)   Meet community participation requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.04 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSS.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, these regulations include methods and
provisions for:
   (a)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
flood heights or velocities;
   (b)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (c)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters;
   (d)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, excavating, and other
development which may increase flood damage; and
   (e)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers, which
will unnaturally divert flood waters, or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.05 LANDS TO WHICH THESE REGULATIONS APPLY.
   These regulations shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within
the jurisdiction of the village as identified in §
1444.06, including any additional areas of special special flood hazard annexed
by the village.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.06 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   For the purposes of these regulations, the following studies and/or maps are
adopted:
   (a)   Flood Insurance Study Pickaway County, Ohio and Incorporated Areas and
Flood Insurance Rate Map Pickaway County, Ohio and incorporated Areas both
effective July 22, 2010.
   (b)   Other studies and/or maps which may be relied upon for establishment
of the flood protection elevation, delineation of the 100-year floodplain,
floodways or delineation of other areas of special flood hazard include: USDA,
Pickaway County Soil Survey, issued February 1980, and any revisions thereto.
   (c)   Any hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis authored by a
registered professional engineer in the state that has been approved by
Pickaway County as required by §
1444.27, Subdivisions and Large Scale Developments. Any revisions to the
aforementioned maps and/or studies are hereby adopted by reference and declared
to be a part of these regulations. The maps and/or studies are on file at the
Office of Development and Planning, 124 West Franklin St. Circleville, OH
43113.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.07 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   These regulations are not intended to repeal any existing ordinances
including subdivision regulations, zoning or building codes. In the event of a
conflict between these regulations and any other ordinance, the more
restrictive shall be followed. These regulations shall not impair any deed
restriction covenant or easement but the land subject to such interests shall
also be governed by the regulations.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.08 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of these regulations, all provisions
shall be:
   (a)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (b)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (c)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes. Where a provision of these regulations may be in conflict with
a state or federal law, such state or federal law shall take precedence over
these regulations.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.09 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. These regulations do not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. These regulations
shall not create liability on the part of village, any officer or employee
thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damage that
results from reliance on these regulations or any administrative decision
lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.10 SEVERABILITY.
   Should any section or provision of these regulations be declared by the
courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the regulations as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part
so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.11 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure on the same lot with, and of a nature
customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure.
   APPEAL. A request for review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of these regulations or a request for a
variance.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. The base flood may also be referred to as the 1% chance annual
flood or 100-year flood.
   BASE (100-YEAR) FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The water surface elevation of the
base flood in relation to a specified datum, usually the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, and
usually expressed in feet mean sea level (MSL). In Zone AO areas, the base
flood elevation is the natural grade elevation plus the depth number (from one
to three feet).
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   ENCLOSURE BELOW THE LOWEST FLOOR. See LOWEST FLOOR.
   EXECUTIVE ORDER 11988 (FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT). Issued by President Carter in
1977, this order requires that no federally assisted activities be conducted in
or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard areas, unless
there is no practicable alternative.
   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA). The agency with the overall
responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
   FILL. A deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). Usually the initial map produced by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, or U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development, for a community depicting approximate special flood hazard areas.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has delineated the areas of special flood hazard.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RISK ZONES. Zone designations on FHBMs and FIRMs that
indicate the magnitude of the flood hazard in specific areas of a community.
Following are the zone definitions:
      (1)   ZONE A. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood;
base flood elevations are not determined.
      (2)   ZONES A1-30 and ZONE AE. Special flood hazard areas inundated by
the 100-year flood; base flood elevations are determined.
      (3)   ZONE AO. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood; with flood depths of one to three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping
terrain); average depths are determined.
      (4)   ZONE AH.  Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood; flood depths of one to three feet (usually areas of ponding); base flood
elevations are determined.
      (5)   ZONE A99. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood to be protected from the 100-year flood by a federal flood protection
system under construction; no base flood elevations are determined.
      (6)   ZONE B and ZONE X (SHADED). Areas of 500-year flood; areas subject
to the 100-year flood with average depths of less than one foot or with
contributing drainage area less than one square mile; and areas protected by
levees from the base flood.
      (7)   ZONE C and ZONE X (UNSHADED). Areas determined to be outside the
500-year floodplain.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official report in which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has provided flood profiles, floodway boundaries (sometimes shown
on Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps), and the water surface elevations of the
base flood.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. The Flood Protection Elevation, or FPE, is the
base flood elevation plus one foot of freeboard. In areas where no base flood
elevations exist from any authoritative source, the flood protection elevation
can be historical flood elevations, or base flood elevations determined and/or
approved by the Floodplain Administrator.
   FLOODWAY. A floodway is the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that have been reserved in order to pass the base flood
discharge. A floodway is typically determined through a hydraulic and
hydrologic engineering analysis such that the cumulative increase in the water
surface elevation of the base flood discharge is no more than a designated
height. In no case shall the designated height be more than one foot at any
point within the community. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area, and is
usually characterized by any of the following: moderate to high velocity flood
waters, high potential for debris and projectile impacts, and moderate to high
erosion forces.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level
for the purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for
the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than
the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such
as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, and the
hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listings on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district; or
      (3)   Individually listed on the State of Ohio's inventory of historic
places maintained by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office.
   HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING ANALYSIS. An analysis performed by a
professional engineer, registered in the state, in accordance with standard
engineering practices as accepted by FEMA, used to determine flood elevations
and/or floodway boundaries.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). A Letter of Map Change is an official FEMA
determination, by letter, to amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate
Maps, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps, and Flood Insurance Studies. LOMC's are
broken down into the following categories:
      (1)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). A revision based on technical data
showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood
hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and
establishes that a specific property is not located in a special flood hazard
area.
      (2)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A revision based on technical data
that, usually due to manmade changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood
elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. One
common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a determination concerning whether a
structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation
and is, therefore, excluded from the special flood hazard area.
      (3)   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A formal review and
comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum
National Flood Insurance Program floodplain management criteria. A CLOMR does
not amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary and
Floodway Maps, or Flood Insurance Studies.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement) of a structure. This definition excludes an enclosure below the
lowest floor which is an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely
for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, provided that the enclosure is built in accordance with the
applicable design requirements specified in these regulations for enclosures
below the lowest floor.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. For the purposes of
these regulations, a manufactured home includes manufactured homes and mobile
homes as defined in Ohio R.C. Chapter 3733.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. As specified in the Ohio Administrative Code § 3701-
27-01, a manufactured home park means any tract of land upon which three or
more manufactured homes, used for habitation are parked, either free of charge
or for revenue purposes, and includes any roadway, building, structure,
vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the facilities of the
park. A tract of land that is subdivided and the individual lots are not for
rent or rented, but are for sale or sold for the purpose of installation of
manufactured homes on the lots, is not a MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, even though
three or more manufactured homes are parked thereon, if the roadways are
dedicated to the local government authority.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The NFIP is a federal program
enabling property owners in participating communities to purchase insurance
protection against losses from flooding. This insurance is designed to provide
an insurance alternative to disaster assistance to meet the escalating costs of
repairing damage to buildings and their contents caused by floods.
Participation in the NFIP is based on an agreement between local communities
and the federal government that states if a community will adopt and enforce
floodplain management regulations to reduce future flood risks to all
development in special flood hazard areas, the federal government will make
flood insurance available within the community as a financial protection
against flood loss.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the initial effective date of the Village of Commercial Point Flood
Insurance Rate Map dated September 30, 1999, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
   PERSON. Includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association, or any other entity, including state and local
governments and agencies. An agency is further defined in Ohio R.C. 111.15 as
any governmental entity of the state and includes, but is not limited to, any
board, department, division, commission, bureau, society, council, institution,
state college or university, community college district, technical college
district, or state community college. Agency does not include the general
assembly, the controlling board, the adjutant general's department, or any
court.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ARCHITECT. A person registered to engage in the
practice of architecture under the provisions of Ohio R.C. 4703.01 through
4703.19.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A person registered as a professional
engineer under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4733.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL SURVEYOR. A person registered as a professional
surveyor under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4733.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Also known as AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD, it
is the land in the floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in
any given year. Special flood hazard areas are designated by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency on Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Insurance
Studies, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood Hazard Boundary Maps as
Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, and A99. SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS may also refer
to areas that are flood prone and designated from other federal state or local
sources of data including but not limited to historical flood information
reflecting high water marks, previous flood inundation areas, and flood prone
soils associated with a watercourse.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. The date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of a building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, manufactured home, or gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include:
      (1)   Any improvement to a structure that is considered new construction;
      (2)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified prior to the application for a development permit by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
      (3)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the standards of these regulations
consistent with the variance conditions herein.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with these regulations.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.12 DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Mayor or designee shall administer and implement these regulations and
is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.13 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include but are not limited to administration and coordination with local
government agencies by agreement to:
   (a)   Evaluate applications for permits to develop in special flood hazard
areas.
   (b)   Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide flood hazard and flood
protection elevation information.
   (c)   Issue permits to develop in special flood hazard areas when the
provisions of these regulations have been met, or refuse to issue the same in
the event of noncompliance.
   (d)   Inspect buildings and lands to determine whether any violations of
these regulations have been committed.
   (e)   Make and permanently keep all records for public inspection necessary
for the administration of these regulations including Flood Insurance Rate
Maps, Letters of Map Amendment and Revision, records of issuance and denial of
permits to develop in special flood hazard areas, determinations of whether
development is in or out of special flood hazard areas for the purpose of
issuing floodplain development permits, elevation certificates, variances, and
records of enforcement actions taken for violations of these regulations.
   (f)   Enforce the provisions of these regulations.
   (g)   Provide information, testimony, or other evidence as needed during
variance hearings.
   (h)   Coordinate map maintenance activities and FEMA follow-up.
   (i)   Conduct substantial damage determinations to determine whether
existing structures, damaged from any source and in special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, must meet the development standards of these regulations.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.14 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to begin construction or other
development activity including but not limited to filling, grading,
construction, alteration, remodeling, or expanding any structure; or alteration
of any watercourse wholly within, partially within or in contact with any
identified special flood hazard area, as established in §
1444.06, until a floodplain development permit is obtained from the Floodplain
Administrator. The floodplain development permit shall show that the proposed
development activity is in conformity with the provisions of these regulations.
No permit shall be issued by the Floodplain Administrator until the
requirements of these regulations have been met.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.15 APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   An application for a floodplain development permit shall be required for all
development activities located wholly within, partially within, or in contact
with an identified special flood hazard area. The application shall be made by
the owner of the property or his or her authorized agent, herein referred to as
the applicant, prior to the actual commencement of the construction on a form
furnished for that purpose. Where it is unclear whether a development site is
in a special flood hazard area, the Floodplain Administrator may require an
application for a floodplain development permit to determine the development's
location. The applications shall include, but not be limited to:
   (a)   Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and topography of the area in question; the location of existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location
of the foregoing.
   (b)   Elevation of the existing, natural ground where structures are
proposed.
   (c)   Elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed
structures.
   (d)   Such other material and information as may be requested by the
Floodplain Coordinator to determine conformance with, and provide enforcement
of these regulations.
   (e)   Technical analyses conducted by the appropriate design professional
registered in the state and submitted with an application for a floodplain
development permit when applicable:
      (1)   Floodproofing certification for nonresidential floodproofed
structure as required in §
1444.29.
      (2)   Certification that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a
structure not meeting the design requirements of §
1444.28(e) are designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces.
      (3)   Description of any watercourse alteration or relocation that the
flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished, and
maintenance assurances as required in §
1444.33(c).
      (4)   A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot in special flood hazard areas
where the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided base flood
elevations but no floodway as required by §
1444.33(b).
      (5)   A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis showing impact of
any development on flood heights in an identified floodway as required by §
1444.33(a).
      (6)   Generation of base flood elevation(s) for subdivision and large-
scale developments as required by §
1444.27.
   (f)   Payment rendered for associated fees, including but not limited to
floodplain development permit applications, site evaluations, subdivision plan/
plat review, and building permits, as set by the schedule of applications and
permit fees adopted by Pickaway County and other agencies by administrative
agreement with the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.16 REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF A FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (a)   Review.
      (1)   After receipt of a complete application, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the application to ensure that the standards of
these regulations have been met. No floodplain development permit application
shall be reviewed until all information required in §
1444.15 has been received by the Floodplain Administrator.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review all floodplain
development permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have been
received from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which
prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining
the permits as required including permits issued by township, county,
municipal, or other local government agencies, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
under § 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act and § 404 of the Clean Water Act, and
the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency under § 401 of the Clean Water Act.
   (b)   Approval. Within 30 days after the receipt of a complete application,
the Floodplain Administrator shall either approve or disapprove the
application. If an application is approved, a floodplain development permit
shall be issued. All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon
the commencement of work within one year. A floodplain development permit shall
expire one year after issuance unless the permitted activity has been
substantially begun and is thereafter pursued to completion.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.17 INSPECTIONS.
   The Floodplain Administrator or an agent designated by administrative
agreement shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times throughout the
period of construction in order to monitor compliance with permit conditions.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.18 POST-CONSTRUCTION CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED.
   The following as-built certifications are required after a floodplain
development permit has been issued:
   (a)   For new or substantially improved residential structures, or
nonresidential structures that have been elevated, the applicant shall have a
Federal Emergency Management Agency elevation certificate completed by a
registered surveyor to record as-built elevation data. For elevated structures
in Zone A and Zone AO areas without a base flood elevation, the elevation
certificate may be completed by the property owner or owner's representative
subject to review and approval by the Floodplain Administrator. For
nonresidential structures that have been designed to be floodproofed, the
applicant shall have a Federal Emergency Management Agency floodproofing
certificate completed by a registered professional architect or professional
engineer.
   (b)   For all development activities subject to the standards of §
1444.21(a), a Letter of Map Revision.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.19 REVOKING A FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be revocable, if among other things,
the actual development activity does not conform to the terms of the
application and permit granted thereon. In the event of the revocation of a
permit, an appeal may be taken to the Variance Board in accordance with §§
1444.34 through
1444.39 of these regulations.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.20 EXEMPTION FROM FILING A DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (a)   An application for a floodplain development permit shall not be
required for:
      (1)   Maintenance work such as roofing, painting, and basement sealing,
or for small nonstructural development activities (except for filling and
grading) valued at less than $5,000.
      (2)   Development activities in an existing or proposed manufactured home
park that are under the authority of the Ohio Department of Health and subject
to the flood damage reduction provisions of the Ohio Administrative Code §
3701.
      (3)   Major utility facilities permitted by the Ohio Power Siting Board
under Ohio R.C. 4906.
      (4)   Hazardous waste disposal facilities permitted by the Hazardous
Waste Siting Board under Ohio R.C. 3734.
      (5)   Development activities undertaken by a federal agency and which are
subject to Federal Executive Order 11988 - Floodplain Management.
   (b)   Any proposed action exempt from filing for a floodplain development
permit is also exempt from the standards of these regulations.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.21 MAP MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES.
   To meet National Flood Insurance Program minimum requirements to have flood
data reviewed and approved by FEMA, and to ensure that the Village of
Commercial Point flood maps, studies and other data identified in §
1444.06 accurately represent flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain
management criteria are based on current data, the following map maintenance
activities are identified:
   (a)   Requirement to submit new technical data.
      (1)   For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations or
base flood elevations, the village shall ensure that technical data reflecting
such changes be submitted to FEMA within six months of the date the information
becomes available. These development proposals include:
         A.   Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood
elevations or alter floodway boundaries;
         B.   Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures
where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard
area;
         C.   Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or
elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts; and
         D.   Subdivision or large scale development proposals requiring the
establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with §
1444.27.
      (2)   It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data,
required in accordance with §
1444.21(a), prepared in a format required for a Conditional Letter of Map
Revision or Letter of Map Revision, and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and
processing fees for these map revisions shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator shall require a Conditional Letter of
Map Revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for:
         A.   Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood
elevation; and
         B.   Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation by
more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations but
no floodway.
      (4)   Floodplain development permits issued by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a Letter of Map
Revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to §
1444.21(a)(1).
   (b)   Right to submit new technical data. The Floodplain Administrator may
request changes to any of the information shown on an effective map that does
not impact floodplain or floodway delineations or base flood elevations, such
as labeling or planimetric details. Such a submission shall include appropriate
supporting documentation made in writing by the Mayor, and may be submitted at
any time.
   (c)   Annexation/detachment. Upon occurrence, the Floodplain Administrator
shall notify FEMA in writing whenever the boundaries of the village have been
modified by annexation or the village has assumed authority over an area, or no
longer has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for
a particular area. In order that the Village of Commercial Point Flood
Insurance Rate Maps accurately represent the village boundaries, include within
such notification a copy of a map of the village suitable for reproduction,
clearly showing the new corporate limits or the new area for which the village
has assumed or relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.22 DATA USE AND FLOOD MAP INTERPRETATION.
   The following guidelines shall apply to the use and interpretation of maps
and other data showing areas of special flood hazard:
   (a)   In areas where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard areas, or
in FEMA identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and
floodway data have not been identified, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review and reasonably utilize any other flood hazard data available from a
federal, state, or other source.
   (b)   Base flood elevations and floodway boundaries produced on FEMA flood
maps and studies shall take precedence over base flood elevations and floodway
boundaries by any other source that reflect a reduced floodway width and/or
lower base flood elevations. Other sources of data, showing increased base
flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FEMA flood maps
and studies, shall be reasonably used by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (c)   When Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood Insurance
Study have been provided by FEMA:
      (1)   Upon the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by the FEMA,
the preliminary flood hazard data shall be used and replace all previously
existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA for the purposes of administering
these regulations.
      (2)   Prior to the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by FEMA,
the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall only be required where no base
flood elevations and /or floodway areas exist or where the preliminary base
flood elevations or floodway area exceed the base flood elevations and/or
floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA. The
preliminary data may be subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA.
   (d)   The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where needed,
as to the exact location of the flood boundaries and areas of special flood
hazard. A person contesting the determination of the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in §§
1444.34 through
1444.39.
   (e)   Where a map boundary showing an area of special flood hazard and field
elevations disagree, the base flood elevations or flood protection elevations
(as found on an elevation profile, floodway data table, established high water
marks, and the like) shall prevail.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.23 SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE DETERMINATIONS.
   (a)   Damages to structures may result from a variety of causes including
flood, tornado, wind, heavy snow, fire, and the like. After such a damage
event, the Floodplain Administrator shall:
      (1)   Determine whether damaged structures are located in special flood
hazard areas;
      (2)   Conduct substantial damage determinations for damaged structures
located in special flood hazard areas; and
      (3)   Make reasonable attempt to notify owners of substantially damaged
structures of the need to obtain a floodplain development permit prior to
repair, rehabilitation, or reconstruction.
   (b)   Additionally, the Floodplain Administrator may implement other
measures to assist with the substantial damage determination and subsequent
repair process. These measures include issuing press releases, public service
announcements, and other public information materials related to the floodplain
development permits and repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other
federal, state, and local agencies to assist with substantial damage
determinations; providing owners of damaged structures materials and other
information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood
hazard areas; and assist owners of substantially damaged structures with
increased cost of compliance insurance claims.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.24 USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
   The following use and development standards apply to development wholly
within, partially within, or in contact with any special flood hazard area as
established in §
1444.06 or §
1444.22(a).
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.25 USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Permitted uses. All uses not otherwise prohibited in this section or
any other applicable land use regulation adopted by the village are allowed,
provided they meet the provisions of these regulations.
   (b)   Prohibited uses.
      (1)   Private water supply systems in all special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, permitted under Ohio R.C. 3701.
      (2)   Infectious waste treatment facilities in all special flood hazard
areas, permitted under Ohio R.C. 3734.
      (3)   New construction of any residential or nonresidential structures in
floodway areas.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.26 WATER AND WASTEWATER SYSTEMS.
   The following standards apply to all water supply, sanitary sewerage and
waste disposal systems not otherwise regulated by the Ohio Revised Code:
   (a)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems;
   (b)   New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
   (c)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.27 SUBDIVISIONS AND LARGE DEVELOPMENTS.
   (a)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in these
regulations;
   (b)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage;
   (c)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and   
   (d)   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data
are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for all subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments containing at least 50 lots or five
acres, whichever is less.
   (e)   The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical data to
FEMA in §
1444.21(a)(1)D. when a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis is completed that
generates base flood elevations as required by §
1444.27(d).
   (f)   All preliminary plans for platted subdivisions shall identify the
flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.
   (g)   All final subdivision plats will provide the boundary of the special
flood hazard area, the floodway boundary, and base flood elevations.
   (h)   In plated subdivisions, all proposed lots or parcels that will be
future building sites shall have a minimum buildable area outside the natural
(non-filled) 1% chance annual floodplain. The buildable area shall be large
enough to accommodate any primary structure and associated structures such as
sheds, barns, swimming pools, detached garages, on-site sewage disposal
systems, and water supply wells, if applicable.
   (i)   Approval shall not be given for streets within a subdivision that
would be subject to flooding. All street surfaces must be located at or above
the base flood elevation.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.28 RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
   (a)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
Where a structure, including its foundation members, is elevated on fill to or
above the base flood elevation, the requirements for anchoring (this division
(a)) and construction materials resistant to flood damage (division (b) below)
are satisfied.
   (b)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with methods and materials resistant to flood damage.
   (c)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
   (d)   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to or above the flood protection elevation. Where flood
protection data are not available the structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent
natural grade. In Zone AO areas with no elevations specified, the structure
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet
above the highest adjacent natural grade.   
   (e)   New construction and substantial improvements, including manufactured
homes, that do not have basements and that are elevated to the flood protection
elevation using pilings, columns, posts, or solid foundation perimeter walls
with openings sufficient to allow unimpeded movement of flood waters may have
an enclosure below the lowest floor provided the enclosure meets the following
standards:
      (1)   Be used only for the parking of vehicles, building access, or
storage; and
      (2)   Be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters; or
      (3)   Have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total
net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area,
and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot above grade.
The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
   (f)   Manufactured homes shall be affixed to a permanent foundation and
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over
the top or frame ties to ground anchors.
   (g)   Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination
that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure, shall be exempt
from the development standards of this section.
   (h)   In AO Zones, new construction and substantial improvement shall have
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around
and away from the structure.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.29 NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
   (a)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall meet the requirements of §
1444.28(a) through (c) and §
1444.28(e) through (h).
   (b)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above the level of the flood
protection elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall meet all of the following standards:
      (1)   Be dry floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of the flood
protection elevation;
      (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
      (3)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect,
through the use of a Federal Emergency Management Agency floodproofing
certificate, that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
divisions (1) and (2) above.
   (c)   Where flood protection data are not available, the structure shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet above the
highest adjacent natural grade.
   (d)   In Zone AO areas with no elevations specified, the structure shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet above the
highest adjacent natural grade.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.30 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   Relief to the elevation or dry floodproofing standards may be granted for
accessory structures containing no more than 600 square feet. Such structures
must meet the following standards:
   (a)   They shall not be used for human habitation;
   (b)   They shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
   (c)   They shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of flood waters;
   (d)   They shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
   (e)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be
elevated or floodproofed to or above the level of the flood protection
elevation; and
   (f)   They shall meet the opening requirements of §
1444.28(e)(3).
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.31 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   Recreational vehicles must meet at least one of the following standards:
   (a)   They shall not be located on sites in special flood hazard areas for
more than 180 days;
   (b)   They must be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
   (c)   They must meet all standards of §
1444.28.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.32 ABOVE GROUND GAS OR LIQUID STORAGE TANKS.
   All above ground gas or liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent
flotation or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.33 ASSURANCE OF FLOOD CARRYING CAPACITY.
   Pursuant to the purpose and methods of reducing flood damage stated in these
regulations, the following additional standards are adopted to assure that the
reduction of the flood carrying capacity of watercourses is minimized:
   (a)   Development in floodways.
      (1)   In floodway areas, development shall cause no increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Prior to issuance of
a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer,
demonstrating that the proposed development would not result in any increase in
the base flood elevation; or
      (2)   Development in floodway areas causing increases in the base flood
elevation may be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the
applicant:
         A.   Meet the requirements to submit technical data in §
1444.21(a);
         B.   An evaluation of alternatives that would not result in increased
base flood elevations and an explanation why these alternatives are not
feasible;
         C.   Certification that no structures are located in areas that would
be impacted by the increased base flood elevation;
         D.   Documentation of individual legal notices to all impacted
property owners within and outside the community, explaining the impact of the
proposed action on their property; and
         E.   Concurrence of the Mayor and the Chief Executive Officer of any
other communities impacted by the proposed actions.
   (b)   Development in riverine areas with base flood elevations but no
floodways.
      (1)   In riverine special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA where
base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been designated,
the cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point. Prior to issuance of a floodplain
development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer, demonstrating that
this standard has been met; or
      (2)   Development in riverine special flood hazard areas identified by
FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been
designated causing more than one foot increase in the base flood elevation may
be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the applicant:
         A.   An evaluation of alternatives which would result in an increase
of one foot or less of the base flood elevation and an explanation why these
alternatives are not feasible;
         B.   Section 1444.33(a)(2), items A. and C. through E.
   (c)   Alterations of a watercourse. For the purpose of these regulations, a
watercourse is altered when any change occurs within its banks. The extent of
the banks shall be established by a field determination of the bankfull stage.
The field determination of bankfull stage shall be based on methods presented
in Chapter 7 of the USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-245, Stream
Channel Reference Sites: An Illustrated Guide to Field Technique or other
applicable publication available from a federal, state, or other authoritative
source. For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse, the following
standards apply:
      (1)   The bankfull flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a description of the
extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development, and certification by a registered professional engineer
that the bankfull flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be
diminished.
      (2)   Adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the
Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water, must be notified prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Evidence of such notification
must be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
      (3)   The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary
maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the
flood carrying capacity will not be diminished. The Floodplain Administrator
may require the permit holder to enter into an agreement with the village
specifying the maintenance responsibilities. If an agreement is required, it
shall be made a condition of the floodplain development permit.
      (4)   The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical data
in §
1444.21(a)(1)C. when an alteration of a watercourse results in the relocation
or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.34 APPEALS BOARD ESTABLISHED.
   The Council of the village is hereby designated to act as the Appeals Board.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.35 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   The village is hereby appointed to serve as the Appeals Board for
these regulations as established by existing Code.
   (b)   Authorize variances in accordance with §
1444.37 of these regulations.
   (c)   Records of the Appeals Board shall be kept and filed in The Village
Offices located at 10 E. Front Street, Commercial Point, Ohio 43145.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.36 APPEALS.
   (a)   Any person affected by any notice and order, or other official action
of the Floodplain Administrator may request and shall be granted a hearing on
the matter before the Appeals Board provided that such person shall file,
within 15 days of the date of such notice and order, or other official action,
a brief statement of the grounds for the hearing or for the mitigation of any
item appearing on any order of the Floodplain Administrator's decision. The
appeal shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and be filed with the
Floodplain Administrator. Upon receipt of the appeal, the Floodplain
Administrator shall transmit notice and all pertinent information on which the
Floodplain Administrator's decision was made to the Appeals Board.
   (b)   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Appeals Board shall fix a
reasonable time for the appeal, give notice in writing to parties in interest,
and decide the appeal within a reasonable time after it is submitted.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.37 VARIANCES.
   Any person believing that the use and development standards of these
regulations would result in unnecessary hardship may file an application for a
variance. The Appeals Board shall have the power to authorize, in specific
cases, such variances from the standards of these regulations, not inconsistent
with federal regulations, as will not be contrary to the public interest where,
owning to special conditions of the lot or parcel, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of these regulations would result in unnecessary hardship.
   (a)   Application for a variance.
      (1)   Any owner or agent thereof, of property for which a variance is
sought shall make an application for a variance by filing it with the
Floodplain Administrator, who upon receipt of the variance shall transmit it to
the Appeals Board.
      (2)   Such application at a minimum shall contain the following
information: name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; legal
description of the property; parcel map; description of the existing use;
description of the proposed use; location of the floodplain; description of the
variance sought; and reason for the variance request.
      (3)   All applications for a variance shall be accompanied by a variance
application fee set in the schedule of fees adopted by Pickaway County.
   (b)   Notice for public hearing. The Appeals Board shall schedule and hold a
public hearing within 30 days after the receipt of an application for a
variance from the Floodplain Administrator. Prior to the hearing, a notice of
the hearing shall be given in one or more newspapers of general circulation in
the community at least ten days before the date of the hearing.
   (c)   Public hearing. At the hearing the applicant shall present statements
and evidence as the Appeals Board requires. In considering the variance
applications, the Appeals Board shall consider and make findings of fact on all
evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of
these regulations and the following factors:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of the damage on the individual owner.
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
      (5)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
      (6)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area.
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   (d)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
      (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause.
      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the property.
Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the requirements of these
regulations does not constitute an exceptional hardship to the applicant.
      (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in these regulations;
additional threats to public safety; extraordinary public expense, nuisances,
fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws.
      (4)   A determination that the structure or other development is
protected by methods to minimize flood damages.
      (5)   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
      (6)   Upon consideration of the above factors and the purposes of these
regulations, the Appeals Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of these regulations.
   (e)   Other conditions for variances.
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (2)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing items in (c)(1) through (11) of this
section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one half
acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
      (3)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and the cost of flood insurance will
be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.38 PROCEDURE AT HEARINGS.
   (a)   All testimony shall be given under oath.
   (b)   A complete record of the proceedings shall be kept, except
confidential deliberations of the Board, but including all documents presented
and a verbatim record of the testimony of all witnesses.
   (c)   The applicant shall proceed first to present evidence and testimony in
support of the appeal or variance.
   (d)   The administrator may present evidence or testimony in opposition to
the appeal or variance.
   (e)   All witnesses shall be subject to cross-examination by the adverse
party or their counsel.
   (f)   Evidence that is not admitted may be proffered and shall become part
of the record for appeal.
   (g)   The Board shall issue subpoenas upon written request for the
attendance of witnesses. A reasonable deposit to cover the cost of issuance and
service shall be collected in advance.
   (h)   The Board shall prepare conclusions of fact supporting its decision.
The decision may be announced at the conclusion of the hearing and thereafter
issued in writing or the decision may be issued in writing within a reasonable
time after the hearing.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.39 APPEAL TO THE COURT.
   Those aggrieved by the decision of the Appeals Board may appeal such
decision to the Pickaway County Court of Common Pleas, as provided in Ohio R.C.
Chapter 2506.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.40 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (a)   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or altered without full
compliance with the terms of these regulations and all other applicable
regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of these regulations,
unless specifically exempted from filing for a development permit as stated in
§
1444.20.
   (b)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit shall be a violation
of these regulations and shall be punishable in accordance with §
1444.99.
   (c)   Floodplain development permits issued on the basis of plans and
applications approved by the Floodplain Administrator authorize only the use,
and arrangement, set forth in such approved plans and applications or
amendments thereto. Use, arrangement, or construction contrary to that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and punishable in
accordance with §
1444.99.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.41 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Whenever the Floodplain Administrator determines that there has been a
violation of any provision of these regulations, he or she shall give notice of
the violation to the person responsible therefore and order compliance with
these regulations as hereinafter provided. The notice and order shall:
   (a)   Be put in writing on an appropriate form;
   (b)   Include a list of violations, referring to the section or sections of
these regulations that have been violated, and order remedial action which, if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of these regulations;
   (c)   Specify a reasonable time for performance;
   (d)   Advise the owner, operator, or occupant of the right to appeal; and
   (e)   Be served on the owner, occupant, or agent in person. However, this
notice and order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner,
occupant, or agent if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to
the person's last known mailing address, residence, or place of business, and/
or a copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or on the dwelling affected.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1444.99 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Violation of the provisions of these regulations, or failure to comply with
any of its requirements or lawful orders issued pursuant thereto, shall be
deemed to be a strict liability offense, and shall constitute a minor
misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter, or fails to comply with any
of its requirements (including violations of conditions of and safeguards
established in connection with conditions) shall upon conviction thereof be
fined or imprisoned as provided by the laws of the village. Each day the
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-21-2010)
PART SIXTEEN: FIRE PREVENTION CODE
         
Chap. 1610. Ohio Fire Code.
CHAPTER 1610
Ohio Fire Code
Section
1610.01   Fire Code adopted.
1610.02   Purpose.
1610.03   Application of Code.
1610.04   Enforcement; responsibilities of Municipal Fire Safety Inspector.
1610.05   Compliance required.
1610.06   Posting arson laws.
1610.07   Setting fires which spread.
1610.08   Responsibilities upon discovery of unfriendly fires.
1610.09   Inspections.
1610.10   Sale and use of fire equipment; standards; service and repair of
equipment.
1610.11   File and distribution copies.
1610.12   Conflicts of laws.
1610.99   Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
   Adoption of technical codes by reference - see Ohio R.C. 731.231
   Power to regulate elevators, stairways and fire escapes - see Ohio R.C.
715.26
   Power to regulate against fires - see Ohio R.C. 737.27
   State Fire Marshal - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3737
   Right to examine buildings - see Ohio R.C. 3737.14
   Gasoline, oils and paints - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3741
   Fireworks - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3743; GEN. OFF. 678.10
§ 1610.01 FIRE CODE ADOPTED.
   There is hereby adopted by and for the village the Ohio Fire Code (OFC),
most current edition, and as may be amended, as adopted by the Ohio Department
of Commerce, Division of State Fire Marshal, and published in Division 1301:
7 of the Ohio Administrative Code (OAC), save and except such portions thereof
as may be hereinafter amended or deleted.
§ 1610.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Ohio Fire Code, as adopted in §
1610.01, is to prescribe minimum standards and regulations governing conditions
hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion.
§ 1610.03 APPLICATION OF CODE.
   The Ohio Fire Code, as adopted in §
1610.01, applies to the use of all lands and properties within the village and
such other lands or properties owned by the village which are situated outside
the corporate limits thereof.
§ 1610.04 ENFORCEMENT; RESPONSIBILITIES OF MUNICIPAL FIRE SAFETY INSPECTOR.
   (a)   No person shall serve as a Municipal Fire Safety Inspector unless he
or she has received a certificate issued by the Ohio Superintendent of Public
Instruction under Ohio R.C. 4765.55 evidencing his or her satisfactory
completion of a fire safety inspection training program.
(ORC 3737.34)
   (b)   The Municipal Fire Safety Inspector, upon examination or inspection,
shall issue citations when he or she finds conditions as specified in Ohio R.C.
3737.41 which are especially dangerous to the safety of persons, buildings,
premises or property, and shall make any necessary remedial orders in
connection therewith. Citation enforcement may be by use of the procedures
established by Ohio R.C. 3737.42 for hearing on the citation or Ohio R.C.
3737.44 for injunctive relief or a temporary restraining order and oral order
for vacation of the building or premises.
   (c)   The Municipal Fire Safety Inspector, upon reasonable belief and after
inspection or investigation, shall, with reasonable promptness, issue a
citation to the responsible person for a violation of the Ohio Fire Code or any
order issued by the Ohio Fire Marshal or any Municipal Fire Safety Inspector.
The citation shall fix a reasonable time for abatement of the violation. Each
citation issued under this subsection shall be prominently posted by the
responsible person, as prescribed by the Ohio Fire Code, at or near each place
a violation referred to in the citation occurs.
   (d)   Upon request of the Municipal Fire Safety Inspector, the Municipal
Attorney shall institute and prosecute any necessary action or proceeding to
enforce this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 3737.
§ 1610.05 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly violate any provision of the Ohio Fire Code,
as adopted in §
1610.01, or any order issued pursuant thereto.
(ORC 3737.51(A))
   (b)   No person shall fail to comply with the fire prevention measures or
fire protection activities prescribed in the Ohio Fire Code or fail to comply
with the municipal application and plan submission and processing requirements,
including payment of the fees designated therefor.
§ 1610.06 POSTING ARSON LAWS.
   The owner, operator or lessee of any transient residential building shall
post the provisions of Ohio R.C. 2909.02 and 2909.03 in a conspicuous place in
each room occupied by guests in such building. The owner, operator or lessee of
any nontransient residential building, institution, school or place of assembly
shall post the provisions of such sections in conspicuous places upon such
premises. No person shall fail to comply with this section.
(ORC 3737.61)
§ 1610.07 SETTING FIRES WHICH SPREAD.
   No person shall set, kindle or cause to be set or kindled any fire which,
through his or her negligence, spreads beyond its immediate confines to any
structure, field or wood lot.
(ORC 3737.62)
§ 1610.08 RESPONSIBILITIES UPON DISCOVERY OF UNFRIENDLY FIRES.
   (a)   The owner, operator or lessee, an employee of any owner, operator or
lessee, an occupant, and any person in direct control of any building regulated
under the Ohio Building Code, upon the discovery of an unfriendly fire or upon
receiving information that there is an unfriendly fire on the premises, shall
immediately and with all reasonable dispatch and diligence call or otherwise
notify the Fire Division concerning the fire and shall spread an alarm
immediately to all occupants of the building.
   (b)   For the purposes of this section, UNFRIENDLY FIRE means a fire of a
destructive nature as distinguished from a controlled fire intended for a
beneficial purpose.
   (c)   No person shall fail to comply with this section.
(ORC 3737.63)
§ 1610.09 INSPECTIONS.
   No person who is not a certified Fire Safety Inspector shall act as such or
hold himself or herself out to be such unless, prior to commencing any
inspection function, he or she discloses the purpose for which he or she is
making such inspection and the fact that he or she is not employed by any state
or local fire service or agency and that he or she is not acting in an official
capacity for any governmental subdivision or agency.
(ORC 3737.64)
§ 1610.10 SALE AND USE OF FIRE EQUIPMENT; STANDARDS; SERVICE AND REPAIR OF
EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, or use any fire protection or
fire-fighting equipment that does not meet the minimum standards established by
the Ohio Fire Marshal in the Ohio Fire Code.
   (b)   Except for public and private mobile fire trucks, no person shall
service, test, repair or install for profit any fire protection or fire-
fighting equipment without a certificate issued by the Ohio Fire Marshal.
(ORC 3737.65)
§ 1610.11 FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   (a)   Copies of the Ohio Fire Code, as adopted in §
1610.01, are on file with the Clerk of the Village Council for inspection by
the public.
   (b)   Copies are also on file in the county law library.
   (c)   In addition, the Clerk of the Council has copies available for
distribution to the public, at cost.
§ 1610.12 CONFLICTS OF LAWS.
   (a)   The rules of the Board of Building Standards shall supersede and
govern any order, standard, or rule of the division of industrial compliance in
the Department of Commerce, Division of the Fire Marshal, the Department of
Health, and of counties and townships, in all cases where such orders,
standards, or rules are in conflict with the rules of the Board, except that
rules adopted and orders issued by the Fire Marshal pursuant to Ohio R.C.
Chapter 3743 prevail in the event of a conflict.
(ORC 3781.11(B))
   (b)   In all other cases of conflict between the Ohio Fire Code and any
other municipal ordinance or technical code adopted thereby, the stricter
standard shall control.
§ 1610.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Criminal penalties.
      (1)   Whoever violates §
1610.05 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 3737.99(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates §
1610.06 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 3737.99(C))
      (3)   Whoever violates §§
1610.07 or
1610.09 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 3737.99(D))
      (4)   Whoever violates §§
1610.08 or
1610.10 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 3737.99(E))
   (b)   Civil penalties.
      (1)   Any person who has received a citation for a serious violation of
the Ohio Fire Code or any order issued pursuant to it shall be assessed a civil
penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each such
violation.
      (2)   Any person who has received a citation for a violation of the Ohio
Fire Code or any order issued pursuant to it, and such violation is
specifically determined not to be of a serious nature, may be assessed a civil
penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each such
violation.
      (3)   Any person who fails to correct a violation for which a citation
has been issued, within the period permitted for its correction, may be
assessed a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
each day during which such failure or violation continues.
      (4)   Any person who violates any of the posting requirements prescribed
by §
1610.04(c) shall be assessed a civil penalty of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation.
      (5)   Due consideration to the appropriateness of the penalty with
respect to the gravity of the violation, the good faith of the person being
charged and the history of previous violations shall be given whenever a
penalty is assessed under this chapter.
      (6)   For purposes of this section, a serious violation shall be
considered to exist if there is a substantial probability that an occurrence
causing death or serious physical harm to persons could result from a condition
which exists, or from one or more practices, means, methods, operations or
processes which have been adopted or are in use, unless the person did not and
could not, with the exercise of reasonable diligence, know of the presence of
the violation.
      (7)   Civil penalties imposed under this chapter shall be paid to the
Clerk of the Village Council for deposit into the General Fund. Such penalties
may be recovered in a civil action in the name of the municipality brought in
the Court of Common Pleas.
(ORC 3737.51(B) to (H))
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
TABLE A.   FRANCHISES
      
TABLE B.   EASEMENTS
      
TABLE C.   VACATING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
      
TABLE D.   DEDICATION AND PLAT ACCEPTANCE
      
TABLE E.   ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY
      
TABLE F.   SALE OF PROPERTY
      
TABLE G.   LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY
      
TABLE H.   NAMING OF STREETS
      
TABLE I.   CHANGING NAMES
      
TABLE J.   AGREEMENTS
      
TABLE K.   BONDS AND ASSESSMENTS
      
TABLE L.   ANNEXATION AND DETACHMENT OF TERRITORY
      
TABLE M.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
TABLE A: FRANCHISES
Ord. No. Date Description
Ord. No. Date       Description
96       7-9-1962   Fixing the price which South-Central Rural Electric
                    Cooperative, Inc. shall charge for electricity.
                    Regulating the price which any person or corporation may
97       7-9-1962   charge for electric light furnished for lighting the
                    streets, avenues, alleys and public grounds.
2-10-69  10-13-1969 Granting Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc. a franchise to provide
                    natural gas for a period of 15 years.
                    Regulating the price which any person or corporation may
9-72     8-7-1972   charge for electric light furnished for lighting the
                    streets, avenues, alleys and public grounds.
                    Regulating the price that may be charged by Columbia Gas of
3-73     9-10-1973  Ohio, Inc., its successors or assigns, for gas for a period
                    of four years.
                    Regulating the price which any person or corporation may
1500.16  4-3-1978   charge for electric light furnished for lighting the
                    streets, avenues, alleys and public grounds.
                    Regulating the price that may be charged by Columbia Gas of
1500.24  1-28-1980  Ohio, Inc., its successors or assigns, for gas for a period
                    of three years.
                    Regulating the price that may be charged by Columbia Gas of
1500.25  - -1983    Ohio, Inc., its successors or assigns, for gas for a period
                    of two years.
                    Regulating the price that may be charged by Columbia Gas of
1500.26  - -1983    Ohio, Inc., its successors or assigns, for gas for a period
                    from and after the effective date of this ordinance and
                    until November 27, 1990.
96-01    1-2-1996   Granting South Central Power Company a franchise for the
                    distribution of electric power and energy.
                    Granting to South Central Power Company the right to
                    acquire, construct, maintain and operate in certain
2020-28  1-4-2021   streets, thoroughfares, alleys, bridges, and public places
                    of the village, lines for the distribution of electric
                    power and energy to certain parts of the village.
                    Granting to Ohio Power Company the right to acquire,
                    construct, maintain and operate in certain streets,
2020-29  1-4-2021   thoroughfares, alleys, bridges, and public places of the
                    village, lines for the distribution of electric power and
                    energy to certain parts of the village.
                   
 
TABLE B: EASEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Description
Ord. No. Date       Description
96.15    8-5-1996   Vacating easement at the Meadows Subdivision.
                    Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with
                    Southeast Ohio Land Company to obtain an easement across
                    lands of Lehman Farms, Inc., Normagene Coon Cornwell and
97.07    3- -1997   David Cornwell, Mark Coon and Lisa Coon, Ruth Eberts and
                    Edward P. Eberts, Jr., William M. Lane and Sara Crabtree
                    for the construction and maintenance of water and/or sewer
                    lines to serve Plantation Oaks.
00-4     9-11-2000  Authorizing the Mayor to sign a termination of a certain
                    right-of-way easement granted to James Finch.
                    Vacating a sanitary easement of .0182 acres located north
2005-18  8-1-2005   of Alberta Drive and west of Brittney Road in the Walker
                    Pointe Subdivision.
                    Appropriating a 30- foot wide public utility easement of
2007-38  12-3-2007  0.893 acres of land located at the intersection of State
                    Route 762 and State Route 104.
2015-13  1-4-2016   Granting approval of an easement to Intelliwave, LLC.
                    Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or
2016-01  2-1-2016   Mayor to enter into a contract for an easement on behalf of
                    the village with Intelliwave, LLC.
                    Authorizing the directing the Village Administrator to
2021-11  4-5-2021   enter into an easement and license agreement with Homes at
                    Foxfire Homeowners Association, Inc.
                    Authorizing and directing the Mayor and Village
2021-31  10-4-2021  Administrator to enter into a private water line easement
                    agreement with COI Rickenbacker Industrial Land, LLC.
                    Authorizing and directing the Mayor and Village
2021-45  11-15-2021 Administrator to enter into an electrical easement
                    agreement with COI Rickenbacker Industrial Land, LLC.
                    Authorizing and directing the acceptance of a deed of
2021-47  11-15-2021 easement from WJHOH LLC (WJH LLC) regarding access to
                    sanitary sewer lines, cleanouts, and taps on 27 lots within
                    the Genoa Crossing Subdivision.
                    Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into an
2022-12  4-4-2022   electric line-right-of-way easement agreement with South
                    Central Power Company over a 2.709 acre parcel of property
                    owned by the village.
                   
 
TABLE C: VACATING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
Ord. No. Date Description
Ord. No. Date      Description
                   Vacating Tigres Alley between Assyrian Alley and the
6-72     8-7-1972  northeast corner of Lot Number 70 and between the northeast
                   corner of Lot Number 70 and Belshazzer Street.
                   Vacating Euphrates Alley between Sherbet Alley and to a
8-72     10-2-1972 point on Lot Number 61 and from a point on Lot Number 61 and
                   Cyrus Street.
2200.14  3-6-1995  Vacating isolation radius at the Meadows Subdivision.
2200.20  2-5-1996  Vacating Sherbet Alley between Cyrus Street and Euphrates
                   Alley.
                   Acceptance of the vacation plat of part of Foxfire Boulevard
96.05    2-5-1996  (60'R/W) and dedicated easements for existing utilities of
                   Foxfire Estates Phase I.
96.11    6-3-1996  Vacating the east- west portion of Euphrates Alley between
                   Cyrus Street and Euphrates Alley South.
96.14    8-5-1996  Vacating isolation radius on James Finch property.
2015-06  7-6-2015  Vacating Oak Alley that runs between Hickory Alley and
                   Congress Street and between North Alley and Brown Street.
 
TABLE D: DEDICATION AND PLAT ACCEPTANCE
Ord. No. Date Description
Ord. No.     Date       Description
96.17        10- -1996  Accepting plat for West Scioto Green, Section III.
96-19        12-12-1996 Approving correction to the plat of West Scioto Green
                        Subdivision, Phase III.
2200.19      10-16-1995 Accepting plat for the West Scioto Green Subdivision,
                        Section II.
02-9         9-9-2002   Accepting plat for Walker Point, Section I.
03-4         7-7-2003   Accepting plat of Chestnut Estates Subdivision, Section
                        I.
03-8         8-25-2003  Accepting plat of Genoa Crossing Subdivision, Phase I.
04-3         3-1-2004   Accepting plat of Walker Pointe Subdivision, Section
                        II.
04-25        1-3-2005   Approving and accepting the final plat of Chestnut
                        Estates Subdivision, Section II, Phase I.
2006-04      5-1-2006   Approving and accepting final plat of Chestnut Estates
                        Subdivision, Section II, Phase II.
2006-11      7-10-2006  Approving final plat of the Walker Pointe Subdivision,
                        Section 3A.
2012-17      11-19-2012 Accepting Walker Point Walkway as a public walkway.
Res. 07-2013 7-1-2013   Approving the final plat for Section 4, Phase 1 of the
                        Chestnut Estates Subdivision.
2016-05      4- -2016   Approving the preliminary development plan for Chestnut
                        Commons.
2016-16      1-9-2017   Accepting the final plat of Chestnut Commons
                        Subdivision, Phase I.
2017-04      5-1-2017   Accepting the final plat of Chestnut Commons
                        Subdivision, Phase II.
2018-01      4-2-2018   Accepting the final plat of Chestnut Commons
                        Subdivision, Phase III.
2018-04      10-1-2018  Accepting the plat of Walker Pointe Subdivision,
                        Section III, Phase C.
2018-10      10-15-2018 Accepting the final plat of Chestnut Commons
                        Subdivision, Phase 4.
2020-20      11-2-2020  Accepting the final plat of Foxfire Subdivision,
                        Section 1, Part 1.
                        Accepting the revised final plat of Scioto Crossing
2020-22      10-29-2020 Subdivision, Section 2, vacating a currently existing
                        drainage easement near Lot 59 of said plat.
2020-24      12-7-2020  Accepting the final plat of Foxfire Subdivision, Phase
                        1, Part 2.
2020-32      1-18-2021  Accepting the final plat of Scioto Crossing
                        Subdivision, Section 3, Part 1.
                        Approving and adopting the final plat of K-Nova LLC for
2021-02      1-18-2021  roadway access from State Route 104 to Lot 6
                        (Rickenbacker Exchange - Part 2) of the K-Nova
                        Development.
2021-07      4-5-2021   Accepting the final plat of Foxfire Subdivision, Phase
                        2, Part 1.
2021-14      5-3-2021   Accepting the final plat of Scioto Crossing
                        Subdivision, Section 3, Part 2.
2021-15      5-3-2021   Accepting the final plat of Foxfire Subdivision, Phase
                        2, Part 2.
2021-18      5-18-2021  Accepting the final plat of Exchange Way.
2021-27      9-13-2021  Accepting the final plat of Scioto Crossing
                        Subdivision, Section 4.
2021-29      8-16-2021  Accepting the final plat of Rickenbacker Exchange, Part
                        3.
2021-43      12-6-2021  Accepting the final plat of Scioto Crossing
                        Subdivision, Section 5.
2023-04      5-1-2023   Accepting the final plat of Foxfire Subdivision, Phase
                        3, Part 1.
2023-14      12-4-2023  Accepting the final plat of Walker Pointe, Section 4,
                        Part 2.
2024-16      12-2-2024  Accepting the final plat of Foxfire Subdivision, Phase
                        3, Part 2.
                       
 
TABLE E: ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY
Ord. No. Date Description
Ord.    Date   Description
No.
               Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract and otherwise
96.10   6-3-   take all action necessary to acquire a certain 9.91 acre tract
        1996   of real estate for the installation and operation of a water
               and waste water treatment plant facility.
99-13   11-1-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract to acquire real
        1999   estate known as 9 Belshazzar Street.
Res.    7-10-  Purchase of land along State Route 762 from the Teays Valley
48-2016 2017   Board of Education for the construction of a water booster
               station.
        9-11-  Acquiring approximately 0.147 acres, more or less, fee simple
2017-14 2017   interest from Board of Education Teays Valley Local School
               District.
2021-03 1-18-  Acceptance of a limited warranty deed for 0.734 acres from
        2021   Brookside Acres, LLC.
2021-54 12-20- Accepting donated land from K-Nova LLC, known as Lot Numbers 4A
        2021   and 4B, and Reserve “A” in Rickenbacker Exchange Part 3.
              
 
TABLE F: SALE OF PROPERTY
 
Ord. No. Date      Description
1-7-68   7-1-1968  Authorizing sale of 920 feet of land out of northwest corner
                   of Lot 9 not needed for municipal purpose.
96-02    1-2-1996  Authorizing the sale of real estate owned by the village
                   located at 33 Front Street.
99-16    11-8-1999 Authorizing the Mayor to take action to sell real estate
                   known as the current Town Hall at 20 East Scioto Street.
99-17    11-8-1999 Authorizing the Mayor to take all action necessary to sell
                   current owned surplus equipment.
 
TABLE G: LEASE OF PROPERTY
 
Ord. No.     Date       Description
                        Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a 90 day lease for
2005-01      1-3-2004   the premises located in the Citizens Bank Building
                        located at 3 Main Street.
                        Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a lease from
30-04        11-30-2004 December 1 until January 23, 2004 for a room on the
                        premises located at 20 West Scioto Street.
2005-12      5-2-2005   Authorizing the Mayor to execute a lease agreement with
                        Pac-Van, Inc. for a mobile office.
                        Authorizing and directing the Administrator of the
Res. 26-2019 6-3-2019   village to enter into a lease agreement with Scioto
                        Township for the old sewer treatment facility land
                        located on Walker Road.
 
TABLE H: NAMING OF STREETS
 
Ord. Date Description
No.
1-   11-  1.   The heretofore non-named public way directly west of Lot Number One shall
11-  16-  be known as Third Street.
70   1970
          2.   The heretofore non-named public way between Lot Numbers Seven and Eight
          shall be known as Second Street.
          3.   The heretofore non-named public way directly east of Lot Number 14 shall be
          known as First Street.
 
TABLE I: CHANGING NAMES
 
Ord. No. Date      Description
                   Approving the petition of all owners of lots within the
98-2     5-11-1998 Tobin Mobile Home Sites Subdivision to change the name of
                   this subdivision to Tobin Estates.
 
TABLE J: AGREEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Description
Ord.  Date Description
No.
      2-5- Authorizing a cooperative agreement for planning of wastewater treatment plant
96.04 1996 improvements project between the village and the Ohio Water Development
           Authority.
      6-2- Authorizing the Mayor to advertise for sealed bids and to enter into a contract
97-08 1997 with the highest and best bidder for the sale of a 1988 Ford Crown Victoria
           police cruiser.
      1-8- Authorizing the Mayor and Clerk to enter into a tap fee agreement with the
01-2  2001 Fritsche Corporation to provide water and sewer services for development known
           as Grovepoint Estates.
      11-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract for the purchase of a used 1996
01-13 5-   Ford Crown Victoria to be used as a police cruiser.
      2001
2005- 3-7- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a uniform accounting network agreement.
09    2004
2005- 1-
03    17-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into engineering contracts.
      2005
2006- 7-   Authorizing the Mayor and Clerk- Treasurer to enter into an agreement with the
13    10-  Ohio Department of Transportation for the relocation of utilities caused by the
      2006 widening of State Route 104.
2006- 10-  Authorizing and directing the Mayor and Clerk-Treasurer to enter into contracts
21    2-   in the amount up to $20,000.00 for the second phase of construction of the
      2006 municipal utilities building.
2007- 6-   Approving a water line construction reimbursement agreement with Ken Adkins
16    19-  relating to Adkins property on Walker Road.
      2007
2007- 6-   Authorizing and directing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Ohio
24    19-  Plan for property and liability coverage, risk management and claims service.
      2007
           Authorizing and directing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with North
2007- 8-6- American Environmental Services, L.L.C., for the removal and disposal of
30    2007 asbestos siding located under the aluminum siding on the structure located at 9
           Bellshazzer Street.
2007- 10-  Approving a gravity sanitary sewer construction reimbursement agreement with
41    1-   Kenneth G. Tinkler, II, for the property located at 9040 McCord Road.
      2007
2008- 4-   Authorizing the Village Administrator to enter into a contract with Downing
06    21-  Construction for the removal and installation of an orbital aerator and to
      2008 purchase necessary equipment and supplies from Evirondyne.
2008- 7-7- Approving a water line construction reimbursement agreement with the Teays
07    2008 Valley Local School District and authorizing the collection of the
           reimbursement charges set forth in the agreement.
2008- 12-  Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator to enter into an agreement
15    9-   for participation with the Regional Income Tax Agency (RITA) for services
      2008 relating to the administration and enforcement of the village income tax.
      1-   Authorizing and directing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Board
2009- 12-  of Commissioners of Pickaway County, Ohio to provide services for the
01    2009 administration and enforcement of the building regulations of the village and
           to pay for such services.
2012- 1-9- Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator to execute a use agreement
01    2012 with the Commercial Point Racing Foundation, Inc. to allow the use of public
           streets for the purpose of hosting an annual go- kart street race.
2012- 6-   Authorizing and directing the acting Village Administrator to execute an
06    18-  agreement with the Country Connections L.L.C. for operating an access point for
      2012 high speed internet services.
Res.  2-6- Authorizing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to award a bid to G&J
05-   2013 Paving, Inc. for the 2013 paving improvements project.
2013
Res.  5-6- Authorizing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to award a bid to DL Smith
06-   2013 Concrete & Design for the 2013 sidewalk project.
2013
Res.  8-   Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
15-   19-  an agreement with DL Smith Concrete & Design for the addition to the 2013
2013  2013 sidewalk project.
Res.  5-5- Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
05-   2014 a contract with Kirk Williams Mechanical Services for the service and
2014       maintenance of the HVAC system at the Municipal Building.
Res.  4-   Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
06-   21-  an agreement regarding transfer of property and right of entry agreement for
2014  2014 the examining and testing of property for water service capacity.
Res.  5-   Directing the Mayor or Village Administrator to enter into a contract for the
08-   19-  drilling of test wells.
2014  2014
Res.  6-2- Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
09-   2014 a contract regarding law enforcement services with the Pickaway County
2014       Sheriff’s Department.
Res.  6-2- Authorizing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to award a bid to KMC
10-   2014 Paving.
2014
Res.  8-4- Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
13-   2014 a contract regarding law enforcement services on behalf of the village with the
2014       Pickaway County Sheriff’s Department.
Res.  12-  Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
22-   1-   a contract effective immediately and continue through December 31, 2016 with
2014  2014 Michael Hess and his law firm for services as Village Solicitor.
2014- 12-  Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to execute a
04    15-  use agreement with Commercial Point Racing Committee.
      2014
2015- 1-5- Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
01    2015 a pre-annexation agreement with Westport Homes of Ohio, Inc. and trustee
           Dewight A. Imler.
Res.  4-6- Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator to enter into a contract
07-   2015 with Cargill Salt for bulk water conditioning softening salt.
2015
Res.  5-4- Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
08-   2015 a contract regarding law enforcement services with the Pickaway County
2015       Sheriff’s Department.
Res.  6-1- Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
11-   2015 a second contract regarding law enforcement services with the Pickaway County
2015       Sheriff’s from June 2, 2015 - August 29, 2015.
Res.  8-   Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
13-   17-  a contract regarding law enforcement services with the Pickaway County
2015  2015 Sheriff’s Department from August 30, 2015 - December 31, 2015.
Res.  8-   Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
15-   17-  a contract with MT Business Technologies for the service and maintenance of the
2015  2015 copier at the Municipal Building.
2015- 9-   Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
11    14-  a pre-annexation agreement with Westport Homes of Ohio, Inc., trustee Dewight
      2015 A. Imler, James L. and Sharon R. Jenkins and SI Ohio Properties, LLC.
Res.  9-   Authorizing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to award a bid to DL Smith
19-   14-  Concrete & Design for the 2015 sidewalk project.
2015  2015
Res.  12-  Authorizing and directing the Mayor/Village Administrator to enter into a three
24-   14-  year contract for 2016, 2017 and 2018 with Rumpke for garbage pick up in the
2015  2015 village.
2016- 2-8- Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
03    2016 a contract for a water infrastructure improvement, water tap reimbursement and
           sewer tap purchase agreement with Westport Homes.
2016- 7-   Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
06    11-  a service agreement with Muni-Link Billing.
      2016
2016- 7-   Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
07    11-  an agreement with Scioto Township to share in the cost and services of Nixle.
      2016
2016- 7-   Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
08    11-  water tank maintenance contracts with Utility Service Company, Inc.
      2016
2016- 8-1- Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
11    2016 a pre-annexation agreement with Lehmann Farms, Ltd, and Foxfire Golf Club, Inc.
Res.  8-1- Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
38-   2016 an agreement on behalf of the village for the examining and testing of property
2016       for water service capacity.
2016- 10-  Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
13    3-   a contract with WSOS Community Action Commission Inc.
      2016
2016- 11-  Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
15    -    a contract with Prime AE Group.
      2016
2016- 12-  Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
18    19-  an agreement with Ohio Insurance Services Agency, Inc.
      2016
2016- 12-  Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
17    19-  a contract with Taser International.
      2016
Res.  3-6- Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
11-   2017 an extension of a right of entry agreement for the examining and testing of
2017       property for water service capacity.
2017- 4-3- Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
03    2017 a contract with Watcon Consulting Engineers & Surveyors.
2017- 9-   Accepting the bid of Kirk Brothers Company, Inc. for the village digestion
12    11-  improvement.
      2017
2017- 10-  Authorizing and directing the Mayor and/or Village Administrator to execute a
15    2-   use agreement with the Commercial Point Racing Committee.
      2017
Res.  5-   Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
11-   16-  a contract on behalf of the village Police Department for the use of
2018  2018 subscription material from Lexipol.
Res.  6-   Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator to enter into a contract
15-   18-  for bulk water conditioning softening salt.
2018  2018
Res.  7-2- Authorizing and directing the Mayor and/or Village Administrator and/or Fiscal
17-   2018 Officer to enter into a loan agreement with the Vinton County Bank for
2018       constructing a raw waterline and well field for the village.
Res.  8-6- Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to award a
21-   2018 contract to Sand Decker not to exceed the amount of $40,000.00 for the
2018       engineering costs of the raw waterline and well field project.
2018- 8-   Authorizing and directing the Mayor and/or Village Administrator to enter into
05    20-  contracts with M-E Companies, dba IBI Group for professional consulting
      2018 services.
2018- 8-   Accepting the bid of Rumpke of Ohio, Inc. for the village refuse collection and
06    20-  recycling program and authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/
      2018 or Mayor to enter into a contract with same.
2018- 9-   Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
08    17-  a pre-annexation agreement with Wesport Homes of Ohio, Inc.
      2018
Res.  10-  Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator to enter into an annual
24-   1-   contract beginning December 1, 2018 to December 31, 2019 with the Scioto
2018  2018 Township Trustees for snow removal on the village streets.
2018- 11-  Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
11    5-   a contract with the Ross Pickaway Highland Fayetter Solid Waste Management
      2018 District for the 2019 and 2020 curbside recycling program.
Res.  11-  Authorizing and directing the Mayor and/or Village Administrator to apply for,
30-   5-   accept, and enter into a cooperative agreement for engineering and planning for
2018  2018 the new water treatment plant project between the village and the Ohio Water
           Development Authority.
Res.  1-7- Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
11-   2019 a contract effective immediately and continue through December 31, 2020 with E.
2019       Rod Davisson for services as Village Solicitor.
Res.  2-4- Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
12-   2019 a contract effective immediately with Kylie Keitch for services as magistrate
2019       for Mayor’s Court.
2019- 3-4- Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
02    2019 a water tank maintenance contract with Utility Service Company, Inc.
Res.  4-1- Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator to continue the village’s
15-   2019 contract for bulk water conditioning softening salt, with Cargill Salt.
2019
Res.  5-6- Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
20-   2019 a contract effective immediately and continue through December 31, 2021 with
2019       Frost Brown Todd LLC for services as Village Solicitor.
Res.  5-6- Authorizing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to award a bid to Roese
21-   2019 Brothers Paving in the amount of $243,111.50 for the 2019 paving project to
2019       take place in the Foxfire Subdivision.
2019- 5-   Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
03    20-  a pre-annexation agreement with Keavin R. Hill, trustee of the Keavin R. Hill
      2019 revocable trust and Maronda Homes, Inc. of Ohio.
2019- 4-   Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
04    15-  a pre-annexation agreement with S & G Commercial Point, LTD and Michael Edward
      2019 Struckman, trustee of the Michael Edward Struckman trust.
2019- 11-  Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
20    4-   a service agreement with SUEZ Utility Services Company.
      2019
2019- 11-  Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and/or Mayor to enter into
21    4-   a contract with SUEZ Utility Services Company.
      2019
2020- 9-   Authorizing and directing the Mayor to enter into a community reinvestment area
19    14-  partial assignment and assumption agreement with COI Rickenbacker Industrial
      2020 Land, LLC and the Delaware County Finance Authority.
2020- 11-  Authorizing and directing the Mayor, Village Administrator, and Planning and
23    16-  Zoning Administrator to enter into an agreement with WJHOH LLC (WJH LLC).
      2020
2020- 11-  Authorizing and directing the Mayor to enter into a community reinvestment area
27    16-  second partial assignment and assumption agreement with K-Nova LLC and COI
      2020 Rickenbacker Industrial Land, LLC.
2020- 12-  Authorizing and directing the Mayor and Village Administrator to enter into a
33    21-  development agreement with COI Rickenbacker Industrial Land, LLC.
      2020
2021- 10-  Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator to enter into a contract
39    25-  with Rumpke of Ohio, Inc.
      2021
2022- 2-   Authorizing and directing the Mayor to enter into a partial assignment and
09    28-  assumption agreement with K-Nova, LLC and Scannell Properties #627, LLC as to
      2022 Lot 7 in Rickenbacker Exchange, Part 3.
2022- 3-   Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator to enter into a contract
11    21-  for the purchase of a utility pickup truck.
      2022
2022- 9-   Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and Fiscal Officer to enter
24    12-  into a contract with Sands Decker CPS, LLC.
      2022
2022- 9-   Authorizing and directing the Village Administrator and Fiscal Officer to enter
25    12-  into a contract with Sands Decker CPS, LLC.
      2022
2022- 11-  Authorizing and directing the Mayor to enter into a partial assignment and
29    21-  assumption agreement with K-Nova, LLC and RBE Partners, LLC as to Lot 3 in
      2022 Rickenbacker Exchange, Part 3.
2022- 12-  Authorizing and directing the Mayor to enter into a partial assignment and
33    5-   assumption agreement with K-Nova, LLC and COI Rickenbacker Lot 5, LLC as to Lot
      2022 5 in Rickenbacker Exchange, Part 3.
2024- 4-1- Authorizing and directing the Mayor to enter into a Building 2 Third partial
04    2024 assignment and assumption agreement with Rohr Two Development, LLC and Tagless
           Tots (OH) LLC.
2024- 9-9- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement to amend the TIF agreement
12    2024 with K-Nova, LLC.
          
 
TABLE K: BONDS AND ASSESSMENTS
 
Ord. No. Date      Description
2000.01  6-1-1981  Reducing the amount of bonds authorized in Ordinance 2000.00
                   and modifying the maturity schedule of the bonds.
                   Levying special assessments for the purpose of improving the
2100.07  8-5-1985  municipal water distribution for fire flow purposes by
                   constructing an elevated water storage tank.
2100.09  8-1-1988  Authorizing the issuance of $44,000.00 additional water
                   system revenue bonds.
                   Authorizing the payment of full outstanding balance and
2007-02  1-15-2007 prepayment penalty of the Park National Bank Sewer System
                   Mortgage Revenue Bond.
2017-11  9-11-2017 Authorizing the issuance of $4,000,000 sanitary sewer system
                   revenue bonds, Series 2017.
                  
 
TABLE L: ANNEXATION AND DETACHMENT OF TERRITORY
Ord. No. Date Description
Ord.    Date   Description
No.
11-1-71 11-15- Annexation of territory on Mt. Sterling-Commercial Point Road.
        1971
1500.17 9-22-  Accepting annexation of Charles F. Beckman property.
        1983
2000.06 3-5-   Accepting annexation of property owned by the Community Men’s
        1984   Club.
2000.02 3-7-   Accepting annexation of property owned by the village, acquired
        1984   from Jane A. Ball.
3-92.1  3-2-   Accepting annexation of property owned by Robert and Joan
        1992   Prindle.
Res. 5- 5-4-   Indicating the services to be provided following the annexation
92      1992   of 53.731 acres of land petitioned by Foxfire Development
               Corporation and Foxfire Golf Club, Inc.
6-92.1  6-1-   Accepting annexation of property owned by Foxfire Development
        1992   Corporation and Foxfire Golf Club, Inc. of 53.731 acres.
               Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a pre-annexation agreement
2200.1  3-1-   on the behalf of the village with Southeast Ohio Land Company
        1993   for the annexation of land, the construction of water and sewer
               lines and the provision of water and sewer service.
99-3    4-5-   Accepting annexation of 0.8048 acres of land owned by Ronald J.
        1999   and Cindy S. Jahn.
99-4    4-5-   Accepting annexation of 4.77 acres of land owned by Ronald
        1999   Wilkins and Delino J. Steele.
99-5    7-8-   Accepting an application for annexation of 0.8048 acres of land
        1999   owned by Ronald J. and Cindy S. Jahn.
99-6    7-8-   Accepting an application for annexation of 63.768 acres of land
        1999   owned by six owners.
99-7    7-8-   Accepting annexation of 63.768 acres of land owned by 6 owners.
        1999
99-8    7-8-   Accepting an application for annexation of 182.7585 acres of
        1999   land owned by owners represented by Michael P. McGonigle.
01-4    5-7-   Indicating the services to be provided following the annexation
        2001   of 11.275 acres of land petitioned by the owners.
        5-7-   Indicating the services to be provided following the annexation
01-5    2001   of 27.00 acres of land and 6.50 acres of land petitioned by the
               owners.
01-16   12-3-  Accepting an application for the annexation of 3.2 acres
        2001   petitioned by Ronald Wilkens and Jack E. Ross.
02-17   11-4-  Accepting an application for the annexation of 2.851 acres
        2002   petitioned by Scott A. Cline and Lisa Cline.
2016-02 2-8-   Approving the annexation of +/- 51.0 acres from Scioto
        2016   Township.
2017-01 2-20-  Approving the annexation of +/- 2.500 acres from Scioto
        2017   Township.
2017-02 4-3-   Approving the annexation of 156.0 +/- acres from Scioto
        2017   Township.
2017-07 9-11-  Approving the annexation of 163.708 +/- acres from Scioto
        2017   Township.
2017-08 9-11-  Approving the annexation of 475.027 +/- acres from Scioto
        2017   Township.
2017-09 9-11-  Approving the annexation of 475.026 +/- acres from Scioto
        2017   Township.
2019-05 5-6-   Approving the annexation of 34.026 +/- acres from Scioto
        2019   Township to the village and amending the zoning map.
2019-07 7-15-  Approving the annexation of 28.386 +/- acres from Scioto
        2019   Township to the village and amending the zoning map.
2019-11 9-9-   Approving the annexation of 57.16 +/- acres from Scioto
        2019   Township to the village and amending the zoning map.
2020-04 5-4-   Annexation of contiguous territory, consisting of 12.279 acres,
        2020   more or less, owned by the village.
2020-05 5-4-   Annexation of contiguous territory, consisting of 9.094 acres,
        2020   more or less, owned by the village.
2021-21 6-21-  Approving the annexation of 5.30 +/- acres from Scioto Township
        2021   to the village and amending the zoning map.
               Authorizing and directing the Mayor and Village Administrator
        12-6-  to enter into a pre-annexation agreement with S & G Commercial
2021-37 2021   Point Ltd., Michael Edward Struckman, Wendy Sizemore, and
               Rockford Homes, Inc. for the annexation of 339.371 +/- acres
               into the village.
               Authorizing and directing the Mayor and Village Administrator
2021-38 11-15- to enter into a pre-annexation agreement with SB Lane Crabtree
        2021   LLC and William Lane for the annexation of 152.469 +/- acres
               into the village.
               Authorizing and directing the Mayor and Village Administrator
2022-08 2-8-   to enter into a pre-annexation agreement with Ronin Holdings,
        2022   LLC and M/I Homes of Central Ohio, LLC for the annexation of
               60.962 +/- acres into the village.
2022-16 8-1-   Approving the annexation of 60.962 +/- acres from Scioto
        2022   Township to the village and amending the zoning map.
        12-19- Approving the annexation of 152.469 +/- acres from Scioto
2022-28 2022   Township, Pickaway County, and Jackson Township, Franklin
               County, to the village and amending the zoning map.
               Authorizing and directing the Mayor and Village Administrator
2023-06 6-5-   to enter into a pre-annexation agreement with Devin B. Weller,
        2023   Andrea L. Weller, John C. Steck, and JAC Acquisitions, LLC, for
               the annexation of 109.863 +/- acres into the village.
2023-11 12-4-  Approving the annexation of 267.59 +/- acres of Scioto Township
        2023   into the village and amending the zoning map.
2023-13 12-4-  Approving the annexation of 109.863 +/- acres of Scioto
        2023   Township into the village and amending the zoning map.
              
 
TABLE M: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Description
Ord.   Date Description
No.
2200.5 - -  Rezoning Lot 28 from R-1 Single Family Residential to B-1 Business.
       1993
       11-  Rezoning Lot 56 at East Scioto Street from R-1 Single Family Residential to B-
98-5   9-   1 Business.
       1998
99-2   2-1- Resubdividing Lots Number One through Four of Foxfire Subdivision, Foxfire
       1999 Estates, Phase I.
99-7   7-8- Designating the zoning on Scioto owned property, being 46.5 acres more or less,
       1999 as M-1 Mobile Home Residential District.
       1-8- 1.   Rezoning property located on State Route 762, consisting of 83.143 acres,
01-1   2001 more or less, from A-1 Agricultural Residential to R-1 Single Family
            Residential.
          2.   Rezoning property located on State Route 762, consisting of 3.86 acres,
            more or less, from B-1 Business to R-1 Single Family Residential.
02-5   - -  Rezoning the northeast corner of Finch Subdivision from A-1 Agricultural
       2002 Residential to B-1 Business.
       12-  Rezoning 64.70 acres, plus or minus, from Agricultural to PUD-1, Planned Unit
02-20  16-  Development District.
       2002
       12-  Rezoning 7.911 acres, plus or minus, from Agricultural to B-1 Business
02-21  16-  District.
       2002
       8-   Rezoning the property located on Borror Road, consisting of 46.576 acres, more
03-6   18-  or less, from M-1 Mobile Home Residential District to PUD-1, Planned Unit
       2003 Development District.
       8-
03-7   18-  Approving the Planned Unit Development zoning text for Genoa Crossing.
       2003
04-6   5-3- Rezoning property located at 7140 State Route 762 consisting of 5.15 acres from
       2004 A- 1 Agricultural Residential to B-1 Business.
2006-  10-  Rezoning 5.8422 acres of land located on Foxfire Boulevard and belonging to
22     16-  Foxfire Golf Club Inc. to Single Family R-1 from Business B- 1.
       2006
Res.   12-
27-    14-  Approving the rezoning of +/- 43.67 acres to Planned Unit Development (PUD).
2015   2015
Res.   2-8- Approving the rezoning of the proposed annexation of +/- 7.075 acres from
01-    2016 Scioto Township as a R-1 Single Family District (R-1).
2016
Res.   8-7-
23-    2017 Approving the rezoning of +/- 58.91 acres:
2017
          1.   Property containing 8.464 +/- as a Business District (B-1).
          2.   Property containing 50.446 +/- acres as an Industrial District (I-1).
Res.   12-
33-    18-  Approving the rezoning of +/- 1,102.08 acres:
2017   2017
          1. Property containing 27.100+/- acres as a Business District B-1.
          2. Property containing 66.544 +/- acres as a Business District B-1.
          3. Property containing 11.583 +/- acres as a Business District B-1.
          4. Property containing 202.620 +/- acres as a Residential District (R-1).
          5. Property containing 20.865 +/- acres as a Residential District (R-1).
          6. Property containing 773.361 +/- acres as an Industrial District (I- 1).
2019-  8-   Rezoning the 34.026 acre parcel to be owned by D.R. Horton to PRD - Planned
10     19-  Residential District.
       2019
2020-  5-   Rezoning Parcel Number L2700010054401 comprised of 28.256 +/- acres on Durrett
06     18-  Road to Planned Residential District and accepting the preliminary plan and
       2020 development standards text for the parcel.
2021-  6-   Rezoning a portion of 281.817 +/- acres east of State Route 104 within the
17     21-  village from General Commercial (GC) to Limited Manufacturing (LM).
       2021
2021-  10-  Rezoning 5.1329 +/- acres with the village from Neighborhood Commercial (NC) to
34     25-  General Commercial (GC).
       2021
       12-  Rezoning 224.720 +/- acres within the village from Low Density Residential (R-
2021-  6-   3) and General Commercial (GC) to Planned Industrial District (PID) and
48     2021 adopting the preliminary plan and development standards text for the planned
            district.
2022-  8-1- Rezoning 60.962 +/- acres within the village from Exceptional Use (EU) to
17     2022 Planned Residential District (PRD) and adopting the preliminary plan and
            development standards text for the planned district.
2022-  12-  Rezoning 152.469 +/- acres within the village from Exception Use (EU) to
31     19-  Limited Manufacturing District (LM).
       2022
2024-  5-   Rezoning 266.971 +/- acres within the village from Exceptional Use to Planned
07     20-  Industrial District (PIO) and adopting the preliminary plan and development
       2024 standards text for the planned district.
2024-  8-5- Rezoning 2.7808 +/- acres within the village from Neighborhood Commercial (NC)
08     2024 to General Commercial (GC).
           
 
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
Historical References to Ohio Revised Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
HISTORICAL REFERENCES TO THE OHIO REVISED CODE
 
ORC Section 2007 Code Section
ORC Section                     2007 Code Section
1.02                            202.02
1.05                            202.02
1.14                            202.03
1.15                            202.03
1.23                            202.05
1.42                            202.03
1.43                            202.03
1.44                            202.02
1.45                            202.03
1.50                            202.07
1.55                            202.05
1.57                            202.04
1.58                            202.04
1.59                            202.02
9.312                           226.05
128.01(A)                       654.19
128.32(F) - (H)                 654.19
128.99(A), (B)                  654.19
701.01                          202.02
723.011                         660.05
731.09                          220.01
731.10                          220.02
731.11                          220.03
731.12                          220.04
731.13                          220.05
731.14                          226.02
731.141                         226.03
731.15                          226.04
731.16                          226.06
731.17                          222.01
731.18                          222.02
731.19                          222.03
731.20                          222.04
731.21                          222.05
731.211                         222.06
731.22                          222.07
731.23                          222.08
731.231                         222.09
731.24                          222.10
731.26                          222.12
731.28                          224.01
731.29                          224.02
731.30                          222.13,
                                224.03
731.31                          224.04
731.32                          224.05
731.33                          224.06
731.34                          224.07
731.35                          224.08
731.36                          224.09
731.38                          224.10
731.40                          224.11
731.41                          224.12
731.42                          222.14
731.43(A)                       220.06
731.44                          220.07
731.45                          220.08
731.46                          220.09
731.47                          220.10
731.48                          226.01
731.49                          220.11
731.50                          220.12
733.24                          228.01
733.25                          228.02
733.30                          228.03
733.32                          228.04
733.33                          228.05
733.34                          228.06
733.35                          228.07
733.36                          228.08
733.37                          228.09
733.38                          228.10
733.39                          228.11
733.40                          228.12
733.41                          228.13
733.48                          234.01
735.27                          220.13
901.51                          642.04
901.99(A)                       642.04
925.62                          642.04
925.99(B)                       642.04
951.02                          618.01
951.99                          618.01
955.10                          618.10
955.11(A)                       618.01
955.21                          618.08
955.22                          618.01
955.222                         618.01
955.24                          618.09
955.25                          618.11
955.54                          618.16
955.99(B)                       618.09 -
                                618.11
955.99(E)                       618.01,
                                618.08
955.99(F)                       618.01
955.99(G)                       618.01
955.99(H)                       618.01
955.99(J)                       618.01
955.99(L)                       618.01
955.99(M)                       618.01
955.99(N)                       618.01
955.99(O)                       618.16
955.99(P)                       618.01
955.99(Q)                       618.01
959.01                          618.02
959.02                          618.03
959.03                          618.04
959.13                          618.05
959.131                         618.05
959.21                          618.17
959.99(B)                       618.03
959.99(C)                       618.04
959.99(D)                       618.05,
                                618.17
959.99(E)                       618.05
959.99(E)(3)                    618.02
959.99(E)(7)                    618.07
1349.17                         672.12
1349.99                         672.12
1546.01                         448.01
1547.02                         448.01
1547.03                         448.02
1547.04                         448.03
1547.05                         448.04
1547.051                        448.04
1547.052                        448.04
1547.06                         448.05
1547.07                         448.06
1547.071                        448.07
1547.072                        448.06
1547.08                         448.08
1547.09                         448.09
1547.10                         448.39
1547.11                         448.10
1547.111                        448.11
1547.12                         448.12
1547.132                        448.06
1547.14                         448.13
1547.15                         448.14
1547.16                         448.15
1547.18                         448.16
1547.19                         448.17
1547.20                         448.18
1547.21                         448.19
1547.22                         448.20
1547.23                         448.21
1547.24                         448.22
1547.25                         448.23
1547.251                        448.24
1547.26                         448.25
1547.27                         448.26
1547.28                         448.27
1547.29                         448.28
1547.30                         448.29
1547.301                        448.29
1547.302                        448.29
1547.303                        448.29
1547.304                        448.29
1547.31(A) - (H)                448.30
1547.32                         448.33
1547.33                         448.33
1547.34                         448.34
1547.38                         448.31
1547.39                         448.32
1547.40                         448.32
1547.41                         448.35
1547.53                         448.36
1547.531                        448.37
1547.533                        448.37
1547.59                         448.39
1547.63                         448.40
1547.65                         448.44
1547.66                         448.38
1547.69                         448.45
1547.92                         448.46
                                448.08,
1547.99(B)                      448.11,
                                448.38,
                                448.39
                                448.02–
                                448.05,
                                448.08,
                                448.09,
                                448.13–
                                448.18,
                                448.20–
1547.99(C)                      448.22,
                                448.24–
                                448.26,
                                448.28,
                                448.29,
                                448.32,
                                448.36,
                                448.37,
                                448.99
1547.99(D)                      448.06,
                                448.12
1547.99(E)                      448.06,
                                448.12
                                448.23,
                                448.29,
1547.99(F)                      448.31,
                                448.32,
                                448.44–
                                448.46
1547.99(G)                      448.10
1547.99(H)                      448.29
1547.99(J)                      448.30
1547.99(K)                      448.04
1547.99(L)                      448.04,
                                448.99
1548.01(B), (C)                 448.41
1548.03                         448.41
1548.05                         448.42
1548.18                         448.43
1548.99(A)                      448.43
2901.01                         606.01
2901.02                         606.01
2901.03                         606.03
2901.04                         606.04
2901.09                         606.13
2901.11                         606.05
2901.13                         606.06
2901.21                         606.07
2901.22                         606.08
2901.23                         606.09
2901.24                         606.10
2903.05                         636.02
2903.06                         434.11
2903.08                         434.11
2903.09                         636.01
2903.10                         636.23
2903.13                         636.03
2903.14                         636.04
2903.16                         636.23
2903.21                         636.05
2903.211                        636.06
2903.216                        636.24
2903.22                         636.07
2903.31                         636.19
2903.311(B), (C)                636.19
2905.03                         636.08
2905.12                         636.10
2907.01                         666.01
2907.04                         666.02
2907.06                         666.03
2907.071                        666.23
2907.08                         666.05
2907.09                         666.04
2907.10                         666.06
2907.23                         666.07
2907.24(A), (C)(1), (D), (E)    666.08
2907.241                        666.09
2907.25                         666.10
2907.26                         666.11
2907.31                         666.12
2907.311                        666.13
2907.33                         666.14
2907.35                         666.15
2907.36                         666.16
2907.37                         666.17
2907.38                         666.18
2907.39                         666.19
2907.40                         666.20
2909.01                         642.01
2909.03                         642.06
2909.06                         642.08
2909.07                         642.09
2909.08(A) - (E)                678.13
2909.09                         642.08
2909.10                         642.13
2909.101                        642.13
2909.11(B) - (D)                642.07
2909.31                         654.18
2911.21                         642.10
2911.211                        642.11
2911.23                         642.10
2911.32                         672.06
2913.01                         642.01
2913.02                         672.01
2913.03                         672.09
2913.04                         642.03
2913.07                         672.25
2913.11                         672.10
2913.21                         672.11
2913.31(B), (C)(2)              672.13
2913.32                         672.14
2913.33                         672.15
2913.40                         672.23
2913.401                        672.23
2913.41                         672.16
2913.42                         672.17
2913.43                         672.18
2913.44                         672.19
2913.441                        654.15
2913.45                         672.20
2913.47                         672.21
2913.48                         672.22
2913.51                         672.02
2913.61(B) - (E)                672.03
2913.71                         672.04
2913.72                         672.05
2915.01                         630.01
2915.02(A) - (G), (K)           630.02
2915.03                         630.03
2915.04                         630.04
2915.05                         630.05
2915.06                         630.14
2915.061                        630.14
2915.09                         630.06
2915.091                        630.10
2915.092                        630.11
2915.093                        630.12
2915.094                        630.13
2915.10                         630.07
2915.11                         630.08
2915.12                         630.09
2915.13                         630.12
2915.14                         630.15
2917.01                         648.09
2917.03                         648.01
2917.031                        648.01
2917.04                         648.02
2917.05                         648.03
2917.11                         648.04
2917.12                         648.05
2917.13                         648.06
2917.14                         648.10
2917.21                         636.15
2917.211                        666.22
2917.31                         648.07
2917.32                         648.08
2917.40                         636.18
2917.41                         672.07
2919.21                         636.11
2919.22(A) - (E), (H)           636.12
2919.23                         636.13
2919.24                         636.14
2919.25                         636.17
2919.27                         636.06
2921.01                         606.01
2921.13                         654.01
2921.14                         654.02
2921.21                         654.03
2921.22                         654.04
2921.23                         654.05
2921.29                         654.18
2921.31                         654.06
2921.32                         654.07
2921.321                        642.12
2921.33                         654.08
2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F)     654.09
2921.36                         612.09
2921.42                         654.10
2921.43                         654.11
2921.44                         654.12
2921.45                         654.13
2921.51                         654.14
2921.52(A) - (D)                654.20
2923.02                         606.11
2923.03                         606.12
2923.11                         678.01
2923.12                         678.02
2923.1211(B), (C)               678.16
2923.1212                       678.16
2923.122(C) - (G)               678.15
2923.126                        678.16
2923.131                        678.03
2923.15                         678.04
2923.16                         678.05
2923.162                        678.11
2923.18                         678.06
2923.19                         678.07
2923.20                         678.08
2923.201                        678.17
2923.211                        678.09
2923.24                         678.14
2925.01                         624.01
2925.04(A), (B), (C)(5), (G)    624.03
2925.11                         624.04
2925.12                         624.05
2925.13                         624.06
2925.14                         624.07
2925.31                         624.08
2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G) 624.09
2925.33                         624.10
2925.34                         624.19
2925.36(A) - (D), (F)           624.11
2925.37(A), (G), (M)            624.12
2925.50                         624.16
2925.51                         624.15
2925.511                        624.15
2925.55                         624.18
2925.56                         624.18
2925.57                         624.18
2925.58                         624.18
2925.62                         624.20
2927.02                         636.20
2927.021                        636.20
2927.022                        636.20
2927.023                        636.20
2927.024                        636.20
2927.03                         636.22
2927.11                         642.05
2927.12                         636.21
2927.15                         636.09
2927.17                         666.21
2929.21                         698.02
2929.22                         698.03
2929.23                         666.99
2929.24                         698.02
2929.25                         698.02
2929.26                         698.02
2929.27                         698.02
2929.28                         698.02
2929.31                         698.04
2929.41                         698.05
2935.041                        654.17
2935.36(E)                      698.01
2981.07                         672.24
2981.11                         654.16
2981.12                         654.16
2981.13(A)                      654.16
3701.81                         660.02
3701.82                         660.01
3701.99(B)                      660.01
3701.99(C)                      660.02
3715.05                         624.18
3715.06                         624.18
3716.11                         636.16
3716.99(C)                      636.16
3719.08(A), (E)                 624.13
3719.172(A), (B)                624.14
3719.19                         624.16
3719.99(C)                      624.13
3719.99(E)                      624.14
3743.01                         678.12
3743.45                         678.12
3743.54                         678.12
3743.60(E) - (L)                678.12
3743.61(E) - (L)                678.12
3743.63                         678.12
3743.64                         678.12
3743.65(A) - (E), (G), (H)      678.12
3743.66                         678.12
3743.68(B)                      678.12
3743.80                         678.12
3743.99(C), (D), (F) - (H)      678.12
3767.13                         660.04
3767.29                         660.06
3767.32                         660.03
3767.99(B)                      660.06
3767.99(C)                      660.03,
                                660.04
3780.36                         624.02
3780.99                         624.02
3781.55                         660.04
3791.031                        660.13
4301.01                         612.01
4301.22                         804.99
4301.22(A)(2)                   612.10
4301.22(B)                      612.03
4301.244                        612.01
4301.62                         612.07
4301.63                         612.02
4301.631                        612.10
4301.633                        612.02
4301.634                        612.02
4301.637                        612.06
4301.64                         612.04
4301.65                         612.11
4301.66                         804.05
4301.69                         612.02
4301.70                         612.06
4301.99                         804.99
                                612.06,
4301.99(A)                      612.07,
                                612.11
4301.99(B)                      612.04,
                                612.10
4301.99(C)                      612.02
4301.99(D)                      612.02,
                                612.03
4301.99(E)                      612.02,
                                612.10
4301.99(F)                      612.02
4301.99(H)                      612.03
4301.99(I)                      612.02
4301.99(J)                      612.11
4303.202(D)(2)                  612.08
4303.208(C)                     612.08
4303.25                         612.05
4303.99(D)                      612.08
4501.01(LL)                     402.01
4501.01(TT)                     416.12
4503.11(A), (D)                 436.14
4503.111                        436.14
4503.12(A), (D)                 436.14
4503.21                         436.14
4505.18                         436.13
4506.01                         442.01
4506.011                        442.02
4506.04(A) - (C)                442.03
4506.10(A), (E)                 442.04
4506.12(I), (J)                 442.03
4506.15                         442.05
4506.19                         442.06
4506.20                         442.07
4506.23                         442.08
4507.02(A)(1)                   436.01
4507.02(A)(2)                   436.02
4507.03                         436.01
4507.04                         436.01
4507.05(F), (I)                 436.03
4507.071(B) - (J)               436.04
4507.213                        436.01
4507.30                         436.05
4507.35                         436.07
4507.99                         436.02
4509.102                        654.01
4510.037(J)                     438.08
                                436.08,
4510.04                         436.10–
                                436.12
4510.05                         408.03,
                                698.06
4510.11                         436.08
4510.111                        436.08
4510.12                         436.09
4510.14                         436.10
4510.16                         436.11
4510.21                         436.12
4510.44                         434.02
4511.01                         402.01
4511.03                         432.19
4511.031                        414.09
4511.04                         404.03
4511.041                        404.04
4511.042                        404.04
4511.05                         404.05
4511.051                        412.05
4511.12                         414.01
4511.121                        414.01
4511.13                         414.03
4511.131                        414.04
4511.132                        432.16
4511.14                         414.05
4511.16                         414.06
4511.17                         414.07
4511.18                         414.08
4511.181                        434.01
4511.19(A) - (F), (G) - (M)     434.01
4511.191(A), (D)                434.01
4511.192                        434.01
4511.194                        434.01
4511.20                         434.03
4511.201                        434.03
4511.202                        434.09
4511.203                        436.06
4511.204                        432.45
4511.205                        432.46
4511.21(A) - (G), (O), (P)      434.04
4511.211                        434.05
4511.213                        432.21
4511.214                        434.12
4511.215                        434.12
4511.22                         434.06
4511.23                         434.07
4511.24                         434.08
4511.25                         432.01
4511.251                        434.10
4511.26                         432.02
4511.27                         432.03
4511.28                         432.04
4511.29                         432.05
4511.30                         432.06
4511.31                         432.07
4511.32                         432.31
4511.33                         432.08
4511.34                         432.09
4511.35                         432.32
4511.36                         432.10
4511.37                         432.11
4511.38                         432.12
4511.39                         432.13
4511.40                         432.14
4511.41                         432.15
4511.42                         432.17
4511.43                         432.18
4511.431(A), (B)                432.22
4511.432                        432.23
4511.44                         432.22
4511.441                        416.09
4511.45                         432.20
4511.451                        432.24
4511.452                        416.08
4511.454                        432.20
4511.46                         416.01
4511.47                         416.02
4511.48                         416.03
4511.481                        416.10
4511.49                         416.04
4511.491                        416.11
4511.50                         416.05
4511.51                         416.06
4511.511                        416.07
4511.512                        416.12
4511.513                        416.13
4511.514                        416.14
4511.52                         444.01
4511.521                        444.06
4511.522                        444.11
4511.53                         444.02
4511.54                         444.03
4511.55                         444.04
4511.56                         444.05
4511.60                         432.30
4511.61                         432.35
4511.62                         432.34
4511.63                         432.35
4511.64                         432.36
4511.65                         414.02
4511.66                         452.01
4511.661                        452.07
4511.67                         452.02
4511.69                         452.04
4511.70                         432.26,
                                452.08
4511.701                        440.08
4511.71                         432.27
4511.711                        432.25
4511.712                        432.37
4511.713                        432.42
4511.714(A), (B)                432.27
4511.72                         432.28
4511.73                         432.29
4511.74                         412.01
4511.75                         432.33
4511.79                         442.09
4511.81(A)-(H), (K), (L)        438.30
4511.82                         432.43
4511.84                         432.44
4511.85                         440.11
4511.99                         408.02(a)
4511.991                        408.02(b)
4513.02(A), (H)                 438.01
4513.021                        438.28
4513.03                         438.02
4513.04                         438.03
4513.05                         438.04
4513.06                         438.05
4513.07                         438.06
4513.071                        438.27
4513.08                         438.07
4513.09                         438.08
4513.10                         438.09
4513.11                         438.10
4513.111                        438.10
4513.112                        438.10
4513.113                        438.10
4513.114                        438.10
4513.115                        438.10
4513.12                         438.11
4513.13                         438.12
4513.14                         438.13
4513.15                         438.14
4513.16                         438.15
4513.17                         438.16
4513.171                        438.17
4513.182                        438.18
4513.19                         438.19
4513.20                         438.20
4513.21                         438.21
4513.22                         438.22
4513.23                         438.23
4513.24                         438.24
4513.241(C) - (J), (K)          438.25
4513.263                        438.31
4513.29                         440.04
4513.30                         438.26
4513.31                         440.06
4513.32                         440.05
4513.34                         440.01
4513.36                         404.02
4513.361                        404.09
4513.61                         452.05
4513.65                         660.07
4513.66                         436.19
4513.68                         436.19
                                438.09,
                                438.18,
                                438.20,
4513.99                         438.25,
                                438.26,
                                440.01,
                                440.04–
                                440.06
4519.01                         446.01
4519.02                         446.08
4519.20                         446.02
4519.40                         446.03
4519.401                        434.12
4519.41                         446.04
4519.44                         446.05
4519.46                         446.06
4519.48                         446.07
4519.66                         446.09
4549.02                         436.15
4549.021                        436.17
4549.03                         436.18
4549.05                         404.01
4549.08                         436.15
4549.081(B), (C)                414.01
4549.11                         436.14
4549.12                         436.14
4549.20                         438.32
4933.18                         672.07
4933.19                         672.07
5577.05                         440.02
5577.06                         440.02
5577.11                         440.03
5577.15                         440.05
5577.99(C)                      440.02
5577.99(E)                      440.03
5589.08                         440.07
5589.081                        440.07
5589.12                         642.02
5589.99(B)                      440.07,
                                642.02
                                
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
5-92     5-4-1992    TSO Table L
05-2013  5-6-2013    TSO Table J
06-2013  5-6-2013    TSO Table J
07-2013  7-1-2013    TSO Table D
15-2013  8-19-2013   TSO Table J
05-2014  5-5-2014    TSO Table J
06-2014  4-21-2014   TSO Table J
08-2014  5-19-2014   TSO Table J
09-2014  6-2-2014    TSO Table J
10-2014  6-2-2014    TSO Table J
13-2014  8-4-2014    TSO Table J
22-2014  12-1-2014   TSO Table J
07-2015  4-6-2015    TSO Table J
08-2015  5-4-2015    TSO Table J
11-2015  6-1-2015    TSO Table J
13-2015  8-17-2015   TSO Table J
15-2015  8-17-2015   TSO Table J
19-2015  9-14-2015   TSO Table J
24-2015  12-14-2015  TSO Table J
27-2015  12-14-2015  TSO Table M
01-2016  2-8-2016    TSO Table M
38-2016  8-1-2016    TSO Table J
48-2016  7-10-2017   TSO Table E
09-2017  2-20-2017   281.01,
                     281.02
11-2017  3-6-2017    TSO Table J
23-2017  8-7-2017    TSO Table M
33-2017  12-18-2017  TSO Table M
11-2018  5-16-2018   TSO Table J
15-2018  6-18-2018   TSO Table J
17-2018  7-2-2018    TSO Table J
21-2018  8-6-2018    TSO Table J
24-2018  10-1-2018   TSO Table J
30-2018  11-5-2018   TSO Table J
11-2019  1-7-2019    TSO Table J
12-2019  2-4-2019    TSO Table J
15-2019  4-1-2019    TSO Table J
20-2019  5-6-2019    TSO Table J
21-2019  5-6-2019    TSO Table J
26-2019  6-3-2019    TSO Table G
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
                     1042.01 -
1700.01  - -         1042.15,
                     1042.99
2-66     - -1966     234.01 -
                     234.03
4-1-71   - -1971     234.01 -
                     234.03
12-72    - -1972     280.01 -
                     280.03
1500.25  - -1983     TSO Table A
1500.26  - -1983     TSO Table A
6-92.3   - -1992     1044.15,
                     1044.16
11-92-1  - -1992     618.18
92-10    - -1992     1264.01
                     1440.01 -
65-93    - -1993     1440.18,
                     1440.99
2200.5   - -1993     TSO Table M
00-2     - -2000     Part IV, App. B, Sch. I
02-5     - -2002     TSO Table M
02-15    - -2002     1052.02
10.34    4-4-1960    Part IV, App. B, Sch. IV
96       7-9-1962    TSO Table A
97       7-9-1962    TSO Table A
1-66     7-5-1966    1040.01,
                     1040.99
1-67     7-3-1967    Part IV, App. B, Sch. III
3-67     8-7-1967    236.02
1-7-68   7-1-1968    TSO Table F
2-7-68   7-1-1968    Part IV, App. B, Sch. II
2-1-69   2-3-1969    240.02
10-69    10-6-1969   234.01 -
                     234.03
2-10-69  10-13-1969  TSO Table A
1-12-69  12-1-1969   240.08
5-70     5-4-1970    240.08
1-8-70   8-3-1970    1082.01 -
                     1082.04
2-8-70   8-3-1970    236.02
1-11-70  11-16-1970  Part IV, App. B, Sch. III,
                     TSO Table H
5-71     6-5-1971    220.14,
                     236.02
11-1-71  11-15-1971  TSO Table L
11-2-71  11-15-1971  1082.01 -
                     1082.04
11-3-71  11-15-1971  1082.01 -
                     1082.04
3-72     3-13-1972   234.01 -
                     234.03
6-72     8-7-1972    TSO Table C
9-72     8-7-1972    TSO Table A
8-72     10-2-1972   TSO Table C
1-11-72  11-6-1972   804.01 -
                     804.99
2-11-72  11-6-1972   648.12
5-11-72  11-6-1972   1082.01 -
                     1082.04
1-73     2-5-1973    234.01 -
                     234.03
3-73     9-10-1973   TSO Table A
1-74     4-1-1974    Part IV, App. B, Sch. II
                     1442.01 -
4-74     6-4-1974    1442.04,
                     1442.99
1500.02  10-10-1974  642.14
1500.05  10-10-1974  624.21
                     804.01 -
1600.01  10-10-1974  804.03,
                     804.99
                     1042.16,
1800.03  8-2-1975    1042.99,
                     1042.99
                     1040.02 -
1500.12  1- -1976    1040.04,
                     1040.99
1900.00  6-7-1976    1420.01
2200.3   6-7-1976    1420.02
1600.02  10-4-1976   804.04,
                     804.99
1600.04  10-4-1976   636.25
                     234.01,
1500.13  3-7-1977    234.02,
                     234.03
1500.16  4-3-1978    TSO Table A
1700.02  10-1-1979   230.01
1500.24  1-28-1980   TSO Table A
2000.01  6-1-1981    TSO Table K
1700.012 7-6-1981    1042.08
1700.013 2-1-1982    1042.04
1500.28  7-18-1983   648.12
1500.17  9-22-1983   TSO Table L
2000.06  3-5-1984    TSO Table L
2000.02  3-7-1984    TSO Table L
                     1044.01 -
                     1044.05,
                     1044.08 -
2100.05  8-27-1984   1044.14,
                     1044.99,
                     1046.01 -
                     1046.07,
                     1046.99
2100.06  8-27-1984   1044.06
2100.07  8-5-1985    TSO Table K
1600.02B 9-14-1987   804.04
2100.09  8-1-1988    TSO Table K
11-89.1  11-6-1989   1080.01
11-89.2  11-6-1989   618.18
1500.30  12-4-1989   220.14
11-89    1-2-1990    206.08
3-91     4-1-1991    234.01,
                     234.02
11-91.2  2-3-1992    1042.08
3-92-3   3-2-1992    1080.02
3-92.1   3-2-1992    TSO Table L
4-92.2   4-6-1992    236.04
4-92.4   6-1-1992    1054.01
6-92.1   6-1-1992    TSO Table L
2200.1   3-1-1993    TSO Table L
2200.4   5-3-1993    1422.01,
                     1422.02
2202     3-7-1994    1422.03
2207     7-11-1994   1080.02
2208     11-7-1994   1050.02
2211     2-27-1995   234.01 -
                     234.03
2200.14  3-6-1995    TSO Table C
2200.15  8-7-1995    1080.02
2200.19  10-16-1995  TSO Table D
2200.16  11-6-1995   220.14
96-01    1-2-1996    TSO Table A
96-02    1-2-1996    TSO Table F
96.04    2-5-1996    TSO Table J
96.05    2-5-1996    TSO Table C
2200.20  2-5-1996    TSO Table C
2200.21  2-5-1996    1048.01 - 1048.12
96.10    6-3-1996    TSO Table E
96.11    6-3-1996    TSO Table C
96.14    8-5-1996    TSO Table C
96.15    8-5-1996    TSO Table B
96.17    10- -1996   TSO Table D
96.12    10-7-1996   1042.08,
                     1044.07
96.16    10-7-1996   230.02
96.18    12-2-1996   240.07
96-19    12-12-1996  TSO Table D
97.07    3- -1997    TSO Table B
97-06    3-3-1997    234.01 -
                     234.03
                     452.16,
97.01    3-3-1997    452.17,
                     452.18
97.02    3-3-1997    452.05
97.03    3-3-1997    452.06
97.04    3-3-1997    404.07,
                     404.10
97.05    3-3-1997    208.01,
                     208.02
97-08    6-2-1997    TSO Table J
97.10    12-1-1997   1042.08
98-2     5-11-1998   TSO Table I
98-3     6-8-1998    660.14
98-4     10-12-1998  1080.02
98-5     11-9-1998   TSO Table M
99-2     2-1-1999    TSO Table M
99-1     3-1-1999    1080.01
99-3     4-5-1999    TSO Table L
99-4     4-5-1999    TSO Table L
99-5     7-8-1999    TSO Table L
99-6     7-8-1999    TSO Table L
99-7     7-8-1999    TSO Table L,
                     TSO Table M
99-8     7-8-1999    TSO Table L
99-10    9-7-1999    660.14
99-11    10-4-1999   234.01 -
                     234.03
99-9     11-1-1999   220.14
99-12    11-1-1999   236.01,
                     236.02
99-13    11-1-1999   TSO Table E
99-16    11-8-1999   TSO Table F
99-17    11-8-1999   TSO Table F
00-4     9-11-2000   TSO Table B
99.14    11-6-2000   1042.08,
                     1044.07
00-3     11-6-2000   1044.17,
                     1044.18
00-6     1-8-2001    240.04
01-1     1-8-2001    TSO Table M
01-2     1-8-2001    TSO Table J
01-4     5-7-2001    TSO Table L
01-5     5-7-2001    TSO Table L
01-12    10-1-2001   432.47
01-13    11-5-2001   TSO Table J
01-16    12-3-2001   TSO Table L
01-17    12-3-2001   1266.06
01-18    12-3-2001   234.01 -
                     234.03
02-7     7-8-2002    452.18
02-9     9-9-2002    TSO Table D
                     1056.01 -
02-14    9-9-2002    1056.04,
                     1056.99
02-17    11-4-2002   TSO Table L
02-19    12-9-2002   234.01 -
                     234.03
02-20    12-16-2002  TSO Table M
02-21    12-16-2002  TSO Table M
03-1     1-6-2003    452.15
03-2     3-3-2003    Part IV, App. B, Sch. III
03-3     3-3-2003    260.01,
                     260.02
03-4     7-7-2003    TSO Table D
03-6     8-18-2003   TSO Table M
03-7     8-18-2003   TSO Table M
03-8     8-25-2003   TSO Table D
2005-01  1-3-2004    TSO Table G
04-1     3-1-2004    230.02
04-3     3-1-2004    TSO Table D
2005-09  3-7-2004    TSO Table J
04-2     4-5-2004    236.03
04-11    4-5-2004    262.01,
                     262.02
04-5     5-3-2004    240.03
04-6     5-3-2004    TSO Table M
04-8     5-3-2004    1042.08
04-12    7-6-2004    240.05
04-13    7-6-2004    438.33
04-14    8-2-2004    240.06
04-15    8-2-2004    240.04
04-20    8-25-2004   234.01 -
                     234.03
4-17     10-4-2004   1262.02, 1264.01
4-19     10-4-2004   1260.03
04-21    11-1-2004   240.07
04-22    11-1-2004   444.12
04-27    11-15-2004  1080.01
30-04    11-30-2004  TSO Table G
04-28    12-20-2004  220.14
04-32    12-20-2004  240.03
04-25    1-3-2005    TSO Table D
2005-03  1-17-2005   TSO Table J
2005-04  1-17-2005   236.04
2005-02  2-7-2005    208.01 -
                     208.03
05-10    4-4-2005    240.01
2005-12  5-2-2005    TSO Table G
2005-07  6-6-2005    212.01
2005-13  8-1-2005    234.01
2005-18  8-1-2005    TSO Table B
2005-19  9-12-2005   234.01
00-5     11- -2005   240.02
2005-24  12-5-2005   1052.01
2005-25  12-5-2005   1050.01
2005-28  12-5-2005   1080.02
2005-29  12-5-2005   1080.01
2006-01  1-9-2006    234.01
2006-05  3-6-2006    242.01
2006-04  5-1-2006    TSO Table D
2006-11  7-10-2006   TSO Table D
2006-13  7-10-2006   TSO Table J
                     1042.08,
2006-16  10-2-2006   1042.99,
                     1044.15,
                     1044.99
2006-21  10-2-2006   TSO Table J
2006-18  11-6-2006   1044.14, 1044.19
2006-19  1-15-2007   240.03
2006-22  10-16-2006  TSO Table M
2006-25  2-5-2007    240.07
2006-27  12-4-2006   1080.01
2007-02  1-15-2007   TSO Table K
2007-03  1-15-2007   236.01,
                     236.02
2007-04  2-5-2007    240.09
2007-05  2-5-2007    240.10
2007-06  1-15-2007   240.01
2007-16  6-19-2007   TSO Table J
2007-19  7-2-2007    230.02
2007-21  6-19-2007   232.01
2007-24  6-19-2007   TSO Table J
2007-25  7-2-2007    232.02
2007-28  8-6-2007    1044.14, 1044.19
2007-30  8-6-2007    TSO Table J
2007-31  8-6-2007    228.14
2007-32  8-6-2007    220.14
2007-33  8-6-2007    240.01
2007-34  8-6-2007    236.02
2007-38  12-3-2007   TSO Table B
2007-39  9-10-2007   232.02
2007-41  10-1-2007   TSO Table J
                     1042.08,
                     1042.09,
2007-42  11-12-2007  1042.99,
                     1044.15,
                     1044.99
2008-01  1-14-2008   618.18
2008-06  4-21-2008   TSO Table J
2008-07  7-7-2008    TSO Table J
2008-14  12-1-2008   Adopting Ordinance
2008-15  12-9-2008   TSO Table J
2009-01  1-12-2009   TSO Table J
                     1444.01 -
2010-03  7-21-2010   1444.41,
                     1444.99
                     808.01 -
2010-04  12-6-2010   808.03,
                     808.99
2012-01  1-9-2012    TSO Table J
2012-06  6-18-2012   TSO Table J
2012-16  - -2012     220.14,
                     228.14
2012-17  11-19-2012  TSO Table D
2012-18  12-3-2012   226.02,
                     226.03
2013-01  4-22-2013   440.12
2014-04  12-15-2014  TSO Table J
2015-01  1-5-2015    TSO Table J
2015-06  7-6-2015    TSO Table C
                     820.01 -
2015-09  10-5-2015   820.26,
                     820.99
2015-11  9-14-2015   TSO Table J
2015-13  1-4-2016    TSO Table B
2016-01  2-1-2016    TSO Table B
2016-02  2-8-2016    TSO Table L
2016-03  2-8-2016    TSO Table J
2016-05  4- -2016    TSO Table D
2016-06  7-11-2016   TSO Table J
2016-07  7-11-2016   TSO Table J
2016-08  7-11-2016   TSO Table J
2016-09  6- -2016    240.11
2016-11  8-1-2016    TSO Table J
2016-12  11-7-2016   824.01 -
                     824.09
2016-13  10-3-2016   TSO Table J
2016-14  10- -2016   Repeals 810.01
2016-15  11- -2016   TSO Table J
2016-16  1-9-2017    TSO Table D
2016-17  12-19-2016  TSO Table J
2016-18  12-19-2016  TSO Table J
2017-01  2-20-2017   TSO Table L
2017-02  4-3-2017    TSO Table L
2017-03  4-3-2017    TSO Table J
2017-04  5-1-2017    TSO Table D
2017-07  9-11-2017   TSO Table L
2017-08  9-11-2017   TSO Table L
2017-09  9-11-2017   TSO Table L
2017-11  9-11-2017   TSO Table K
2017-12  9-11-2017   TSO Table J
2017-14  9-11-2017   TSO Table E
2017-15  10-2-2017   TSO Table J
2018-01  4-2-2018    TSO Table D
2018-02  8-6-2018    1250.01
2018-04  10-1-2018   TSO Table D
2018-05  8-20-2018   TSO Table J
2018-06  8-20-2018   TSO Table J
2018-08  9-17-2018   TSO Table J
2018-10  10-15-18    TSO Table D
2018-11  11-5-2018   TSO Table J
2019-02  3-4-2019    TSO Table J
2019-03  3-4-2019    TSO Table J
2019-04  4-15-2019   TSO Table J
2019-05  5-6-2019    TSO Table L
2019-06  6-17-2019   1042.08
2019-07  7-15-2019   TSO Table L
2019-10  8-19-2019   TSO Table M
2019-11  9-9-2019    TSO Table L
2019-12  10-7-2019   Repeals 1422.04
2019-16  10-21-2019  434.12
2019-20  11-4-2019   TSO Table J
2019-21  11-4-2019   TSO Table J
2020-02  3-2-2020    1042.09
2020-04  5-4-2020    TSO Table L
2020-05  5-4-2020    TSO Table L
2020-06  5-18-2020   TSO Table M
2020-08  6-15-2020   236.05
                     1101.01 -
                     1101.12,
                     1103.01,
                     1103.02,
                     1105.01 -
                     1105.08,
                     1109.01 -
                     1109.04,
                     1111.01 -
                     1111.04,
                     1113.01 -
                     1113.03,
                     1115.01 -
                     1115.07, 115.09 -
                     1115.15,
                     1117.01 -
                     1117.03,
                     1117.05,
                     1130.01 -
                     1130.12,
                     Pt. 11, Title 1, Appendix A,
                     Pt. 11, Title 1, Appendix B,
                     1131.01 -
                     1131.12,
                     1133.01 -
                     1133.03,
                     1135.01 -
                     1135.08,
                     1135.10 -
                     1135.14,
                     1137.01 -
                     1137.07,
                     1141.01,
                     1141.02,
                     1141.04 -
                     1141.12,
                     1143.01 -
                     1143.04,
                     1145.01 -
                     1145.06,
                     1147.01 -
                     1147.07,
                     1149.01 -
                     1149.04,
                     1151.01 -
                     1151.04,
                     1153.01 -
                     1153.21,
                     1155.01 -
2020-10  6-15-2020   1155.04,
                     1157.01 -
                     1157.04,
                     1159.01 -
                     1159.08,
                     1161.01 -
                     1161.04,
                     1163.01 -
                     1163.04,
                     1165.01 -
                     1165.04,
                     1167.01 -
                     1167.04,
                     1169.01 -
                     1169.04,
                     1171.01 -
                     1171.05,
                     1173.01 -
                     1173.08,
                     1175.04 -
                     1175.06,
                     1177.01 -
                     1177.06,
                     1179.01 -
                     1179.07,
                     1181.01 -
                     1181.03,
                     1181.05,
                     1181.07 -
                     1181.09,
                     1183.01 -
                     1183.03,
                     1185.01,
                     1185.03 -
                     1185.07,
                     1187.01 -
                     1187.03,
                     1189.01 -
                     1189.11,
                     1193.01 -
                     1193.04,
                     1195.01,
                     1195.03,
                     1195.04,
                     1197.01 -
                     1197.17,
                     1199.01 -
                     1199.07,
                     Pt. 11, Appendix A,
                     B,
                     C
                     806.01 -
2020-13  7-20-2020   806.13,
                     806.99
2020-15  8-17-2020   1173.06
2020-19  9-14-2020   TSO Table J
2020-20  11-2-2020   TSO Table D
2020-22  10-29-2020  TSO Table D
2020-23  11-16-2020  TSO Table J
2020-24  12-7-2020   TSO Table D
2020-27  11-16-2020  TSO Table J
2020-28  1-4-2021    TSO Table A
2020-29  1-4-2021    TSO Table A
                     1131.04,
                     1153.06,
2020-30  1-4-2021    1181.08,
                     1195.01,
                     1195.04
2020-32  1-18-2021   TSO Table D
2020-33  12-21-2020  TSO Table J
2021-02  1-18-2021   TSO Table D
2021-03  1-18-2021   TSO Table E
2021-06  4-19-2021   452.15
2021-07  4-5-2021    TSO Table D
2021-09  4-5-2021    618.18
2021-10  5-3-2021    220.14
2021-11  4-5-2021    TSO Table B
2021-12  5-18-2021   236.01
2021-14  5-3-2021    TSO Table D
2021-15  5-3-2021    TSO Table D
2021-17  6-21-2021   TSO Table M
2021-18  5-18-2021   TSO Table D
2021-19  6-21-2021   1052.03
2021-20  7-19-2021   1191.01 -
                     1191.13
2021-21  6-21-2021   TSO Table L
2021-27  9-13-2021   TSO Table D
2021-28  8-16-2021   1115.08,
                     1199.08
2021-29  8-16-2021   TSO Table D
2021-31  10-4-2021   TSO Table B
2021-34  10-25-2021  TSO Table M
2021-35  11-1-2021   1117.04
2021-37  12-6-2021   TSO Table L
2021-38  11-15-2021  TSO Table L
2021-39  10-25-2021  TSO Table J
2021-43  12-6-2021   TSO Table D
2021-44  12-6-2021   1185.02
2021-45  11-15-2021  TSO Table B
2021-47  11-15-2021  TSO Table B
2021-48  12-6-2021   TSO Table M
2021-49  11-29-2021  226.07
2021-54  12-20-2021  TSO Table E
2022-06  1-24-2022   1171.04
                     1171.04,
2022-07  2-8-2022    1141.03,
                     1195.05
2022-08  2-8-2022    TSO Table L
2022-09  2-28-2022   TSO Table J
2022-11  3-21-2022   TSO Table J
2022-12  4-4-2022    TSO Table B
2022-14  6-20-2022   228.14
2022-16  8-1-2022    TSO Table L
2022-17  8-1-2022    TSO Table M
2022-22  9-12-2022   452.03
2022-24  9-12-2022   TSO Table J
2022-25  9-12-2022   TSO Table J
2022-26  10-3-2022   1042.17,
                     1044.07
2022-28  12-19-2022  TSO Table L
2022-29  11-21-2022  TSO Table J
2022-30  11-21-2022  648.11
2022-31  12-19-2022  TSO Table M
2022-33  12-5-2022   TSO Table J
2022-34  12-5-2022   1044.12
2022-35  12-5-2022   1042.12
                     244.01 -
2023-01  4-11-2023   244.11,
                     244.99
2023-04  5-1-2023    TSO Table D
2023-06  6-5-2023    TSO Table L
2023-07  6-5-2023    452.03
2023-09  8-7-2023    1171.02
2023-10  10-2-2023   1042.05
2023-11  12-4-2023   TSO Table L
2023-13  12-4-2023   TSO Table L
2023-14  12-4-2023   TSO Table D
                     820.02,
                     820.04,
2023-15  12-4-2023   820.05,
                     820.18,
                     820.27
2024-01  2-5-2024    Part IV, App. B, Sch. III
2024-04  4-1-2024    TSO Table J
2024-05  5-6-2024    1143.04
2024-07  5-20-2024   TSO Table M
2024-08  8-5-2024    TSO Table M
2024-09  10-7-2024   1181.06
2024-10  8-5-2024    648.11
2024-12  9-9-2024    TSO Table J
2024-13  11-4-2024   1135.09
2024-14  11-4-2024   806.01,
                     806.02
2024-16  12-2-2024   TSO Table D
2025-01  3-3-2025    1115.08
                     1130.09,
2025-02  3-3-2025    1155.04,
                     1157.04,
                     1161.02
                    
 
 
