GREAT PARKS OF
HAMILTON COUNTY, OHIO
CODE OF BY-LAWS
2024 S-2 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through December 31, 2018
State legislation current through 4-5-2023
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Short titles
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Rules of construction
   
10.04   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal
   
10.05   Construction of section references
   
10.06   Conflicting provisions
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   By-laws repealed
   
10.11   By-laws unaffected
   
10.12   By-laws saved
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 SHORT TITLES.
   (A)   All by-laws of a permanent and general nature of the park district, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“park district code”, for which designation “codified by-laws”, “code of by-
laws”, or “code” may be substituted. Code, title, chapter, and section headings
do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the by-laws.
(R.C. § 1.01)
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to such
components of the by-laws unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “traffic code”. Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01". Headings and captions used in these by-laws other than the title,
chapter, and section numbers, are employed for reference purposes only and
shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of these codified by-laws the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   AND. May be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires it.
(R.C. § 1.02(F))
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
(R.C. § 1.02(B))
   BOARD OF PARK COMMISSIONERS or BOARD. The body appointed to govern the park
district pursuant to R.C. § 1545.05.
   BOND. Includes an undertaking.
(R.C. § 1.02(D))
   CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER. The chief executive officer appointed by and
answerable to the Board of Park Commissioners of Great Parks of Hamilton
County.
   COUNTY. The county or counties in which the park district is located,
specifically Hamilton and Clermont Counties in the State of Ohio.
   IMPRISONED.
      (1)   Imprisoned under a sentence imposed for an offense or serving a
term of imprisonment, prison term, jail term, term of local incarceration, or
other term under a sentence imposed for an offense in an institution under the
control of the department of rehabilitation and correction, a county,
multicounty, municipal, municipal-county, or multicounty-municipal jail or
workhouse, a minimum security jail, a community-based correctional facility, a
halfway house, an alternative residential facility, or another facility
described or referred to in R.C. § 2929.34 for the type of criminal offense and
under the circumstances specified or referred to in that section.
      (2)   As used in division (1) of this definition, “community-based
correctional facility”, “halfway house”, and “alternative residential facility”
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2929.01.
(R.C. § 1.05)
   INTERNET. The international computer network of both federal and non-federal
interoperable packet switched data networks, including the graphical subnetwork
known as the world wide web.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or
as a servant, agent, or employee.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of incorporeal nature.
(R.C. § 701.01(E))
   MAY. Is permissive.
   OATH. Includes affirmation; and SWEAR includes affirm.
(R.C. §§ 1.59, 701.01)
   OF UNSOUND MIND. The person lacks the relevant mental capacity.
(R.C. § 1.02(C))
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, or
tenant in common of the whole or part of such property.
   PARK. Any land owned or controlled by the Board of Park Commissioners of
Great Parks of Hamilton County.
   PARK DISTRICT or DISTRICT. Great Parks of Hamilton County.
   PERSON. Includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, and association.
(R.C. §§ 1.59(C), 701.01)
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real.
   PLAN OF SEWERAGE, SYSTEM OF SEWERAGE, SEWER, and SEWERS. Include sewers,
sewage disposal works and treatment plants, and sewage pumping stations,
together with facilities and appurtenances necessary and proper therefor.
(R.C. § 701.01)
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, and mixed estates and interests.
(R.C. § 701.01(D))
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the municipal, county,
state, or federal government, its officers, or an agency thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the
sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.
   R.C. or REVISED CODE. Refers to the Ohio Revised Code.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail; and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail. (R.C. § 1.02(G))
   ROAD. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, streets, highways,
viaducts, and all other public thoroughfares which are adjacent to or through
the Great Parks of Hamilton County and which are designed and intended for
motor vehicle traffic.
   SHALL. Is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE. The State of Ohio.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such
premises, alone or with others.
   TRAIL. Includes footpaths, cartpaths, bikepaths, horsepaths, and all other
passageways within the park district which have been designed, constructed, and
maintained by the park district, and which are not specifically reserved for
motor vehicle traffic.
   UNDERTAKING. Includes a bond.
(R.C. § 1.02(E))
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
(R.C. § 1.44)
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.
(R.C. § 1.02(A))
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Includes printing and any representation of words,
letters, symbols, or figures; this provision does not affect any law relating
to signatures.
(R.C. §§ 1.59, 701.01(B))
   YEAR. 12 consecutive months.
(R.C. § 1.44)
(Prior by-law § 18)
§ 10.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Common and technical usage. Words and phrases shall be read in context
and construed according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and
phrases that have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by
legislative definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
(R.C. § 1.42)
   (B)   Singular and plural; gender; tenses. As used in these codified by-
laws, unless the context otherwise requires:
      (1)   The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular.
      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders.
      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future.
(R.C. § 1.43)
   (C)   Calendar; computation of time.
      (1)   The time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day; except that when
the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then the act may be done on
the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal holiday.
      (2)   When a public office, in which an act required by law is to be
performed, is closed to the public for the entire day that constitutes the last
day for doing the act or before its usual closing time on that day, the act may
be performed on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal
holiday.
(R.C. § 1.14)
      (3)   When an act is to take effect or become operative from and after a
day named, no part of that day shall be included. If priority of legal rights
depends upon the order of events on the same day, such priority shall be
determined by the times in the day at which they respectively occurred.
(R.C. § 1.15)
      (4)   If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from
a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding
month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there
are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends
on the last day of that month.
(R.C. § 1.45)
      (5)   In all cases where the law shall require any act to be done in a
reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice
shall mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the
duty or compliance with the notice.
   (D)   Numbers. If there is a conflict between figures and words in
expressing a number, the words govern.
(R.C. § 1.46)
   (E)   Authority. When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as
well be done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be
construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (F)   Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three
or more park district officers or other persons shall be construed as giving
that authority to a majority of the officers or other persons, unless it shall
be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority, or is
inconsistent with state law.
   (G)   Exceptions. The rules of construction shall not apply to any law which
contains any express provision excluding the construction, or when the subject
matter or context of the law is repugnant thereto.
§ 10.04 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (A)   The repeal of a repealing statute does not revive the by-law
originally repealed nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein.
(R.C. § 1.57)
   (B)   The reenactment, amendment, or repeal of a by-law does not, except as
provided in division (C) below:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the by-law or any prior action taken
thereunder;
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation, or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded, or incurred thereunder;
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture, or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal;
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment; and the
investigation, proceeding, or remedy may be instituted, continued, or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment imposed, as if the by-law had not
been repealed or amended.
   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment for any offense is reduced
by a reenactment or amendment of a by-law, the penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the by-law as
amended.
(R.C. § 1.58)
   (D)   A by-law which is re-enacted or amended is intended to be a
continuation of the prior by-law and not a new enactment, so far as it is the
same as the prior by-law.
(R.C. § 1.54)
§ 10.05 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, such reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (B)   References in the codified by-laws to action taken or authorized under
designated sections of the codified by-laws include, in every case, action
taken or authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is
superseded by these codified by-laws.
(R.C. § 1.23)
   (C)   A reference to any portion of a provision of this code applies to all
re-enactments or amendments thereof.
(R.C. § 1.55)
   (D)   If a section refers to a series of numbers or letters, the first and
the last numbers or letters are included.
(R.C. § 1.56)
   (E)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject matter be
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.06 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of the codified
by-laws conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions bearing the
latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions bear the same
passage date, the conflict shall be so construed as to be consistent with the
meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject matter taken as a
whole.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of these codified by-laws or the application
thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not
affect other provisions or applications of the section or related sections
which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to
this end the provisions are severable.
(R.C. § 1.50)
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the park district exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error be discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intention, the spelling shall be corrected, and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of such error.
§ 10.10 BY-LAWS REPEALED.
   These codified by-laws from and after their effective date, shall contain
all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein
enumerated and embraced. All prior by-laws pertaining to the subjects treated
by these codified by-laws shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective
date of this code of by-laws.
§ 10.11 BY-LAWS UNAFFECTED.
   All by-laws of a temporary or special nature, and all other by-laws
pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of by-laws,
shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by
necessary implication.
§ 10.12 BY-LAWS SAVED.
   Whenever a by-law by its nature either authorizes or enables the Board of
Park Commissioners, or a certain park district officer or employee, to make
additional by-laws or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intention
of the by-law, all by-laws and regulations of a similar nature serving the
purpose, effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall
remain in effect, and are saved.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Where an act or omission is prohibited or declared unlawful in this
code of by-laws, and no penalty of fine or imprisonment is otherwise provided,
the offender shall be fined not more than $150 for a first offense and not more
than $1,000 for each subsequent offense.
   (B)   If the Board of Park Commissioners that adopted the by-law or rule
that the offender violated and that was the basis of the offender’s violation
of R.C. § 1545.09(C) has adopted a penalty for the violation under R.C. §
1545.09(B), the offender shall be penalized in accordance with the penalty so
adopted for the violation.
(R.C. § 1545.99) (Prior by-law § 19)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
31.   PURCHASING
      
APPENDIX A: STATUTORY PROVISIONS OF R.C. CHAPTER 1545
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
30.01   Application of Title III
   
30.02   Park Commissioners
   
30.03   Board of Park Commissioners
   
30.04   By-laws
   
30.05   Employees
   
30.06   Police powers
   
30.07   Contracts for park district law enforcement officers to render police
services to political subdivisions
   
30.08   Park district law enforcement departments providing police services to
political subdivisions without contract
Cross-reference:
   Statutory provisions of R.C. Chapter 1545, see
Appendix A
§ 30.01 APPLICATION OF TITLE III.
   Title III of this code of by-laws is designed to include and incorporate,
insofar as is practical, legislation concerning the organization,
qualifications, appointment, terms of office, compensation, and the powers and
duties of the officials and Board of the park district. Pertinent sections of
the Ohio Revised Code relative to these offices and boards have been assembled
and adopted as a part of this title. No material changes of the code sections
referred to by annotation have been made. The purpose of including these
sections is to afford easy reference to the statutory provisions.
§ 30.02 PARK COMMISSIONERS.
   (A)   Appointment. Upon the creation of a park district, the probate judge
shall appoint three Commissioners who shall take office immediately and whose
terms shall expire one, two, and three years, respectively, from the first day
of January next after the date of their appointment. Thereafter, their
successors shall be appointed by the probate judge for terms of three years.
   (B)   Oath. Before entering upon the performance of the duties of the
office, each Commissioner shall take an oath to perform faithfully the duties
of the office and, except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 3.061, shall give
bond for that faithful performance in the sum of $5,000. The bond shall be
approved by and filed with the County Auditor.
   (C)   Compensation. Commissioners shall serve without compensation, but
shall be allowed their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties.
   (D)   Membership. Any Board of Park Commissioners of a park district may
elect to expand the membership of the Board from three members to five members
upon a majority vote of the Board. Upon such a vote, the Board shall certify to
the probate judge a resolution requesting the judge to appoint two additional
members to the Board. The probate judge shall appoint those additional members,
and they shall take office immediately upon their appointment. One member shall
be appointed to a term that expires on the first day of January of the year
following the year of that member’s appointment, and one member shall be
appointed to a term that expires on the first day of January of the second year
following the year of that member’s appointment. Thereafter, their successors
shall be appointed by the probate judge for terms of three years.
(R.C. § 1545.05)
§ 30.03 BOARD OF PARK COMMISSIONERS.
   (A)   The Commissioners appointed in accordance with §
30.02 shall constitute the Board of Park Commissioners of the park district.
The Board shall be a body politic and corporate, and may sue and be sued as
provided in R.C. §§ 1545.01 through 1545.28.
(R.C. § 1545.07)
   (B)   The Board shall meet from time to time as necessary to conduct
official business of the Board. The Board shall conduct its business only if at
least three Park Commissioners are in attendance. An affirmative vote of at
least three Park Commissioners is required for any action taken by vote. All
Board of Park Commissioner meetings shall be open to the general public
pursuant to R.C. § 121.22. The Board may adopt Board governance rules and
policies as the Board deems advisable.
(By-law 8-05)
§ 30.04 BY-LAWS.
   The Board of Park Commissioners shall adopt such by-laws and rules as the
Board deems advisable for the preservation of good order within and adjacent to
parks and reservations of land, and for the protection and preservation of the
parks, parkways, and other reservations of land under its jurisdiction and
control and of property and natural life therein.
(R.C. § 1545.09)
§ 30.05 EMPLOYEES.
   The Board may employ a secretary and such other employees as are necessary
in the performance of the powers conferred upon the Board including a Chief
Executive Officer appointed by the Board of Park Commissioners. The Chief
Executive Officer is responsible for ensuring the park district operates under
the by-laws, rules, and policies established by the Board and in accordance
with the legal mandates and requirements set forth by laws of the State of Ohio
and the United States.
(R.C. § 1545.07) (By-law 8-05)
§ 30.06 POLICE POWERS.
   (A)   The employees that the Board of Park Commissioners designates for that
purpose, may exercise all the powers of police officers within and adjacent to
the lands under the jurisdiction and control of the Board or when acting as
authorized by R.C. § 1545.131 or 1545.132. Before exercising the powers of
police officers, the designated employees shall comply with the certification
requirement established in R.C. § 109.77, take an oath, and give a bond to the
state in the sum that the Board prescribes, for the proper performance of their
duties in this respect. This section is subject to the following division (B)
below.
   (B)   (1)   The Board of Park Commissioners shall not designate an employee
as provided in division (A), on a permanent basis, on a temporary basis, for a
probationary term, or on other than a permanent basis if the employee
previously has been convicted or has pleaded guilty to a felony.
      (2)   (a)   The Board of Park Commissioners shall terminate the
employment of an employee designated as provided in division (A) if the
employee does either of the following:
            1.   Pleads guilty to a felony;
            2.   Pleads guilty to a misdemeanor pursuant to a negotiated plea
agreement as provided in R.C. § 2929.43 in which the employee agrees to
surrender the certificate awarded to the employee under R.C. § 109.77.
         (b)   The Board shall suspend from employment an employee designated
as provided in division (A) of this section if the employee is convicted, after
trial, of a felony. If the employee files an appeal from that conviction and
the conviction is upheld by the highest court to which the appeal is taken or
if the employee does not file a timely appeal, the Board shall terminate the
employment of that employee. If the employee files an appeal that results in
the employee’s acquittal of the felony or conviction of a misdemeanor, or in
the dismissal of the felony charge against the employee, the Board shall
reinstate that employee. An employee who is reinstated under this division (B)
shall not receive any back pay unless that employee’s conviction of the felony
was reversed on appeal, or the felony charge was dismissed, because the court
found insufficient evidence to convict the employee of the felony.
      (3)   Division (B) does not apply regarding an offense that was committed
prior to January 1, 1995.
      (4)   The suspension from employment, or the termination of the
employment, of an employee under division (B)(2) shall be in accordance with
R.C. Ch. 119.
(R.C. § 1545.13)
§ 30.07 CONTRACTS FOR PARK DISTRICT LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS TO RENDER POLICE
SERVICES TO POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   The Board of Park Commissioners of a park district may enter into
contracts with one or more townships, township police districts, joint police
districts, municipal corporations, or county sheriffs of this state, with one
or more township park districts created pursuant to R.C. § 511.18 or other park
districts, with one or more state universities or colleges, as defined in R.C.
§ 3345.12, or with a contiguous political subdivision of an adjoining state,
and a township, township police district, joint police district, municipal
corporation, county sheriff, township park district, other park district, or
state university or college may enter into a contract with a park district upon
any terms that are agreed to by them, to allow the use of the park district
police or law enforcement officers designated under R.C. § 1545.13 to perform
any police function, exercise any police power, or render any police service on
behalf of the contracting entity that the entity may perform, exercise, or
render.
   (B)   R.C. Chapter 2744, insofar as it applies to the operation of police
departments, applies to the contracting entities and to the members of the
police force or law enforcement department when they are rendering service
outside their own subdivisions pursuant to that contract.
   (C)   Members of the police force or law enforcement department acting
outside the political subdivision in which they are employed, pursuant to that
contract, shall be entitled to participate in any indemnity fund established by
their employer to the same extent as while acting within the employing
subdivision. Those members shall be entitled to all the rights and benefits of
R.C. Chapter 4123 to the same extent as while performing service within the
subdivision.
   (D)   The contracts entered into pursuant to this section may provide for
the following:
      (1)   A fixed annual charge to be paid at the times agreed upon and
stipulated in the contract;
      (2)   Compensation based upon the following:
         (a)   A stipulated price for each call or emergency;
         (b)   The number of members or pieces of equipment employed;
         (c)   The elapsed time of service required in each call or emergency.
      (3)   Compensation for loss or damage to equipment while engaged in
rendering police services outside the limits of the subdivision that owns and
furnishes the equipment;
      (4)   Reimbursement of the subdivision in which the police force or law
enforcement department members are employed for any indemnity award or premium
contribution assessed against the employing subdivision for workers’
compensation benefits for injuries or death of its police force or law
enforcement department members occurring while engaged in rendering police
services pursuant to the contract.
(R.C. § 1545.131)
§ 30.08 PARK DISTRICT LAW ENFORCEMENT DEPARTMENTS PROVIDING POLICE SERVICES TO
POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS WITHOUT CONTRACT.
   (A)   The police force or law enforcement department of any park district
may provide police protection to any county, municipal corporation, township,
township police district, or joint police district of this state, to any other
park district or any township park district created pursuant to R.C. § 511.18,
or to a governmental entity of an adjoining state without a contract to provide
police protection, upon the approval, by resolution, of the Board of Park
Commissioners of the park district in which the police force or law enforcement
department is located and upon authorization by an officer or employee of the
police force or department providing the police protection who is designated by
title of office or position, pursuant to the resolution of the Board of Park
Commissioners, to give the authorization.
   (B)   R.C. Chapter 2744, insofar as it applies to the operation of police
departments, shall apply to any park district and to members of its police
force or law enforcement department when those members are rendering police
services pursuant to this section outside the park district by which they are
employed.
   (C)   Police force or law enforcement department members acting, as provided
in this section, outside the park district by which they are employed shall be
entitled to participate in any pension or indemnity fund established by their
employer to the same extent as while acting within the park district by which
they are employed. Those members shall be entitled to all rights and benefits
of R.C. Chapter 4123 to the same extent as while performing services within the
park district by which they are employed.
(R.C. § 1545.132)
CHAPTER 31: PURCHASING
Section
   
31.01   Contracting for goods and services
   
31.02   Acquiring property
   
31.03   Authorizing contracts
Cross-reference:
   Statutory provisions of R.C. Chapter 1545, see
Appendix A
§ 31.01 CONTRACTING FOR GOODS AND SERVICES.
   (A)   For the purposes of acquiring, planning, developing, protecting,
maintaining, or improving lands and facilities thereon under R.C. § 1545.11, or
under §
31.02 of this code, and for other types of assistance which it finds necessary
in carrying out its duties under R.C. Chapter 1545, the Board may hire and
contract for professional, technical, consulting, and other special services,
and may purchase goods.
   (B)   In procuring any goods, the Board shall contract as a contracting
authority under R.C. §§ 307.86 through 307.91, to the same extent and with the
same limitations as a Board of County Commissioners.
   (C)   In procuring any services, as required in R.C. § 1545.09, the Board
shall establish procedures within its by-laws. The Board hereby requires the
Chief Executive Officer to solicit requests for proposals from multiple vendors
for contracts that exceed the dollar threshold required for competitive bidding
as outlined in R.C. 307.86. The results from this process shall be presented to
the Board for approval.
§ 31.02 ACQUIRING PROPERTY.
   (A)   The Board of Park Commissioners may acquire lands either within or
without the park district for conversion into forest reserves and for the
conservation of the natural resources of the state, including streams, lakes,
submerged lands, and swamplands, and to those ends may create parks, parkways,
forest reservations, and other reservations and afforest, develop, improve,
protect, and promote the use of the same in such manner as the Board deems
conducive to the general welfare. Such lands may be acquired by the Board, on
behalf of the district, by:
      (1)   Gift or devise;
      (2)   Purchase for cash, by purchase by installment payments with or
without a mortgage, by entering into lease-purchase agreements, by lease with
or without option to purchase;
      (3)   Appropriation.
   (B)   In furtherance of the use and enjoyment of the lands controlled by it,
the Board may accept donations of money or other property or may act as
trustees of land, money, or other property, and use and administer the same as
stipulated by the donor, or as provided in the trust agreement. The terms of
each such donation or trust shall first be approved by the probate court before
acceptance by the Board.
   (C)   In case of appropriation, the proceedings shall be instituted in the
name of the Board, and shall be conducted in the manner provided in R.C. §§
163.01 through 163.22.
(R.C. § 1545.11) (Prior by-law, § 16)
§ 31.03 AUTHORIZING CONTRACTS.
   The Board authorizes the Chief Executive Officer or his or her designee, to
execute any and all contracts necessary to conduct the business of the park
district. All contracts must meet the Board approval process as outlined in §§
31.01 and
31.02.
APPENDIX A: STATUTORY PROVISIONS OF R.C. CHAPTER 1545
Editor’s note:
   As park districts in Ohio are governed by the statutory provisions of R.C.
Chapter 1545 and therefore often have need to refer to such provisions, we have
included in this appendix the complete text of R.C. Chapter 1545.
Section
   
1545.01   Park districts created
   
1545.02   Application to probate judge
   
1545.03   Notice and hearing
   
1545.04   Evidence - argument - judgment
   
1545.041   Conversion of township park district - resolution
   
1545.05   Park commissioners
   
1545.06   Removal of park commissioners - vacancy
   
1545.07   Board of park commissioners - employees
   
1545.071   Group insurance
   
1545.072   Board may authorize use of park district credit card
   
1545.08   Reports of board of park commissioners
   
1545.09   Bylaws and rules
   
1545.10   Contract with corporation or association maintaining museum of
natural history
   
1545.11   Board of park commissioners - power to acquire lands
   
1545.12   Sale or lease of lands - notice - approval by probate court
   
1545.13   Park commission employees designated as law enforcement officers
   
1545.131   Mutual aid contracts
   
1545.132   Providing police service without contract
   
1545.14   Agreement with other public authorities to assume control of parks
   
1545.15   Annexation procedure
   
1545.16   Powers of budget commissioners, auditors, and treasurers in relation
to park districts
   
1545.17   Improvement of public highway
   
1545.18   Assessment of cost of improvement - collection
   
1545.19   Assessment may be increased with consent of property owners
   
1545.20   Tax levy
   
1545.21   Tax levy for use of district - submission to electors - bonds
   
1545.211   Anticipation notes
   
1545.22   Depositories for funds - duties of county treasurer and county
auditor
   
1545.23   Disposition of proceeds from sale or lease of park mineral rights
   
1545.24   Issuance of bonds
   
1545.25   [Repealed]
   
1545.26   [Repealed]
   
1545.27   Bonds are lawful investments
   
1545.28   Replacement fund
   
1545.29   [Repealed]
   
1545.30   [Repealed]
   
1545.35   Dissolution of active park district
   
1545.36   Petition for dissolution of district
   
1545.37   Application for hearing on dissolution
   
1545.38   Proceedings for dissolution of inactive district
   
1545.39   Ceasing activity pending determination on petition
   
1545.40   Dissolution
 
   
1545.99   Penalty
§ 1545.01 PARK DISTRICTS CREATED.
   Park districts may be created which include all or a part of the territory
within a county, and the boundary lines of such district shall be so drawn as
not to divide any existing township or municipal corporation within such
county.
§ 1545.02 APPLICATION TO PROBATE JUDGE.
   Application for the creation of a park district shall be made to the probate
judge of the county within which the district is to be located. Such
application shall either be signed by a majority of the electors residing
within the proposed district as determined by the number of electors voting at
the most recent general election within such territory, or, in lieu thereof,
shall be authorized by resolution adopted by the board of county commissioners,
any board of township trustees, or legislative authority of any municipal
corporation within such proposed district. Such application shall state the
name of the proposed district, shall contain an accurate description of the
territory to be included, and shall be accompanied with an accurate map or plat
thereof.
§ 1545.03 NOTICE AND HEARING.
   Upon the filing of the application provided for in R.C. § 1545.02, the
probate judge shall fix a time for the hearing of such application which shall
not be less than twenty nor more than forty days subsequent to the date of the
filing of the application. Such judge shall publish notice of the filing of
such application and the date of hearing thereof in two newspapers of general
circulation within such district, or if there is but one newspaper of general
circulation within such district, in such newspaper. If there is no newspaper
of general circulation within such proposed district, then such judge shall
post such notice in five of the most public places within such proposed
district. Such notice shall be published or posted for a period of not less
than fifteen days prior to the date fixed for the hearing. The hearing may be
adjourned from time to time upon good cause shown.
§ 1545.04 EVIDENCE - ARGUMENT - JUDGMENT.
   At a hearing on an application for the creation of a park district, evidence
may be taken as in other civil cases in the probate court, and the probate
judge shall hear all arguments for and against the creation of such district.
If he finds that such application is signed or authorized as provided in R.C. §
1545.02, and that the creation of such district will be conducive to the
general welfare, he shall enter an order creating the district under the name
specified in the application.
   The judge may amend or change the limits of the territory described in the
application at the time of the hearing, provided that in no case shall he
increase the limits or size of said district. In case any of the original
territory is eliminated from the district as finally established, the boundary
lines of the district as finally ordered by the court shall not divide any
existing township or municipal corporation.
§ 1545.041 CONVERSION OF TOWNSHIP PARK DISTRICT - RESOLUTION.
   (A)   Any township park district created pursuant to R.C. § 511.18 that
includes park land located outside the township in which the park district was
established may be converted under the procedures provided in this section into
a park district to be operated and maintained as provided for in this chapter,
provided that there is no existing park district created under R.C. § 1545.04
in the county in which the township park district is located. The proposed park
district shall include within its boundary all townships and municipal
corporations in which lands owned by the township park district seeking
conversion are located, and may include any other townships and municipal
corporations in the county in which the township park district is located.
   (B)   Conversion of a township park district into a park district operated
and maintained under this chapter shall be initiated by a resolution adopted by
the board of park commissioners of the park district. Any resolution initiating
a conversion shall include the following:
      (1)   The name of the township park district seeking conversion;
      (2)   The name of the proposed park district;
      (3)   An accurate description of the territory to be included in the
proposed district;
      (4)   An accurate map or plat of the proposed park district. The
resolution may also include a proposed tax levy for the operation and
maintenance of the proposed park district. If such a tax levy is proposed, the
resolution shall specify the annual rate of the tax, expressed in dollars and
cents for each one hundred dollars of valuation and in mills for each dollar of
valuation, and shall specify the number of consecutive years the levy will be
in effect. The annual rate of such a tax may not be higher than the total
combined millage of all levies then in effect for the benefit of the township
park district named in the resolution.
   (C)   Upon adoption of the resolution provided for in division (B) of this
section, the board of park commissioners of the township park district seeking
conversion under this section shall certify the resolution to the board of
elections of the county in which the park district is located no later than
four p.m. of the seventy-fifth day before the day of the election at which the
question will be voted upon. Upon certification of the resolution to the board,
the board of elections shall make the necessary arrangements to submit the
question of conversion of the township park into a park district operated and
maintained under R.C. Chapter 1545, to the electors qualified to vote at the
next primary or general election who reside in the territory of the proposed
park district. The question shall provide for a tax levy if such a levy is
specified in the resolution.
   (D)   The ballot submitted to the electors as provided in division (C) of
this section shall contain the following language:
      Shall the . . . . . . . . (name of the township park district seeking
conversion) be converted into a park district to be operated and maintained
under R.C. Chapter 1545 under the name of . . . . . . . . (name of proposed
park district), which park district shall include the following townships and
municipal corporations:
      (name townships and municipal corporations)
      Approval of the proposed conversion will result in the termination of all
existing tax levies voted for the benefit of . . . . . . . . (name of the
township park district sought to be converted) and in the levy of a new tax for
the operation and maintenance of . . . . . . . (name of proposed park district)
at a rate not exceeding . . . . . (number of mills) mills for each one dollar
of valuation, which is . . . . . (rate expressed in dollars and cents) for each
one hundred dollars of valuation, for . . . (number of years the millage is to
be imposed) years, commencing on the . . . . (year) tax duplicate.
      FOR THE PROPOSED CONVERSION
      AGAINST THE PROPOSED CONVERSION
   (E)   If the proposed conversion is approved by at least a majority of the
electors voting on the proposal, the township park district that seeks
conversion shall become a park district subject to R.C. Chapter 1545 effective
the first day of January following approval by the voters. The park district
shall have the name specified in the resolution, and effective the first day of
January following approval by the voters, the following shall occur:
      (1)   The indebtedness of the former township park district shall be
assumed by the new park district;
      (2)   All rights, assets, properties, and other interests of the former
township park district shall become vested in the new park district, including
the rights to any tax revenues previously vested in the former township park
district; provided, that all tax levies in excess of the ten mill limitation
approved for the benefit of the former township park district shall be removed
from the tax lists after the February settlement next succeeding the
conversion. Any tax levy approved in connection with the conversion shall be
certified as provided in R.C. § 5705.25.
      (3)   The members of the board of park commissioners of the former
township park district shall be the members of the members of the board of park
commissioners of the new park district, with all the same powers and duties as
if appointed under R.C. § 1545.05. The term of each such commissioner shall
expire on the first day of January of the year following the year in which his
term would have expired under R.C. § 511.19. Thereafter, commissioners shall be
appointed pursuant to R.C. § 1545.05.
§ 1545.05 PARK COMMISSIONERS.
   (A)   Upon the creation of a park district, the probate judge shall appoint
three commissioners who shall take office immediately and whose terms shall
expire one, two, and three years, respectively, from the first day of January
next after the date of their appointment. Thereafter, their successors shall be
appointed by the probate judge for terms of three years. Before entering upon
the performance of the duties of the office, each commissioner shall take an
oath to perform faithfully the duties of the office and shall give bond for
that faithful performance in the sum of five thousand dollars. The bond shall
be approved by and filed with the county auditor. The commissioners shall serve
without compensation, but shall be allowed their actual and necessary expenses
incurred in the performance of their duties.
   (B)   Any board of park commissioners of a park district may elect to expand
the membership of the board from three members to five members upon a majority
vote of the board. Upon such a vote, the board shall certify to the probate
judge a resolution requesting the judge to appoint two additional members to
the board. The probate judge shall appoint those additional members, and they
shall take office immediately upon their appointment. One member shall be
appointed to a term that expires on the first day of January of the year
following the year of that member’s appointment, and one member shall be
appointed to a term that expires on the first day of January of the second year
following the year of that member’s appointment. Thereafter, their successors
shall be appointed by the probate judge for terms of three years.
§ 1545.06 REMOVAL OF PARK COMMISSIONERS - VACANCY.
   Any park commissioner may be removed at the discretion of the probate judge,
either upon complaint filed with such judge or upon his own motion. No such
removal shall be made without giving such commissioner not less than ten days’
notice and a full opportunity to be heard in his own behalf in a public
hearing. The order removing such commissioner shall state the reasons therefor
and shall be entered upon the records of the probate court. In case of such
removal, or in case of other vacancy in the office of commissioner, the vacancy
shall be filled by the judge by appointment for the unexpired term.
§ 1545.07 BOARD OF PARK COMMISSIONERS - EMPLOYEES.
   The commissioners appointed in accordance with R.C. § 1545.05 or pursuant to
R.C. § 1545.041 shall constitute the board of park commissioners of the park
district. Such board shall be a body politic and corporate, and may sue and be
sued as provided in R.C. §§ 1545.01 to 1545.28. Such board may employ a
secretary and such other employees as are necessary in the performance of the
powers conferred in such sections. The board may appoint a treasurer to act as
custodian of the board’s funds and as fiscal officer for the park district. For
the purposes of acquiring, planning, developing, protecting, maintaining, or
improving lands and facilities thereon under R.C. § 1545.11, and for other
types of assistance which it finds necessary in carrying out its duties under
R.C. Chapter 1545, the board may hire and contract for professional, technical,
consulting, and other special services, including, in accordance with R.C. §
309.09(D), the legal services of the prosecuting attorney of the county in
which the park district is located, and may purchase goods. In procuring any
goods with a cost in excess of fifty thousand dollars, the board shall contract
as a contracting authority under R.C. §§ 307.86 to 307.91, to the same extent
and with the same limitations as a board of county commissioners. In procuring
services, the board shall contract in the manner and under procedures
established by the bylaws of the board as required in R.C. § 1545.09.
§ 1545.071 GROUP INSURANCE.
   The board of park commissioners of any park district may procure and pay all
or any part of the cost of group insurance policies that may provide benefits
for hospitalization, surgical care, major medical care, disability, dental
care, eye care, medical care, hearing aids, or prescription drugs, or sickness
and accident insurance or a combination of any of the foregoing types of
insurance or coverage for park district officers and employees and their
immediate dependents issued by an insurance company duly authorized to do
business in this state.
   The board may procure and pay all or any part of the cost of group life
insurance to insure the lives of park district employees.
   The board also may contract for group health care services with health
insuring corporations holding a certificate of authority under R.C. Chapter
1751 provided that each officer or employee is permitted to:
   (A)   Choose between a plan offered by an insurance company and a plan
offered by a health insuring corporation and provided further that the officer
or employee pays any amount by which the cost of the plan chosen by the officer
or employee exceeds the cost of the plan offered by the board under this
section;
   (B)   Change the choice made under division (A) of this section at a time
each year as determined in advance by the board.
   Any appointed member of the board of park commissioners and the spouse and
dependent children of the member may be covered, at the option and expense of
the member, as a noncompensated employee of the park district under any benefit
plan described in division (A) of this section. The member shall pay to the
park district the amount certified to it by the benefit provider as the
provider’s charge for the coverage the member has chosen under division (A) of
this section. Payments for coverage shall be made, in advance, in a manner
prescribed by the board. The member’s exercise of an option to be covered under
this section shall be in writing, announced at a regular public meeting of the
board, and recorded as a public record in the minutes of the board.
   The board may provide the benefits authorized in this section by
contributing to a health and welfare trust fund administered through or in
conjunction with a collective bargaining representative of the park district
employees.
   The board may provide the benefits described in this section through an
individual self-insurance program or a joint self-insurance program as provided
in R.C. § 9.833.
§ 1545.072 BOARD MAY AUTHORIZE USE OF PARK DISTRICT CREDIT CARD.
   (A)   Not later than three months after the effective date of this
amendment, a board of park commissioners of a park district that holds a credit
card account on the effective date of this amendment shall adopt a written
policy for the use of credit card accounts. Otherwise, a board shall adopt a
written policy before first holding a credit card account.
The policy shall include provisions addressing all of the following:
      (1)   The officers, positions, or appointees authorized to use park
district credit card accounts;
      (2)   The types of expenses for which a credit card account may be used;
      (3)   The procedure for acquisition, use, and management of a credit card
account and presentation instruments related to the account including cards and
checks;
      (4)   The procedure for submitting itemized receipts to the treasurer or
the treasurer's designee;
      (5)   The procedure for credit card issuance, credit card reissuance,
credit card cancellation, and the process for reporting lost or stolen credit
cards;
      (6)   The district's credit card account's maximum credit limit or
limits;
      (7)   The actions or omissions by an officer, employee, or appointee that
qualify as misuse of a credit card account.
   (B)   The name of the park district shall appear on each presentation
instrument related to the account including cards and checks.
   (C)   If the treasurer of the park district does not retain general
possession and control of the credit card account and presentation instruments
related to the account including cards and checks, the board shall appoint a
compliance officer to perform the duties enumerated under division (D) of this
section. The compliance officer may not use a credit card account and may not
authorize an officer, employee, or appointee to use a credit card account. The
treasurer is not eligible for appointment as compliance officer.
   (D)   The compliance officer, if applicable, and the board at least
quarterly shall review the number of cards and accounts issued, the number of
active cards and accounts issued, the cards' and accounts' expiration dates,
and the cards' and accounts' credit limits.
   (E)   If the treasurer retains general possession and control of the credit
card account and presentation instruments related to the account including
cards and checks, and the board authorizes an officer, employee, or appointee
to use a credit card, the treasurer may use a system to sign out credit cards
to the authorized users. The officer, employee, or appointee is liable in
person and upon any official bond the officer, employee, or appointee has given
to the park district to reimburse the district treasury the amount for which
the officer, employee, or appointee does not provide itemized receipts in
accordance with the policy described in division (A) of this section.
   (F)   The use of a credit card account for expenses beyond those authorized
by the board constitutes misuse of a credit card account. An officer, employee,
or appointee of a board of park commissioners or a public servant as defined
under section 2921.01 of the Revised Code who knowingly misuses a credit card
account held by the board violates section 2913.21 of the Revised Code.
   (G)   The treasurer or the treasurer's designee annually shall file a report
with the board detailing all rewards received based on the use of the park
district's credit card account.
   (H)   As used in this section, “credit card account” means any bank-issued
credit card account, store-issued credit card account, financial institution-
issued credit card account, financial depository-issued credit card account,
affinity credit card account, or any other card account allowing the holder to
purchase goods or services on credit or to transact with the account, and any
debit or gift card account related to the receipt of grant moneys. “Credit card
account” does not include a procurement card account, gasoline or telephone
credit card account, or any other card account where merchant category codes
are in place as a system of control for use of the card account.
§ 1545.08 REPORTS OF BOARD OF PARK COMMISSIONERS.
   The board of park commissioners shall compile and publish reports and
information relating to the park district and to the proceedings and functions
of the board. The board shall keep an accurate and permanent public record of
all its proceedings.
§ 1545.09 BYLAWS AND RULES.
   (A)   The board of park commissioners shall adopt such bylaws and rules as
the board considers advisable for the preservation of good order within and
adjacent to parks and reservations of land, and for the protection and
preservation of the parks, parkways, and other reservations of land under its
jurisdiction and control and of property and natural life therein. The board
shall also adopt bylaws or rules establishing a procedure for contracting for
professional, technical, consulting, and other special services. Any
competitive bidding procedures of the board do not apply to the purchase of
benefits for park district officers or employees when such benefits are
provided through a health and welfare trust fund administered through or in
conjunction with a collective bargaining representative of the park district
employees, as authorized in R.C. § 1545.071. Summaries of the bylaws and rules
shall be published as provided in the case of ordinances of municipal
corporations under R.C. § 731.21 before taking effect.
   (B)   (1)   As used in division (B)(2) of this section, “similar violation
under state law” means a violation of any section of the Revised Code, other
than division (C) of this section, that is similar to a violation of a bylaw or
rule adopted under division (A) of this section.
      (2)   The board of park commissioners may adopt by bylaw a penalty for a
violation of any bylaw or rule adopted under division (A) of this section, and
any penalty so adopted shall not exceed in severity whichever of the following
is applicable:
         (a)   The penalty designated under the Revised Code for a violation of
the state law that is similar to the bylaw or rule for which the board adopted
the penalty;
         (b)   For a violation of a bylaw or rule adopted under division (A) of
this section for which the similar violation under state law does not bear a
penalty or for which there is no similar violation under state law, a fine of
not more than one hundred fifty dollars for a first offense and not more than
one thousand dollars for each subsequent offense.
      (3)   A summary of any bylaw adopted under division (B)(2) of this
section shall be published as provided in the case of ordinances of municipal
corporations under R.C. § 731.21 before taking effect.
   (C)   No person shall violate any bylaws or rules adopted under division (A)
of this section. All fines collected for any violation of this section shall be
paid into the treasury of such park board.
§ 1545.10 CONTRACT WITH CORPORATION OR ASSOCIATION MAINTAINING MUSEUM OF
NATURAL HISTORY.
   The board of park commissioners may contract for a term not exceeding three
years, upon such terms as the board deems expedient, with any private
corporation or association not for profit maintaining a museum of natural
history in any county within which the park district is located in whole or in
part, or which has for its object the promotion of interest in or the
conservation and preservation of the flora or fauna in any portion or all of
the territory comprising the district for the purpose of obtaining for such
district such services and assistance as can be rendered by such corporation or
association.
§ 1545.11 BOARD OF PARK COMMISSIONERS - POWER TO ACQUIRE LANDS.
   The board of park commissioners may acquire lands either within or without
the park district for conversion into forest reserves and for the conservation
of the natural resources of the state, including streams, lakes, submerged
lands, and swamplands, and to those ends may create parks, parkways, forest
reservations, and other reservations and afforest, develop, improve, protect,
and promote the use of the same in such manner as the board deems conducive to
the general welfare. Such lands may be acquired by such board, on behalf of
said district, (1) by gift or devise, (2) by purchase for cash, by purchase by
installment payments with or without a mortgage, by entering into lease-
purchase agreements, by lease with or without option to purchase, or, (3) by
appropriation. In furtherance of the use and enjoyment of the lands controlled
by it, the board may accept donations of money or other property, or may act as
trustees of land, money, or other property, and use and administer the same as
stipulated by the donor, or as provided in the trust agreement. The terms of
each such donation or trust shall first be approved by the probate court before
acceptance by the board.
   In case of appropriation, the proceedings shall be instituted in the name of
the board, and shall be conducted in the manner provided in R.C. §§ 163.01 to
163.22, inclusive.
   This section applies to districts created prior to April 16, 1920.
§ 1545.12 SALE OR LEASE OF LANDS - NOTICE - APPROVAL BY PROBATE COURT.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, if the board of
park commissioners finds that any lands that it has acquired are not necessary
for the purposes for which they were acquired by the board, it may sell and
dispose of the lands upon terms the board considers advisable. The board also
may lease or permit the use of any lands for purposes not inconsistent with the
purposes for which the lands were acquired, and upon terms the board considers
advisable. No lands shall be sold pursuant to this division without first
giving notice of the board’s intention to sell the lands by publication once a
week for four consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
district or as provided in R.C. § 7.16. The notice shall contain an accurate
description of the lands and shall state the time and place at which sealed
bids will be received for the purchase of the lands, and the lands shall not
thereafter be sold at private sale for less than the best and highest bid
received without giving further notice as specified in this division.
   (B)   (1)   After compliance with division (B)(2) of this section, the board
of park commissioners may sell land upon terms the board considers advisable to
any park district established under R.C. § 511.18 or R.C. Chapter 1545, any
political subdivision of the state, the state or any department or agency of
the state, or any department or agency of the federal government for
conservation uses or for park or recreation purposes without the necessity of
having to comply with division (A) of this section.
      (2)   Before the board of park commissioners may sell land under division
(B)(1) of this section, the board shall offer the land for sale to each of the
following public agencies that is authorized to acquire, develop, and maintain
land for conservation uses or for park or recreation purposes: each park
district established under R.C. § 511.18 or R.C. Chapter 1545 or political
subdivision in which the land is located, each park district that is so
established and that adjoins or each political subdivision that adjoins a park
district so established or political subdivision in which the land is located,
and each agency or department of the state or of the federal government that
operates parks or conservation or recreation areas near the land. The board
shall make the offer by giving a written notice that the land is available for
sale, by first class mail, to these public agencies. A failure of delivery of
the written notice to any of these public agencies does not invalidate any
proceedings for the sale of land under this division. Any public agency that is
so notified and that wishes to purchase the land shall make an offer to the
board in writing not later than sixty days after receiving the written notice.
         If there is only one offer to purchase the land made in that sixty-day
period, the board need not hold a public hearing on the offer. The board shall
accept the offer only if it determines that acceptance of the offer will result
in the best public use of the land.
         If there is more than one offer to purchase the land made in that
sixty-day period, the board shall not accept any offer until the board holds a
public hearing on the offers. If, after the hearing, the board decides to
accept an offer, it shall accept the offer that it determines will result in
the best public use of the land.
   (C)   No lands shall be sold under this section at either public or private
sale without the approval of the probate court of the county in which the lands
are situated.
§ 1545.13 PARK COMMISSION EMPLOYEES DESIGNATED AS LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
   (A)   As used in this section, “felony” has the same meaning as in R.C. §
109.511.
   (B)   The employees that the board of park commissioners designates for that
purpose may exercise all the powers of police officers within and adjacent to
the lands under the jurisdiction and control of the board or when acting as
authorized by R.C. § 1545.131 or 1545.132. Before exercising the powers of
police officers, the designated employees shall comply with the certification
requirement established in R.C. § 109.77, take an oath, and give a bond to the
state in the sum that the board prescribes, for the proper performance of their
duties in that respect. This division is subject to division (C) of this
section.
   (C)   (1)   The board of park commissioners shall not designate an employee
as provided in division (B) of this section on a permanent basis, on a
temporary basis, for a probationary term, or on other than a permanent basis if
the employee previously has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty to a
felony.
      (2)   (a)   The board of park commissioners shall terminate the
employment of an employee designated as provided in division (B) of this
section if the employee does either of the following:
            (i)   Pleads guilty to a felony;
            (ii)   Pleads guilty to a misdemeanor pursuant to a negotiated plea
agreement as provided in division (D) of R.C. § 2929.43 in which the employee
agrees to surrender the certificate awarded to the employee under R.C. §
109.77.
         (b)   The board shall suspend from employment an employee designated
as provided in division (B) of this section if the employee is convicted, after
trial, of a felony. If the employee files an appeal from that conviction and
the conviction is upheld by the highest court to which the appeal is taken or
if the employee does not file a timely appeal, the board shall terminate the
employment of that employee. If the employee files an appeal that results in
the employee’s acquittal of the felony or conviction of a misdemeanor, or in
the dismissal of the felony charge against the employee, the board shall
reinstate that employee. An employee who is reinstated under division (C)(2)(b)
of this section shall not receive any back pay unless that employee’s
conviction of the felony was reversed on appeal, or the felony charge was
dismissed, because the court found insufficient evidence to convict the
employee of the felony.
      (3)   Division (C) of this section does not apply regarding an offense
that was committed prior to January 1, 1995.
      (4)   The suspension from employment, or the termination of the
employment, of an employee under division (C)(2) of this section shall be in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 119.
§ 1545.131 MUTUAL AID CONTRACTS.
   The board of park commissioners of a park district may enter into contracts
with one or more townships, township police districts, joint police districts,
municipal corporations, or county sheriffs of this state, with one or more
township park districts created pursuant to R.C. § 511.18 or other park
districts, with one or more state universities or colleges, as defined in R.C.
§ 3345.12, or with a contiguous political subdivision of an adjoining state,
and a township, township police district, joint police district, municipal
corporation, county sheriff, township park district, other park district, or
state university or college may enter into a contract with a park district upon
any terms that are agreed to by them, to allow the use of the park district
police or law enforcement officers designated under R.C. § 1545.13 to perform
any police function, exercise any police power, or render any police service on
behalf of the contracting entity that the entity may perform, exercise, or
render.
   R.C. Chapter 2744, insofar as it applies to the operation of police
departments, applies to the contracting entities and to the members of the
police force or law enforcement department when they are rendering service
outside their own subdivisions pursuant to that contract.
   Members of the police force or law enforcement department acting outside the
political subdivision in which they are employed, pursuant to that contract,
shall be entitled to participate in any indemnity fund established by their
employer to the same extent as while acting within the employing subdivision.
Those members shall be entitled to all the rights and benefits of R.C. Chapter
4123, to the same extent as while performing service within the subdivision.
   The contracts entered into pursuant to this section may provide for the
following:
   (A)   A fixed annual charge to be paid at the times agreed upon and
stipulated in the contract;
   (B)   Compensation based upon the following:
      (1)   A stipulated price for each call or emergency;
      (2)   The number of members or pieces of equipment employed;
      (3)   The elapsed time of service required in each call or emergency.
   (C)   Compensation for loss or damage to equipment while engaged in
rendering police services outside the limits of the subdivision that owns and
furnishes the equipment;
   (D)   Reimbursement of the subdivision in which the police force or law
enforcement department members are employed for any indemnity award or premium
contribution assessed against the employing subdivision for workers’
compensation benefits for injuries or death of its police force or law
enforcement department members occurring while engaged in rendering police
services pursuant to the contract.
§ 1545.132 PROVIDING POLICE SERVICE WITHOUT CONTRACT.
   The police force or law enforcement department of any park district may
provide police protection to any county, municipal corporation, township,
township police district, or joint police district of this state, to any other
park district or any township park district created pursuant to R.C. § 511.18,
or to a governmental entity of an adjoining state without a contract to provide
police protection, upon the approval, by resolution, of the board of park
commissioners of the park district in which the police force or law enforcement
department is located and upon authorization by an officer or employee of the
police force or department providing the police protection who is designated by
title of office or position, pursuant to the resolution of the board of park
commissioners, to give the authorization.
   R.C. Chapter 2744, insofar as it applies to the operation of police
departments, shall apply to any park district and to members of its police
force or law enforcement department when those members are rendering police
services pursuant to this section outside the park district by which they are
employed.
   Police force or law enforcement department members acting, as provided in
this section, outside the park district by which they are employed shall be
entitled to participate in any pension or indemnity fund established by their
employer to the same extent as while acting within the park district by which
they are employed. Those members shall be entitled to all rights and benefits
of R.C. Chapter 4123 to the same extent as while performing services within the
park district by which they are employed.
§ 1545.14 AGREEMENT WITH OTHER PUBLIC AUTHORITIES TO ASSUME CONTROL OF PARKS.
   A board of park commissioners may by agreement with the legislative or other
public authority in control of parks or park lands either within or without the
park district, assume control of all or a portion of any existing parks or park
lands or otherwise contract or cooperate with such public authority in
connection with the use, development, improvement, and protection of parks or
park lands. In such event, such parks or park lands may be developed, improved,
and protected as in case of lands otherwise acquired by said board. This
section does not authorize said board to acquire or control any park, park
lands, parkways, playgrounds, other lands, or boulevards owned or controlled by
any other public authority except by agreement as provided in this section.
§ 1545.15 ANNEXATION PROCEDURE.
   When conducive to the general welfare, any territory adjacent and contiguous
to an existing park district, whether located within or without the county in
which such district was created, may be annexed to such district. When a
petition is filed with the board of park commissioners requesting such
annexation, containing an accurate description of the territory proposed to be
annexed, accompanied by an accurate map or plat of such territory, and signed
either by a majority of the electors residing within such territory or by not
less than fifty such electors, the board shall determine whether it is
advisable that such annexation should be made. If the board determines in favor
of such annexation, it shall make application to the probate court of the
county in which such territory is located, setting forth the fact of the filing
of such petition and the reasons why it is advisable that such territory should
be annexed to such district. Any such board may of its motion file such
petition in such court. Upon the filing of such petition, like proceedings
shall be had as are provided in R.C. §§ 1545.03 and 1545.04 upon application
for the creation of a park district, except that the territory so annexed may
include a part only of an existing township or municipal corporation.
§ 1545.16 POWERS OF BUDGET COMMISSIONERS, AUDITORS, AND TREASURERS IN RELATION
TO PARK DISTRICTS.
   In the event of the annexation to a park district of territory located in a
county other than the county in which such district was created, the budget
commissioners of the county in which such annexed territory is located shall
exercise, with reference to such annexed territory, the powers conferred upon
budget commissioners by R.C. § 1545.20, and the county auditor and county
treasurer of the county in which such annexed territory is located shall
exercise, with reference to taxes levied and collected by the board of park
commissioners upon such annexed territory, the powers conferred upon auditors
and treasurers by R.C. § 1545.22.
§ 1545.17 IMPROVEMENT OF PUBLIC HIGHWAY.
   When a public highway extends into or through a park area, or when a public
highway forms all or part of a suitable connection between two or more park
areas, and it is deemed advisable to make alterations in the route or width of
such highway, or to grade, drain, pave, or otherwise improve such highway,
boards of park commissioners may enter into agreements with the public
authorities in charge or control of so much of said highway as lies within such
park area or which forms the whole or part of a connecting link between two or
more park areas, providing for the doing of any of such things, under the
procedure authorized by law in case of such public authorities, and for the
payment by such boards of so much of the cost thereof as is agreed upon. This
section does not affect the legal status of such highway.
§ 1545.18 ASSESSMENT OF COST OF IMPROVEMENT - COLLECTION.
   In the development and improvement of the lands acquired by a board of park
commissioners, such board may assess such portion of the cost of such
development or improvement as it deems equitable, not to exceed fifty per cent
of such total cost, upon abutting, contiguous, adjacent, or otherwise
specifically benefited lands, in an amount not in excess of and in proportion
to the special benefits conferred upon such lands by such development or
improvement. Such assessment shall be payable in not to exceed ten equal annual
installments, and said board may borrow money in anticipation of the collection
of such special assessments. The proceedings had in the levying and collection
of such special assessments, including the issue of bonds of the park district
in anticipation of the collection of deferred assessments, shall be as provided
in case of the levy and assessment of special assessments for street
improvements in municipal corporations, insofar as such proceedings are
applicable. If any such assessment is twenty-five dollars or less, or whenever
the unpaid balance of any such assessment is twenty-five dollars or less, such
assessment shall be paid in full, and not in installments, at the time when the
first or next installment would otherwise become due and payable.
§ 1545.19 ASSESSMENT MAY BE INCREASED WITH CONSENT OF PROPERTY OWNERS.
   In case of any development or improvement, the assessments authorized by
R.C. § 1545.18 shall not in the aggregate exceed the cost of a development or
improvement sufficient only to serve that need of the property to be assessed,
unless the development or improvement has been petitioned for by the owners of
not less than sixty per cent, both in foot frontage and in tax valuation, of
the property to be assessed, consenting to a larger assessment than provided
for in this section and R.C. § 1545.18, in which event such larger assessment
may be levied to the extent specified in such petition.
   Any owner of property to be assessed in accordance with R.C. § 1545.18 may
appeal to the probate court in the county in which such property is located
from the action of the board of park commissioners in the matter of the
determination of the aggregate amount to be assessed for any given development
or improvement or in the matter of the determination of the assessment against
any specific property, or both, in the manner provided in R.C. §§ 6117.01 to
6117.40, inclusive, and the court may review and modify the action of the board
with respect to such assessments.
§ 1545.20 TAX LEVY.
   A board of park commissioners may levy taxes upon all the taxable property
within the park district in an amount not in excess of one-half of one mill
upon each dollar of the district tax valuation in any one year, subject to the
combined maximum levy for all purposes otherwise provided by law. After the
budget commission of the county in which the district is located certifies such
levy, or such modification thereof as it considers advisable, to the county
auditor, he shall place it upon the tax duplicate. The board may then borrow
money in anticipation of the collection of such tax, and issue the negotiable
notes of such board therefor in an amount not in excess of fifty per cent of
the proceeds of such tax, based upon the amount of the current tax valuation.
Such notes shall not be issued for a period longer than one year, and shall be
payable out of the proceeds of such levy. To the extent of such notes and the
interest which accrues thereon such levy shall be exclusively appropriated to
the payment of such notes. Any portion of such notes remaining unpaid through
any deficiency in such levy shall be payable out of the next ensuing levy which
shall be made by said board in the next ensuing year in an amount at least
sufficient to provide for the payment of said notes, but not in excess of one
half of one mill in accordance with R.C. § 133.17.
§ 1545.21 TAX LEVY FOR USE OF DISTRICT - SUBMISSION TO ELECTORS - BONDS.
   The board of park commissioners, by resolution, may submit to the electors
of the park district the question of levying taxes for the use of the district.
The resolution shall declare the necessity of levying such taxes, shall specify
the purpose for which such taxes shall be used, the annual rate proposed, and
the number of consecutive years the rate shall be levied. Such resolution shall
be forthwith certified to the board of elections in each county in which any
part of such district is located, not later than the ninetieth day before the
day of the election, and the question of the levy of taxes as provided in such
resolution shall be submitted to the electors of the district at a special
election to be held on whichever of the following occurs first:
   (A)   The day of the next general election;
   (B)   The first Tuesday after the first Monday in May in any calendar year,
except that if a presidential primary election is held in that calendar year,
then the day of that election. The ballot shall set forth the purpose for which
the taxes shall be levied, the annual rate of levy, and the number of years of
such levy. If the tax is to be placed on the current tax list, the form of the
ballot shall state that the tax will be levied in the current tax year and
shall indicate the first calendar year the tax will be due. If the resolution
of the board of park commissioners provides that an existing levy will be
canceled upon the passage of the new levy, the ballot may include a statement
that: “an existing levy of ... mills (stating the original levy millage),
having ... years remaining, will be canceled and replaced upon the passage of
this levy”. In such case, the ballot may refer to the new levy as a
“replacement levy” if the new millage does not exceed the original millage of
the levy being canceled or as a “replacement and additional levy” if the new
millage exceeds the original millage of the levy being canceled. If a majority
of the electors voting upon the question of such levy vote in favor thereof,
such taxes shall be levied and shall be in addition to the taxes authorized by
R.C. § 1545.20, and all other taxes authorized by law. The rate submitted to
the electors at any one time shall not exceed two mills annually upon each
dollar of valuation unless the purpose of the levy includes providing operating
revenues for one of Ohio’s major metropolitan zoos, as defined in R.C. §
4503.74, in which case the rate shall not exceed three mills annually upon each
dollar of valuation. When a tax levy has been authorized as provided in this
section or in R.C. § 1545.041, the board of park commissioners may issue bonds
pursuant to R.C. § 133.24 in anticipation of the collection of such levy,
provided that such bonds shall be issued only for the purpose of acquiring and
improving lands. Such levy, when collected, shall be applied in payment of the
bonds so issued and the interest thereon. The amount of bonds so issued and
outstanding at any time shall not exceed one per cent of the total tax
valuation in such district. Such bonds shall bear interest at a rate not to
exceed the rate determined as provided in R.C. § 9.95.
§ 1545.211 ANTICIPATION NOTES.
   In addition to the authority conferred by R.C. § 1545.21, in anticipation of
the collection of current revenues in and for any fiscal year, the board of
park commissioners may borrow money and issue notes therefor in anticipation of
the receipt of taxes for debt charges or current expenses to the extent
necessary to meet such charges or expenses, but not in excess of the estimated
receipts for the current tax year, less all advances. The sums so anticipated
shall be deemed appropriated for the payment of such notes at maturity. The
notes shall not run more than one year, nor bear interest at a rate exceeding
the rate provided in R.C. § 9.95, and the proceeds therefrom shall be used only
for the purposes for which the anticipated taxes were levied. No board shall
borrow money or issue notes in anticipation of such taxes before the first day
of January of the year of such tax receipts.
§ 1545.22 DEPOSITORIES FOR FUNDS - DUTIES OF COUNTY TREASURER AND COUNTY
AUDITOR.
   (A)   If a treasurer is appointed by a board of park commissioners pursuant
to R.C. § 1545.07, the accounts of the board shall be kept by that treasurer.
The treasurer shall be an ex officio officer of the board. No contract of the
board shall become effective until the treasurer certifies that there are funds
of the board sufficient to provide for that contract.
   (B)   If no treasurer is appointed by the board pursuant to R.C. § 1545.07:
      (1)   All funds under the control of a board of park commissioners shall
be kept in depositories selected in the manner provided for the deposit of
county funds, insofar as such proceedings are applicable, and such deposits
shall be secured as provided in the case of county funds. The county treasurer
of the county in which the park district is located shall be the custodian of
the funds of the board and shall be an ex officio officer of the board. He
shall pay the funds out upon the warrant of the county auditor of the county in
which the district is located. Interest earned on all funds under the control
of the board of park commissioners shall be credited to such funds.
      (2)   The county auditor shall be an ex officio officer of the board, and
no contract of the board involving the expenditure of money shall become
effective until the auditor certifies that there are funds of the board in the
custody of the county treasurer and otherwise unappropriated sufficient to
provide therefor. The auditor shall draw warrants on the treasurer to disburse
the funds of the board upon order of the board, evidenced by the certificate of
its secretary.
      (3)   Any such board of park commissioners may select a depository for
the funds of the district, in the manner provided in R.C. §§ 135.01 to 135.21,
upon the adoption of a resolution declaring such intent. The resolution shall
be certified to the board of county commissioners and to the treasurer in the
counties in which the district is located. The board of park commissioners
shall thereupon become the governing board for such district with respect to
the deposit of funds of such district.
   (C)   If no deposits to or expenditures from the funds of a park district
have been made for a period of five years, the county auditor or the treasurer
appointed by the board shall send written notice to the probate court of the
county.
§ 1545.23 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS FROM SALE OR LEASE OF PARK MINERAL RIGHTS.
   If a park district enters into an agreement for the sale or lease of mineral
rights regarding a park within the district, any royalties or other moneys
resulting from the sale or lease shall be deposited into a special fund that
the board of park commissioners shall create. The fund shall be used
exclusively for maintenance of parks within the district and for the
acquisition of new park lands.
§ 1545.24 ISSUANCE OF BONDS.
   The board of park commissioners of any park district may issue bonds
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 133 for the purpose of acquiring and improving lands
as authorized by R.C. § 1545.11. The board may secure the payment of such bonds
by pledge or deed of trust of any of its revenues and receipts resulting from
rentals, concessions, licenses, and permits. The board shall not pledge the
credit or taxing power of the district for the payment of any such bonds, nor
shall any of the bonds issued under this section be deemed to be an
indebtedness of the district.
§ 1545.25 [REPEALED].
Effective Date: 10-30-1989
§ 1545.26 [REPEALED].
Effective Date: 10-30-1989
§ 1545.27 BONDS ARE LAWFUL INVESTMENTS.
   Park district revenue bonds are lawful investments of banks, trust
companies, trustees, the boards of trustees of the sinking funds of municipal
corporations, school districts, and counties, the administrator of workers’
compensation, the state teachers retirement system, the public employees
retirement system, and the school employees retirement system, and also are
acceptable as security for the deposit of public moneys.
§ 1545.28 REPLACEMENT FUND.
   The board of park commissioners may establish and maintain a replacement
fund, and for that purpose may set aside annually out of its revenue such sum
as it may determine necessary. In case of total or partial destruction of or
injury to any of the property of the park district from any cause, or in case
it becomes necessary to demolish part or to repair or replace the same, in
whole or in part, because of the unfitness of such property, such replacement
fund may be used to rebuild on the original site or elsewhere, or to restore,
repair, or improve such property.
   Such replacement fund may be invested by such district in bonds of the
United States, the state, or of a county, municipal corporation, school
district, or township of this state, and when necessary for the purposes of
such funds such securities may be disposed of by such district.
§ 1545.29 [REPEALED].
Effective Date: 7-1-1989
§ 1545.30 [REPEALED].
Effective Date: 7-1-1989
§ 1545.35 DISSOLUTION OF ACTIVE PARK DISTRICT.
   An active park district created under this chapter and to which no territory
has been annexed under R.C. § 1545.15 may be dissolved under R.C. § 1545.36 or
1545.37. An active park district to which territory has been annexed under R.C.
§ 1545.15 may be dissolved only under the applicable provisions of R.C. §
1545.37. A park district that has been inactive for five years may be dissolved
under R.C. § 1545.38.
§ 1545.36 PETITION FOR DISSOLUTION OF DISTRICT.
   (A)   When the board of elections of the county in which a park district is
located has had filed with it a petition calling for the dissolution of the
district, and determines that the petition meets the requirements of this
section and R.C. § 3501.38, the board shall place the issue of the dissolution
on the ballot at the next special election to be held on the day of a general
or primary election. Written notice of the filing of the petition shall be sent
immediately to the board of park commissioners and the probate court that
created the district.
   (B)   The petition shall:
      (1)   Be filed with the board no less than ninety days before the next
election;
      (2)   Be supported by the signatures of at least twenty-five per cent of
the number of voters in the district who voted in the preceding gubernatorial
election.
   (C)   If the petition as filed does not have the required number of
signatures and the time for filing has elapsed, the board shall declare it
invalid. No further petition for dissolution shall be received until after the
next election is completed. On determination of these findings, the board shall
send written notice of them to the principal circulator.
   (D)   (1)   If a majority of the votes cast support the dissolution, the
board shall immediately send written notice of the vote, citing the number of
votes for and against the issue, to the probate court, to the board of park
commissioners, and to the principal circulator. No park district shall be
applied for within the dissolved district for a period of four years following
the election in which the issue was supported.
      (2)   If the issue fails to obtain a majority of the votes cast, the
board shall receive no further petition for dissolution until the fourth year
following that in which the election failed, and shall send written notice of
these results to the principal circulator and the board of park commissioners.
§ 1545.37 APPLICATION FOR HEARING ON DISSOLUTION.
   (A)   An application for a hearing on dissolution may be filed with the
probate court of the county that created the district at any time not
prohibited by this section and shall meet the requirements of this section.
   (B)   The application shall:
      (1)   Bear the signatures of at least twenty-five per cent of the number
of voters in the district who voted in the preceding gubernatorial election;
      (2)   Bear the name, address, and telephone number of at least one voter
registered in the district to be designated the applicant of record. Each
applicant of record and the board of park commissioners shall be named parties
to the proceedings.
      (3)   Be accompanied by a complete statement of the issues to be heard,
signed by applicant of record. Failure to list completely the issues to be
heard may, in the discretion of the court, be grounds for dismissal of the
application.
   (C)   Each page of the application:
      (1)   Being circulated for signatures shall clearly state the purpose for
which it is being circulated and at least one reason supporting that purpose.
Each page lacking either statement shall be declared invalid.
      (2)   Shall be circulated by and signed in the presence of a voter
registered in the district and bear a certification signed by him that this
requirement has been met. Failure to certify or a false certification shall
invalidate the page.
   (D)   Each signatory shall sign his name as recorded by the board of
elections together with his current address and the date. Failure to comply
with this division shall invalidate the signature.
   (E)   The original of the application and statement of issues shall be filed
with the court and, concurrently, a copy of each shall be served on the board
of park commissioners. Failure to timely serve these documents on the board are
(is) grounds for denial of the application.
   (F)   Upon receipt of the application, the court shall determine its
validity in terms of the requirements of divisions (B) to (E) of this section,
and may on its own assess the application for validity of the signatures or
forward it to the county board of elections for that assessment. Immediately
upon determining the state of the application’s validity, the court shall send
written notice of its findings to each party. If the application is valid, the
court shall forthwith set a date for hearing, not less than twenty days nor
more than forty days from the date of its findings, and include the date in its
notice to each party. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least one
daily newspaper of general circulation within the district for not less than
five consecutive days, the period to end no less than ten days before the
hearing. Failure to meet the requirement of notice to any party shall not
invalidate the proceedings but shall postpone the time of hearing. A corrected
notice shall be sent to each party with a new date of hearing set not less than
twenty days nor more than forty days from the date of corrected notice, unless
each party and the court agree to an earlier date. If the application is found
to be invalid, the court shall send written notice to each party that the
application is denied and has been impounded by the court. The court shall not
receive any further application for hearing on dissolution for two years from
the date of original filing.
      On motion, any applicant may be named as a party at the discretion of the
court. Any party may be heard on his own or through counsel. On motion by any
party made at least five days before the hearing, evidence based on the
statement of issues filed with the application shall be heard in accordance
with the Rules of Civil Procedure. At the hearing, evidence may be heard at the
discretion of the court. Argument for and against the dissolution shall be
heard by the court, and may be limited at its discretion. A verbatim record of
the hearing shall be taken. Upon completion of the hearing, the court shall
issue its findings together with its reasons therefor to all parties. No more
than thirty days shall pass between the adjournment of the hearing and the
issuing of the findings. If the court finds that dissolution is conducive to
the public welfare, no other park district shall be created within the same
jurisdiction or part of it pursuant to R.C. §§ 1545.01 to 1545.04 or 1545.15
for four years from the date of finding. If the court finds that dissolution is
not conducive to the public welfare, it shall find against it. Upon a finding
against dissolution, the court shall impound the application, and advise each
party that no further application for hearing on dissolution shall be received
for four years from the date of finding.
   (G)   A park district that includes territory annexed under R.C. § 1545.15
shall only be dissolved by order of the probate court that created the district
on compliance with this division and divisions (A) to (F) of this section.
Pages of the application bearing signatures of registered voters of each
annexed territory shall be filed for assessment of their validity with the
probate court of the county in which the territory is located. The number of
signatures needed to establish validity shall be a majority of the number of
voters residing within the annexed territory who voted in the preceding
gubernatorial election. Upon determination of its assessment, and in no case
more than fifteen days after filing, the probate court of the county in which
the annexed territory is located shall forward the pages of the application
together with its findings to the probate court that created the district. The
probate court that created the district shall incorporate these findings with
its assessment of the application filed with it in accordance with division (F)
of this section in reaching its determination of the entire application’s
validity and proceed in accordance with applicable provisions of division (F)
of this section.
§ 1545.38 PROCEEDINGS FOR DISSOLUTION OF INACTIVE DISTRICT.
   On receipt of written notice from the county auditor that no deposits to or
expenditures from the funds of a park district have been made for a period of
five years, the probate court shall immediately serve written notice on the
board of park commissioners and the auditor of a date for hearing on the
dissolution of the district. The notice shall also order the board to forward
to the court a complete, current financial statement of the assets and
liabilities of the district, an inventory of its real and personal property,
available deeds to, maps or plats for, and other records of real property of
the park district, and copies of any available plans of the district for park
acquisition and development, or capital improvements. A copy of the notice
shall be served on each party. The court shall publish notice of the hearing
for five consecutive days in a daily newspaper of general circulation within
the district, ending no less than fifteen days before the hearing. The issue of
dissolution shall be heard and determined by the court in accordance with the
applicable provisions of R.C. § 1545.37(F). If the court finds for dissolution,
it shall as applicable proceed in accordance with R.C. § 1545.40.
§ 1545.39 CEASING ACTIVITY PENDING DETERMINATION ON PETITION.
   On receipt of notice of the filing of a petition with the county board of
elections or an application for hearing or a notice of hearing from the probate
court, the board of park commissioners shall cease all acquisition of land and
the development of existing land unless valid options or contracts for which
funds have been committed have been previously signed. No activity shall be
resumed until the board of elections or the court determines, respectively,
that the petition or application is invalid and the issue will not be voted on
or heard, or the issue fails election, or the court finds against dissolution,
whichever is earlier.
§ 1545.40 DISSOLUTION.
   On dissolution of a park district, the board of park commissioners is
dissolved and all of its duties and responsibilities shall be exercised by the
probate court until all of the board’s business is completed and all of its
property disposed of. The court may retain special counsel and another person
who in the court’s discretion are qualified to assist it in the closing out of
business and disposal of property and any employee of the district the court
determines is necessary to closing out the business or to maintaining the
property of the district in good order until it is disposed of. Any employee
not retained by the court shall be terminated within ten working days of the
board’s dissolution and paid one month’s base salary or for one hundred
seventy-three hours, whichever is applicable, in addition to all other pay and
allowances due him. The same shall be paid to any employee retained by the
court upon his termination.
   The court shall send the director of natural resources notice of the
dissolution together with an inventory of the district’s real property, any
personal property of the district that he considers to be functionally related
to the use or management of the real property, and a full and accurate
statement of any indebtedness that is secured by the real property. The
director shall, within sixty days of receipt of such notice, notify the court
of his acceptance or rejection of any such real property and its related
personal property and indebtedness. If the director accepts, the court shall
convey the real property to the state, subject to any deed or other
restrictions placed upon use of the real property as a condition of receiving
federal or state assistance for its acquisition or development, and transfer
the related personal property to the department of natural resources. If the
director rejects, the court shall convey any real property of the district and
transfer any related personal property to any other agency of the state or any
political subdivision or instrumentality of the state located within the former
park district or within a county in which territory that was annexed to the
district is located, that is interested in acquiring the real property for
parks and recreation, conservation, or other public purposes, in that order of
priority, and that is willing to assume any related indebtedness and fulfill
any deed restrictions and any other restrictions placed upon use of the real
property as a condition of receiving federal or state assistance for its
acquisition or development.
   If no state agency, political subdivision, or instrumentality of the state
is willing to accept the real property and related personal property and
indebtedness, the court shall convey such property to the board of county
commissioners of the county in which the property is located. The board of
county commissioners may sell, lease, or transfer such property in accordance
with R.C. §§ 307.09 to 307.12. If there is any outstanding indebtedness on such
property sold or leased, the proceeds from the sale or lease shall be paid into
the fund from which payments are made to extinguish the indebtedness on such
property and the proceeds shall be used for that purpose; otherwise the
proceeds shall be paid into the general fund of the county. The budget
commission shall continue to levy and collect taxes necessary for the payment
of any outstanding indebtedness of the district for which tax revenues of the
district were pledged and that is not otherwise assumed.
   Except as otherwise provided in this section, upon dissolution of a park
district, the probate court shall order the budget commission of each county
affected to terminate the tax levies of the park district, levied under R.C. §
1545.20 or 1545.21, and the assessments levied under R.C. § 1545.18 and divide
the net indebtedness of the district among the state, political subdivisions,
and instrumentalities that acquire the district’s real property on the basis of
the market value of the real property that each acquires. Upon disposal of the
district’s real property, the court shall notify the budget commission, which
shall transfer the remaining funds of the district to the proper authorities.
§ 1545.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates R.C. § 1545.09(C) shall be punished as follows:
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section, the
offender shall be fined not more than one hundred fifty dollars for a first
offense and not more than one thousand dollars for each subsequent offense.
   (B)   If the board of park commissioners that adopted the bylaw or rule that
the offender violated and that was the basis of the offender’s violation of
R.C. § 1545.09(C) has adopted a penalty for the violation under division (B) of
that section, the offender shall be penalized in accordance with the penalty so
adopted for the violation.
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   (This title is reserved for by-laws dealing with sewer, water, trash
collection and the like.)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   LICENSING PROVISIONS
      
72.   TRAFFIC RULES
      
73.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
74.   EQUIPMENT AND LOADS
      
75.   BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Definitions
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this title, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   ALL PURPOSE VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for
cross-country travel on land and water, or on more than one type of terrain,
and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or any combination thereof,
including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air, vehicles commonly known as
all-terrain vehicles, all-season vehicles, mini-bikes, and trail bikes. ALL-
PURPOSE VEHICLE does not include a utility vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4501.01
or any vehicle principally used in playing golf, any motor vehicle or aircraft
required to be registered under R.C. Chapter 4503 or 4561, and any vehicle
excepted from definition as a motor vehicle by R.C. § 4501.01(B).
   BICYCLE. Every device, other than a device that is designed solely for use
as a play vehicle by a child, that is propelled solely by human power upon
which a person may ride, and that has two or more wheels, any of which is more
than 14 inches in diameter.
   BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine passengers,
and used for the transportation of persons other than in a ridesharing
arrangement, and every motor vehicle, automobile for hire, or funeral car,
other than a taxicab or motor vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement,
designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
   COMMERCIAL TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle having motive power designed or used
for drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load
thereon, or designed or used for drawing other vehicles while carrying a
portion of the other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both.
   CROSSWALK.
      (1)   That part of a roadway at intersections ordinarily included within
the real or projected prolongation of property lines and curb lines or, in the
absence of curbs, the edges of the traversable roadway;
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere,
distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface;
      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this definition, there
shall not be a crosswalk where the district has placed signs indicating no
crossing.
   DRIVER or OPERATOR. Any person who drives or is in actual physical control
of a vehicle.
   ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a “class 1 electric bicycle”, a “class 2 electric
bicycle”, or a “class 3 electric bicycle” as defined below.
      (1)   CLASS 1 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that
provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles per hour.
      (2)   CLASS 2 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that may
provide assistance regardless of whether the rider is pedaling and is not
capable of providing assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles
per hour.
      (3)   CLASS 3 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that
provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 28 miles per hour.
   ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE. A self-balancing two non-tandem
wheeled device that is designed to transport only one person, has an electric
propulsion system of an average of 750 watts, and when ridden on a paved level
surface by an operator who weighs 170 pounds has a maximum speed of less than
20 mph.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Emergency vehicles of municipal, township or county
departments or public utility corporations, when identified as such as required
by law, the Director of Public Safety, or local authorities, and motor vehicles
when commandeered by a police officer.
   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load thereon.
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of
two highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or
the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways that join at
any other angle might come into conflict. The junction of an alley or driveway
with a roadway or highway does not constitute an intersection unless the
roadway or highway at the junction is controlled by a traffic control device.
      (2)   If a highway includes two roadways that are 30 feet or more apart,
then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway constitutes a separate intersection. If both intersecting highways
include two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of any two
roadways of such highways constitutes a separate intersection.
      (3)   At a location controlled by a traffic control signal, regardless of
the distance between the separate intersections as described in division (2) of
this definition:
         (a)   If a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk has not been designated
on the roadway within the median between the separate intersections, the two
intersections and the roadway and median constitute one intersection;
         (b)   Where a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk line is designated
on the roadway on the intersection approach, the area within the crosswalk and
any area beyond the designated stop line or yield line constitute part of the
intersection;
         (c)   Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on the departure
from the intersection, the intersection includes the area that extends to the
far side of the crosswalk.
   LANED HIGHWAY. A highway the roadway of which is divided into two or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
   LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICE. Means a device weighing less than 100 pounds
that has handlebars, is propelled by an electric motor or human power, and has
an attainable speed on a paved level surface of not more than 20 miles per hour
when propelled by the electric motor.
   MOTOR BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine
passengers, and used for the transportation of persons other than in a
ridesharing arrangement, and every motor vehicle, automobile for hire, or
funeral car, other than a taxicab or motor vehicle used in a ridesharing
arrangement, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than muscular
power or power collected from overhead electric trolley wires, except motorized
bicycles, electric bicycles, road rollers, traction engines, power shovels,
power cranes, and other equipment used in construction work, and not designed
for or employed in general highway transportation, hole-digging machinery,
well-drilling machinery, ditch-digging machinery, farm machinery, and trailers
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 mph or
less.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat or
saddle for the use of the operator and designed to travel on not more than
three wheels in contact with the ground, including but not limited to motor
vehicles known as “motor-driven cycle”, “motor scooter”, “autocycle”, “cab-
enclosed motorcycle”, or “motorcycle” without regard to weight or brake
horsepower.
   MOTORIZED BICYCLE or MOPED. Any vehicle having either two tandem wheels or
one wheel in the front and two wheels in the rear, that may be pedaled, and
that is equipped with a helper motor of not more than 50 cubic centimeters
piston displacement that produces not more than one brake horsepower and is
capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of not greater than 20 mph on a
level surface. The terms do not include an electric bicycle.
   MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR. Any self-propelled vehicle designed for, and used by,
a person with a disability and that is incapable of a speed in excess of eight
mph.
   OPERATE. To cause or have caused movement of a vehicle.
   PARKING or PARKED. The standing of a vehicle upon a street, road, alley,
highway or public ground, whether accompanied or unaccompanied by a driver, but
does not include the temporary standing of a vehicle for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or loading merchandise or passengers.
   PASSENGER CAR. Any motor vehicle that is designed and used for carrying not
more than nine persons and includes any motor vehicle that is designed and used
for carrying not more than 15 persons in a ridesharing arrangement.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any natural person afoot. The term includes a personal delivery
device as defined in R.C. § 4511.513 unless the context clearly suggests
otherwise.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or
to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations, including specifically,
park rangers.
   PREDICATE MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAFFIC OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12, 4511.132,
4511.16, 4511.20, 4511.201, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32,
4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40,
4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451,
4511.452, 4511.46, 4511.47, 4511.48, 4511.481, 4511.49, 4511.50, 4511.511,
4511.53, 4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.56, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60,
4511.61, 4511.64, 4511.66, 4511.661, 4511.68, 4511.70, 4511.701, 4511.71,
4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, 4511.73, 4511.763, 4511.771, 4511.78, or
4511.84;
      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.17(A)(2), 4511.51(A) through (D), or
4511.74(A);
      (3)   A violation of any provision of R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.76 for
which no penalty otherwise is provided in the section that contains the
provision violated;
      (4)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.214;
      (5)   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any section or provision set forth or described in division (1),
(2),(3), or (4) of this definition.
   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Any of the following:
      (1)   Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under contract to
a municipality, township, or county, and private ambulances and nontransport
vehicles bearing license plates issued under R.C. § 4503.49;
      (2)   Motor vehicles used by public law enforcement officers or other
persons sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state;
      (3)   Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required by the
Director of Public Safety, when used in response to fire emergency calls or to
provide emergency medical service to ill or injured persons, and when operated
by a duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer rescue service or a
volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to the rules or
directives of that service. The State Fire Marshal shall be designated by the
Director of Public Safety as the certifying agency for all public safety
vehicles described herein;
      (4)   Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor vehicles when
used by volunteer firefighters responding to emergency calls in the fire
department service when identified as required by the Director of Public
Safety;
      (5)   Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency medical service
to an ill or injured person, when certified as a public safety vehicle, shall
be considered such a vehicle when transporting an ill or injured person to a
hospital, regardless of whether such vehicle has already passed a hospital;
      (6)   Vehicles used by the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit for the
enforcement of orders and rules of the Public Utilities Commission as specified
in R.C. § 5503.34.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Either of the following, as the context requires:
      (1)   The right of a vehicle or pedestrian to proceed uninterruptedly in
a lawful manner in the direction in which it, he or she is moving, in
preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching from a different
direction into its, his or her path;
      (2)   A general term denoting land, property, or the interest therein,
usually in the configuration of a strip, acquired for or devoted to
transportation purposes. When used in this context, “right-of-way” includes the
roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch, and slopes extending to the right-of-way
limits under the control of the state or local authority.
   ROAD, STREET, or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way open to the use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of
vehicular travel.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes two or
more separate roadways, the term means any roadway separately, but not all the
roadways collectively.
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians, and protected or marked or indicated by adequate
signs so as to be plainly visible at all times.
   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or property
with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part of its own
weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by another
vehicle.
   SHARED-USE PATH. A bikeway outside the traveled way and physically separated
from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and either within
the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment. A shared-use path
also may be used by pedestrians, including skaters, joggers, users of manual
and motorized wheelchairs, and other authorized motorized and non-motorized
users. A shared-use path does not include any trail that is intended to be used
primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or other similar uses,
or any other single track or natural surface trail that has historically been
reserved for non-motorized use.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
line of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   SNOWMOBILE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for use on snow or
ice, and steered by skis, runners, or caterpillar treads.
   STOP INTERSECTION. Any intersection at one or more entrances of which stop
signs are erected.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars, and
other devices, either singly or together, while using for purposes of travel
any highway or private road open to public travel.
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE. A flagger, sign, signal, marking, or other device
used to regulate, warn, or guide traffic, placed on, over, or adjacent to a
street, highway, private road open to public travel, pedestrian facility, or
shared-use path by authority of a public agency or official having
jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road open to public travel, by
authority of the private owner or private official having jurisdiction.
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any highway traffic signal by which traffic is
alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed.
   TRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or property
wholly on its own structure, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, including
any vehicle when formed by or operated as a combination of a semitrailer and a
vehicle of the dolly type, such as that commonly known as a trailer dolly, a
vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production
materials between a local place of storage or supply and the farm when drawn or
towed on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 mph and a vehicle
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of more than ten miles or at a speed of more than 25
mph.
   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers, designed and
used to carry property.
   U-TURN. A turn that reverses the direction in which the vehicle making the
turn is proceeding.
   VEHICLE. Every device, including a motorized bicycle and an electric
bicycle, in, upon, or by which any person or property may be transported or
drawn upon a highway, except that the term does not include any motorized
wheelchair, any electric personal assistive mobility device, any low-speed
micromobility device, any personal delivery device as defined in R.C. §
4511.513, any device that is moved by power collected from overhead electric
trolley wires or that is used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, or
any device, other than a bicycle, that is moved by human power.
   WASTE COLLECTION VEHICLE. A vehicle used in the collection of garbage,
refuse, trash, or recyclable materials.
(R.C. § 4511.01)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this traffic code for which no specific
penalty is otherwise provided, shall be fined not more than $150 for a first
offense and not more than $1,000 for each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 1545.99)
CHAPTER 71: LICENSING PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
71.01   Display of license plates or validation stickers
Prohibitions
   
71.05   Prohibited acts
   
71.06   Prohibition against permitting minor to operate vehicle
   
71.07   Restriction against owner lending vehicle for use of another
   
71.08   Display of license
   
71.09   Prohibition against false statements
   
71.10   Expired plates
   
71.11   Use of unauthorized plates
   
71.12   Operating with number of former owner
   
71.13   Resident operating with number issued by foreign state
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.01 DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES OR VALIDATION STICKERS.
   (A)   No person who is the owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall fail
to display in plain view on the rear of the motor vehicle a license plate that
displays the distinctive number and registration mark assigned to the motor
vehicle by the Ohio Director of Public Safety, including any county
identification sticker and any validation sticker when required by and issued
under R.C. §§ 4503.19 and 4503.191. However, a commercial tractor shall display
the license plate on the front of the commercial tractor.
   (B)   The license plate shall be securely fastened so as not to swing, and
shall not be covered by any material that obstructs its visibility.
   (C)   No person to whom a temporary motor vehicle license registration has
been issued for the use of a motor vehicle under R.C. § 4503.182, and no
operator of that motor vehicle, shall fail to display the temporary motor
vehicle license registration in plain view from the rear of the vehicle either
in the rear window or on an external rear surface of the motor vehicle.
   (D)   No person shall cover a temporary motor vehicle license registration
by any material that obstructs its visibility.
(R.C. § 4503.21(A)) Penalty, see §
70.99
PROHIBITIONS
§ 71.05 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   No person shall do any of the following:
   (A)   Display or cause or permit to be displayed, or possess any
identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit
knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled, suspended, or
altered;
   (B)   Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly permit a person
not entitled thereto to use any identification card, driver’s or commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver’s license
temporary instruction permit issued to the person so lending or permitting the
use thereof;
   (C)   Display, or represent as one’s own, any identification card, driver’s
or commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit not issued to the person so
displaying the same;
   (D)   Fail to surrender to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, upon the
Registrar’s demand, any identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit that has been suspended or canceled;
   (E)   In any application for an identification card, driver’s or commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial driver’s license
temporary instruction permit or any renewal, reprint, or duplicate thereof,
knowingly conceal a material fact or present any physician’s statement required
under R.C. § 4507.08 or 4507.081 when knowing the same to be false or
fictitious.
(R.C. § 4507.30) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.06 PROHIBITION AGAINST PERMITTING MINOR TO OPERATE VEHICLE.
   No person shall cause or knowingly permit any minor to drive a motor vehicle
upon a highway as an operator, unless the minor has first obtained a license or
permit to drive a motor vehicle under R.C. Chapter 4507.
(R.C. § 4507.31) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.07 RESTRICTION AGAINST OWNER LENDING VEHICLE FOR USE OF ANOTHER.
   (A)   No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or under
the person’s control to be driven by another if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person does not have a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or valid nonresident driving privileges;
      (2)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privileges have been suspended or canceled under R.C. Chapter 4510 or
any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code;
      (3)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving the motor vehicle would violate any prohibition
contained in R.C. Chapter 4509;
      (4)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving would violate R.C. § 4511.19;
      (5)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
vehicle is the subject of an immobilization waiver order issued under R.C. §
4503.235 and the other person is prohibited from operating the vehicle under
that order.
   (B)   Without limiting or precluding the consideration of any other evidence
in determining whether a violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
or (A)(5) of this section has occurred, it shall be prima facie evidence that
the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator of the
motor vehicle owned by the offender or under the offender’s control is in a
category described in division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of
this section if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (A)(1), (A)(3), or (A)(5) of this section, the offender and the
operator of the motor vehicle reside in the same household and are related by
consanguinity or affinity;
      (2)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (A)(2) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle reside in the same household, and the offender knows or has reasonable
cause to believe that the operator has been charged with or convicted of any
violation of law, or has committed any other act or omission, that would or
could result in the suspension or cancellation of the operator’s license,
permit, or privilege;
      (3)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (A)(4) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the offense.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful entrustment of a
motor vehicle, and shall be punished as provided in divisions (C) to (H) of
this section.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) of this section is guilty of an
unclassified offense. When the offense is unclassified, the offender shall be
sentenced pursuant to R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender
shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a
community residential sanction pursuant to R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding R.C.
§ 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and,
notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to 500 hours. The
failure of an offender to complete a term of community service imposed by the
court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. § 2705.02(A)
that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   (a)   If, within three years of a violation of division (A)(1), (A)
(2), or (A)(3) of this section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to
or been convicted of two or more violations of division (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)
(3) of this section, R.C. § 4511.203(A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3), the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree, to be prosecuted under state law.
         (b)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) or (A)(5) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree, to be prosecuted under state law.
      (3)   For any violation of this section, in addition to the penalties
imposed under this code or R.C. Chapter 2929, the court may impose a class
seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(7), and, if the vehicle involved in the offense is registered in the
name of the offender, the court may order one of the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3)(b) or (C)(3)(c)
of this section, the court may order, for 30 days, the immobilization of the
vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license
plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §
4503.233.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, the court may order,
for 60 days, the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the
impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates. If issued, the order shall be
issued and enforced under R.C. § 4503.233.
         (c)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, the court
may order the criminal forfeiture to the state of the vehicle involved in the
offense. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §
4503.234.
      (4)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for
criminal forfeiture under division (C)(3)(c) of this section is assigned or
transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in addition to or
independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the
offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National
Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine imposed under this
division (C) shall be distributed in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).
   (D)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle, the court
shall not release the vehicle from the immobilization before the termination of
the period of immobilization ordered unless the court is presented with current
proof of financial responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
   (E)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle, upon receipt
of the order from the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor any
deputy registrar shall accept any application for the registration or transfer
of registration of any motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the
order. The period of denial shall be five years after the date the order is
issued, unless, during that five-year period, the court with jurisdiction of
the offense that resulted in the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies
the Registrar of the termination. If the court terminates the forfeiture and
notifies the Registrar, the Registrar shall take all necessary measures to
permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to
transfer the registration of the vehicle.
   (F)   This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or motor
vehicle leasing dealers, as defined in R.C. § 4549.65.
   (G)   Evidence of a conviction of, plea of guilty to, or adjudication as a
delinquent child for a violation of this section shall not be admissible as
evidence in any civil action that involves the offender
or delinquent child who is the subject of the conviction, plea, or adjudication
and that arises from the wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle.
   (H)   For purposes of this section, a vehicle is owned by a person if, at
the time of a violation of this section, the vehicle is registered in the
person’s name.
(R.C. § 4511.203) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.08 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall display the operator’s driver’s
license, or furnish satisfactory proof that the operator has a driver’s
license, upon demand of any peace officer or of any person damaged or injured
in any collision in which the licensee may be involved. When a demand is
properly made, and the operator has the operator’s driver’s license on or about
the operator’s person, the operator shall not refuse to display the license. A
person’s failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that the person is licensed
under R.C. Chapter 4507 when the person does not have the person’s license on
or about the person’s person shall be prima facie evidence of the person’s not
having obtained a driver’s license.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an offense. The offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28
(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and notwithstanding R.C. §
2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant to R.C. § 2929.27(C) to
serve a term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an
offender to complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be
punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be
filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or R.C. § 4507.35, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree, to be
prosecuted under state law.
(R.C. § 4507.35) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.09 PROHIBITION AGAINST FALSE STATEMENTS.
   No person shall knowingly make a false statement to any matter or thing
required by the provisions of this traffic code.
(R.C. § 4507.36) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.10 EXPIRED PLATES.
   Except as otherwise provided by R.C. §§ 4503.103, 4503.107, 4503.173,
4503.41, 4503.43, and 4503.46, no person who is the owner or chauffeur of a
motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways shall fail
to file annually the application for registration or to pay the tax therefor.
(R.C. § 4503.11(A)) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.11 USE OF UNAUTHORIZED PLATES.
   (A)   No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the public roads
and highways in this park district if it displays a license plate or a
distinctive number or identification mark that meets any of the following
criteria:
      (1)   It is fictitious;
      (2)   It is a counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any distinctive
number or identification mark;
      (3)   It belongs to another motor vehicle, provided that this section
does not apply to a motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads and
highways in this park district when the motor vehicle displays license plates
that originally were issued for a motor vehicle that previously was owned by
the same person who owns the motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads
and highways in this park district during the 30-day period described in R.C. §
4503.12(A)(4).
   (B)   A person who fails to comply with the transfer of registration
provisions of R.C. § 4503.12 and is charged with a violation of that section
shall not be charged with a violation of this section.
(R.C. § 4549.08) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.12 OPERATING WITH NUMBER OF FORMER OWNER.
   No person shall operate or drive upon the highways of this park district a
motor vehicle acquired from a former owner who has registered the motor
vehicle, while the motor vehicle displays the distinctive number or
identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration.
(R.C. § 4549.11) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.13 RESIDENT OPERATING WITH NUMBER ISSUED BY FOREIGN STATE.
   No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident of this state
shall operate or drive the motor vehicle upon the highways of this park
district while it displays a distinctive number or identification mark issued
by or under the authority of another state, without complying with the laws of
this state relating to the registration and identification of motor vehicles.
(R.C. § 4549.12) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
General Provisions
   
72.01   Lanes of travel upon roadways
   
72.02   Compliance with posted regulations
   
72.03   Vehicles traveling in opposite directions
   
72.04   Emergency vehicles to proceed cautiously past red or stop signal
   
72.05   Obeying traffic-control devices
   
72.06   Signal lights
   
72.07   Flashing traffic signals
   
72.08   Prohibition against alteration, defacing, or removal
   
72.09   One-way highways and rotary traffic islands
   
72.10   Rules for driving in marked lanes
   
72.11   Space between moving vehicles
   
72.12   No passing
   
72.13   Rules for turns at intersections
   
72.14   Turning in roadway prohibited
   
72.15   Rules for starting and backing vehicles
   
72.16   Turn and stop signals
   
72.17   Hand and arm signals
   
72.18   Compliance with order of police officer
   
72.19   Prohibition against resisting officer
Right-of-Way
   
72.20   Right-of-way at intersections
   
72.21   Right-of-way when turning left
   
72.22   Right-of-way at through highways; stop signs; yield signs
   
72.23   Stop at sidewalk or trail area
   
72.24   Right-of-way on public highway
   
72.25   Pedestrian on sidewalk or trail has right-of-way
   
72.26   Right-of-way of public safety vehicles
   
72.27   Animal compliance
   
72.28   Pedestrians yield right-of-way to public safety vehicle
   
72.29   Pedestrian on crosswalk has right-of-way
   
72.30   Right-of-way yielded to blind person
   
72.31   Right-of-way yielded by pedestrian
   
72.32   Intoxicated or drugged pedestrian hazard on highway
Pedestrians
   
72.35   Pedestrians
   
72.36   Pedestrian walking along highway
   
72.37   Prohibition against soliciting rides; riding on outside of vehicle
   
72.38   Electric personal assistive mobility devices
   
72.39   Operation of personal delivery device on sidewalks and crosswalks
   
72.40   Low-speed micromobility devices
Reckless Operation
   
72.45   Reckless operation of vehicles
   
72.46   Reckless operation off streets and highways; competitive operation
   
72.47   Operator to be in reasonable control
Accidents
   
72.50   Failure to stop after accident
   
72.51   Stopping after accident on other than public roads or highways
   
72.52   Stopping after accident involving damage to realty
   
72.53   Failure to report accident
Prohibitions
   
72.55   Obstruction and interference affecting view and control of driver
   
72.56   Occupying travel trailer, fifth wheel vehicle, or manufactured or
mobile home while in motion
   
72.57   Vehicles on road only
   
72.58   Truck prohibitions
   
72.59   Obstructing passage of other vehicles
   
72.60   Following an emergency or public vehicle is prohibited
   
72.61   Slow speed
   
72.62   Prohibition against placing injurious material on highway
   
72.63   Transporting child not in child-restraint system prohibited
   
72.64   Occupant restraining devices
   
72.65   Street racing defined; prohibited
   
72.66   Prohibition against driving through safety zone
   
72.67   Snowmobile prohibition
   
72.68   Speed limit
   
72.69   Operating motor vehicles while wearing earphones or earplugs
   
72.70   Texting while driving prohibited
   
72.71   Use of electronic wireless communication devices by minors or
probationary drivers while driving prohibited
Vehicle Permit
   
72.75   Permit required
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.01 LANES OF TRAVEL UPON ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction, or when making a left turn under the rules governing such movements;
      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      (3)   When driving upon a roadway divided into three or more marked lanes
for traffic under the rules applicable thereon;
      (4)   When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for
one-way traffic;
      (5)   When otherwise directed by a park ranger, other official within the
park, or traffic-control device.
   (B)   (1)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the
prevailing and lawful speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available
for traffic, and far enough to the right to allow passing by faster vehicles if
such passing is safe and reasonable, except under any of the following
circumstances:
         (a)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction;
         (b)   When preparing for a left turn;
         (c)   When the driver must necessarily drive in a lane other than the
right-hand lane to continue on the driver’s intended route.
      (2)   Nothing in division (B)(1) of this section requires a driver of a
slower vehicle to compromise the driver’s safety to allow overtaking by a
faster vehicle.
   (C)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and
providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the
left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left of the center of
the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the lanes, or
except as permitted under division (A)(2) of this section. This division (C)
shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the center line in making
a left turn into or from an alley, private road, or driveway.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.25) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.02 COMPLIANCE WITH POSTED REGULATIONS.
   No person shall drive or propel any vehicle along or over any park road
without complying with all traffic signs and all posted traffic regulations.
(Prior by-law § 8F) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.03 VEHICLES TRAVELING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   (A)   Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass
each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one
line of traffic in each direction, each operator shall give to the other one-
half of the main traveled portion of the roadway or as nearly one-half as is
reasonably possible.
   (B)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.26) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.04 EMERGENCY VEHICLES TO PROCEED CAUTIOUSLY PAST RED OR STOP SIGNAL.
   (A)   The driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any
stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety to traffic, but may proceed
cautiously past the red or stop sign or signal with due regard for the safety
of all persons using the street or highway.
   (B)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.05 OBEYING TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of
any traffic-control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this
traffic code, unless at the time otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (B)   No provision of this traffic code for which signs are required shall
be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the
alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular
section of this traffic code does not state that signs are required, that
section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.12) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.06 SIGNAL LIGHTS.
   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting
different colored lights, or colored lighted arrows, successively one at a time
or in combination, only the colors green, red, and yellow shall be used, except
for special pedestrian signals carrying words or symbols, and these lights
shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows.
   (A)   Steady green signal indication.
      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal indication
is permitted to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a U-turn
movement except as such movement is modified by a lane-use sign, turn
prohibition sign, lane marking, roadway design, separate turn signal
indication, or other traffic control device. Such vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left or making a U-turn movement, shall yield the
right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a U-turn
movement to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching
from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the
intersection.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal indication, displayed
alone or in combination with another signal indication, is permitted to
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications displayed at
the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left
or making a U-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the
following:
         (a)   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
         (b)   Other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (3)   (a)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication,
as provided in R.C. § 4511.14, pedestrians facing a circular green signal
indication are permitted to proceed across the roadway within any marked or
unmarked associated crosswalk. The pedestrian shall yield the right- of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection or so close as to create an immediate
hazard at the time that the green signal indication is first displayed.
         (b)   Pedestrians facing a green arrow signal indication, unless
otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control
device, shall not cross the roadway.
   (B)   Steady yellow signal indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow signal indication
is thereby warned that the related green movement or the related flashing arrow
movement is being terminated or that a steady red signal indication will be
exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection. The provisions governing vehicular operation under the movement
being terminated shall continue to apply while the steady circular yellow
signal indication is displayed.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow arrow signal indication is
thereby warned that the related green arrow movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated. The provisions governing vehicular
operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while the
steady yellow arrow signal indication is displayed.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal
indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device, shall not start to
cross the roadway.
   (C)   Steady red signal indication.
      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal
indication, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted
by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, traffic shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before
entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication
to proceed is displayed except as provided in divisions (C)(1), (C)(2), and (C)
(3) of this section.
         (b)   Except when a traffic control device is in place prohibiting a
turn on red or a steady red arrow signal indication is displayed, vehicular
traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication is permitted, after
stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-
way street into a one-way street. The right to proceed with the turn shall be
subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a stop
sign.
      (2)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication
shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow
and, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted by
another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before entering the
intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication or other
traffic control device permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is
displayed.
         (b)   When a traffic control device is in place permitting a turn on a
steady red arrow signal indication, vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow
indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to turn
right, or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street. The right
to proceed with the turn shall be limited to the direction indicated by the
arrow and shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a
stop at a stop sign.
      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device, pedestrians facing
a steady circular red or steady red arrow signal indication shall not enter the
roadway.
      (4)   Local authorities may prohibit a right or a left turn against a
steady red signal at any intersection, which shall be effective when signs
giving notice thereof are posted at the intersection.
   (D)   Location other than an intersection. In the event an official traffic-
control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection,
the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those
provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required
shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop
shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be
made at the signal.
(R.C. § 4511.13) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.07 FLASHING TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
   (A)   Flashing yellow signal indication.
      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing
a flashing circular yellow signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter
the intersection to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a U-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by lane-use signs, turn
prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway design, separate turn signal
indications, or other traffic control devices. Such vehicular traffic,
including vehicles turning right or left or making a U-turn movement, shall
yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a U-turn
to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (2)   (a)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing
a flashing yellow arrow signal indication, displayed alone or in combination
with another signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or other such
movement as is permitted by other signal indications displayed at the same
time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or
making a U-turn, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a U-turn
to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing any flashing yellow signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.
      (4)   When a flashing circular yellow signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory or warning requirements of the other traffic
control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently
applicable.
   (B)   Flashing red signal indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular red signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. The right to proceed
shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing any flashing red signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing red signal indication is first displayed.
      (3)   When a flashing circular red signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory requirements of the other traffic control
device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently applicable.
Use of this signal indication shall be limited to supplementing stop, do not
enter, or wrong way signs, and to applications where compliance with the
supplemented traffic control device requires a stop at a designated point.
   (C)   Railroad grade-crossings. This section does not apply at railroad
grade-crossings. Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade
crossings shall be governed by R.C. §§ 4511.61 and 4511.62.
(R.C. § 4511.13) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.08 PROHIBITION AGAINST ALTERATION, DEFACING, OR REMOVAL.
   No person, without lawful authority, shall do any of the following:
   (A)   Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly
tamper with any traffic-control device, any railroad sign or signal, or any
inscription, shield, or insignia on the device, sign, or signal, or any part of
the device, sign, or signal;
   (B)   Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied pavement marking
material on the surface of a roadway while the marking material is in an
undried condition, and is marked by flags, markers, signs, or other devices
intended to protect it;
   (C)   Knowingly move, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with a
manhole cover.
(R.C. § 4511.17) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.09 ONE-WAY HIGHWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (A)   The park district may designate any highway or any separate roadway
under its jurisdiction for one-way traffic, and shall erect appropriate signs
giving notice thereof.
   (B)   Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way traffic, a
vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
   (C)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only
to the right of the rotary traffic island.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.32) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.10 RULES FOR DRIVING IN MARKED LANES.
   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes
for traffic, or wherever within the park district traffic is lawfully moving in
two or more substantially continuous lines in the same direction, the following
rules apply.
   (A)   A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as is practicable, entirely
within a single lane or line of traffic and shall not be moved from the lane or
line until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with
safety.
   (B)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for the
two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane,
except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is clearly
visible and the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or when
preparing for a left turn, or where the center lane is at the time allocated
exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding, and
is posted with signs to give notice of such allocation.
   (C)   Official signs may be erected directing specified traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction, regardless of the center of the roadway, or restricting
the use of a particular lane to only buses during certain hours or during all
hours, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of such signs.
   (D)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey
the directions of every such device.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.33) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.11 SPACE BETWEEN MOVING VEHICLES.
   (A)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more
closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of the
vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
   (B)   The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle,
when traveling upon a roadway outside a business or residence district, shall
maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions permit, between the vehicle
and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor vehicle may enter and occupy
the space without danger. This division (B) does not prevent overtaking and
passing nor does it apply to any lane specially designated for use by trucks.
   (C)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business or
residence district in a caravan or motorcade shall maintain a sufficient space
between the vehicles so an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy the space
without danger. This division shall not apply to funeral processions.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.34) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.12 NO PASSING.
   No person, while operating a vehicle on a park road, except authorized
agents in park vehicles, shall pass another moving vehicle on the left, except
as defined in §
72.01.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.13 RULES FOR TURNS AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall be
governed by the following rules.
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
center line thereof and by passing to the right of the center line where it
enters the
intersection, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made
so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway
being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in that
portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection.
      (3)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on
one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at
any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of the
vehicle, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so
as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left hand lane
of the roadway being entered lawfully available to traffic moving in that lane.
   (B)   The park district may cause markers, buttons, or signs to be placed
within or adjacent to intersections, and thereby require and direct that a
different course from that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles
turning at an intersection, and when markers, buttons, or signs are so placed,
no operator of a vehicle shall turn the vehicle at an intersection other than
as directed and required by the markers, buttons, or signs.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.36) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.14 TURNING IN ROADWAY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.13 and division (B) of this section,
no vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any
curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, if such vehicle
cannot be seen within 500 feet by the driver of any other vehicle approaching
from either direction.
   (B)   The driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, may turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction. This division applies only when the emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle, and when the driver of the vehicle is giving an audible signal by
siren, exhaust whistle, or bell. This division does not relieve the driver of
an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.37) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.15 RULES FOR STARTING AND BACKING VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked
until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.
   (B)   Before backing, operators of vehicles shall give ample warning, and
while backing they shall exercise vigilance not to injure person or property on
the street or highway.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.38) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.16 TURN AND STOP SIGNALS.
   (A)   No person shall turn a vehicle or move right or left upon a highway
unless and until the person has exercised due care to ascertain that the
movement can be made with reasonable safety, nor without giving an appropriate
signal in the manner hereinafter provided.
   (B)   When required, a signal of intention to turn or move right or left
shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by
the vehicle before turning, except that in the case of a person operating a
bicycle or electric bicycle, the signal shall be made not less than one time
but is not required to be continuous. A bicycle or electric bicycle operator is
not required to make a signal if the bicycle is in a designated turn lane, and
a signal shall not be given when the operator’s hands are needed for the safe
operation of the bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (C)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to
give a signal.
   (D)   Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given either
by means of the hand and arm, or by signal lights that clearly indicate to both
approaching and following traffic the intention to turn or move right or left,
except that any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with, and
the required signal shall be given by, signal lights when the distance from the
center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body,
cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when the distance from
the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or
load thereof exceeds 14 feet, whether a single vehicle or a combination of
vehicles.
   (E)   The signal lights required by this section shall not be flashed on one
side only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or “do pass” signal to
operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear, nor be flashed on one
side only of a parked vehicle except as may be necessary for compliance with
this section.
   (F)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.39) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.17 HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, all signals
required by the provisions of this traffic code, when given by hand and arm,
shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and
the signals shall indicate as follows:
      (1)   Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally;
      (2)   Right turn, hand and arm extended upward;
      (3)   Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward.
   (B)   As an alternative to division (A)(2) of this section, a person
operating a bicycle or electric bicycle may give a right turn signal by
extending the right hand and arm horizontally and to the right side of the
bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.40) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.18 COMPLIANCE WITH ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER.
   (A) No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of any
ranger or police officer invested with authority to direct, control, or
regulate traffic.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to elude or
flee a ranger or police officer after receiving a visible or audible signal
from a ranger or police officer to bring the person’s motor vehicle to a stop.
(R.C. § 2921.331) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.19 PROHIBITION AGAINST RESISTING OFFICER.
   No person shall resist, hinder, obstruct, or abuse any sheriff, constable,
or other official while that official is attempting to arrest offenders under
any provision of this Title VII. No person shall interfere with any person
charged under any provision of this Title VII with the enforcement of the law
relative to park roads.
(R.C. § 4513.36) Penalty, see §
70.99
RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 72.20 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different
streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle
on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (B)   The right-of-way rule declared in division (A) of this section is
modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this traffic code or
R.C. Chapter 4511.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.41) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.21 RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT.
   (A)   The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an
intersection or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-
of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within
the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   (B)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.42) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.22 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT THROUGH HIGHWAYS; STOP SIGNS; YIELD SIGNS.
   (A)   Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer, every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-
way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so
closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is
moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a
speed reasonable for the existing conditions, and if required for safety to
stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After
slowing, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways. Whenever a driver is involved in a
collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways, after
driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision shall be prima facie
evidence of the driver’s failure to yield the right-of-way.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.43) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.23 STOP AT SIDEWALK OR TRAIL AREA.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private
road, or driveway within a business or residence district shall stop the
vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or trail or onto the
sidewalk or trail area extending across the alley, building entrance, road, or
driveway, or in the event there is no sidewalk or trail area, shall stop at the
point nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic thereon.
   (B)   If the offender violates division (A) of this section while distracted
and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C.
§ 4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.431) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.24 RIGHT-OF-WAY ON PUBLIC HIGHWAY.
   (A)   The operator of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from any
place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all traffic
approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed.
   (B)   If the offender violates division (A) of this section while distracted
and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C.
§ 4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.44) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.25 PEDESTRIAN ON SIDEWALK OR TRAIL HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
on a sidewalk or on a trail.
   (B)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.441) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.26 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner’s vehicle,
equipped with at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible
under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of
the vehicle, and the driver is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust
whistle, or bell, no driver of any other vehicle shall fail to yield the right-
of-way, immediately drive if practical to a position parallel to, and as close
as possible to, the right edge or curb of the highway clear of any
intersection, and stop and remain in that position until the public safety
vehicle or coroner’s vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer.
   (B)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle or
coroner’s vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.45) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.27 ANIMAL COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   No person, except authorized agents of the Park Board, or persons
having specific written permission from the Chief Executive Officer, shall ride
any horse or other animal within the park, except upon bridle paths designated
and established for horseback riders and in accordance with the rules adopted
by the Board.
   (B)   Every person riding, driving, or leading an animal upon a roadway is
subject to the provisions of this traffic code, applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, except those provisions of this traffic code which by their nature are
inapplicable.
(R.C. § 4511.05) (Prior by-law § 86) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.28 PEDESTRIANS YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY TO PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE.
   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of a public safety vehicle, as stated in §
72.26, every pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the public safety
vehicle.
   (B)   This section shall not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle
from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian.
(R.C. § 4511.452) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.29 PEDESTRIAN ON CROSSWALK HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   When traffic-control signals are not in place, not in operation, or
are not clearly assigning the right-of-way, the driver of a vehicle shall yield
the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a
pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon
the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the
pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as
to be in danger.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply under the conditions
stated in §
72.31(B).
   (D)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.46) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.30 RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED TO BLIND PERSON.
   (A)   (1)   As used in this section BLIND PERSON or BLIND PEDESTRIAN means a
person having not more than 20/200 visual acuity in the better eye with
correcting lenses, or visual acuity greater than 20/200, but with a limitation
in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field
subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees.
      (2)   The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to every
blind pedestrian guided by a guide dog, or carrying a cane which is
predominantly white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip.
   (B)   No person, other than a blind person, while on any public highway,
street, alley, or other public thoroughfare, shall carry a white or metallic
cane, with or without a red tip.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.47) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.31 RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED BY PEDESTRIAN.
   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all traffic upon the roadway.
   (C)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (D)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic-control devices; and when authorized to cross
diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official
traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
   (E)   This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle from
exercising due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway.
(R.C. § 4511.48) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.32 INTOXICATED OR DRUGGED PEDESTRIAN HAZARD ON HIGHWAY.
   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol, any drug of abuse, or
any combination of them to a degree that renders the pedestrian a hazard shall
not walk or be upon a highway.
(R.C. § 4511.481) Penalty, see §
70.99
PEDESTRIANS
§ 72.35 PEDESTRIANS.
   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of trails
or crosswalks.
(R.C. § 4511.49) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.36 PEDESTRIAN WALKING ALONG HIGHWAY.
   (A)   Where a sidewalk or trail is provided and its use is practicable, it
shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk, jog, or run along and upon an
adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where a sidewalk or trail is not available, any pedestrian walking,
jogging, or running along and upon a highway shall walk, jog, or run only on a
shoulder, as far as practicable from the edge of the roadway.
   (C)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a trail nor a shoulder is available, any
pedestrian walking, jogging, or running along and upon a highway shall walk,
jog, or run as near as practicable to an outside edge of the roadway, and, if
on a two-way roadway, shall walk, jog, or run only on the left side of the
roadway.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided, any pedestrian upon a roadway shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(R.C. § 4511.50) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.37 PROHIBITION AGAINST SOLICITING RIDES; RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person while on a roadway outside a safety zone shall solicit a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting
employment, business, or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall hang onto or ride on the outside of any motor vehicle
while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making
repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or street
maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency.
   (D)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto or ride on
the outside of any motor vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except
mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers
performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under
authority of a public agency.
   (E)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall knowingly permit
any person who has not attained the age of 16 years to ride in the unenclosed
or unroofed cargo storage area of the driver’s vehicle if the vehicle is
traveling faster than 25 mph, unless either of the following applies:
      (1)   The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a properly
secured seat to which is attached a seat safety belt that is in compliance with
federal standards for an occupant restraining device as defined in R.C. §
4513.263(A)(2), the seat and seat safety belt were installed at the time the
vehicle was originally assembled, and the person riding in the cargo storage
area is in the seat and is wearing the seat safety belt;
      (2)   An emergency exists that threatens the life of the driver or the
person being transported in the cargo storage area of the truck, trailer, or
semitrailer.
   (F)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall permit any person,
except for those workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance
or construction under authority of a public agency, to ride in the cargo
storage area or on a tailgate of the driver’s vehicle while the tailgate is
unlatched.
(R.C. § 4511.51) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.38 ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.
   (A)   No person shall operate an electric personal assistive mobility device
on any park road or any trail or path prohibited to motorized vehicles, except
devices specifically designed for and being used by a person with disabilities
or with specific written permit from the Chief Executive Officer.
   (B)   (1)   Electric personal assistive mobility devices may be operated on
the public streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions of roadways set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this traffic code that by their nature are applicable to an electric personal
assistive mobility device apply to the device and the person operating it
whenever it is operated upon any public street, highway, sidewalk, or path or
upon any portion of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
      (3)   The park district may regulate or prohibit the operation of
electric personal assistive mobility devices on public streets, highways,
sidewalks, and paths, or portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use
of bicycles, under its jurisdiction.
   (C)   No operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and human-powered
vehicles at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         (a)   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet;
         (b)   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
      (4)   Operate the device on any portion of a street or highway that has
an established speed limit of 55 mph or more;
      (5)   Operate the device upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of
pedestrians or other specialized use when an appropriate sign giving notice of
the specialized use is posted on the path;
      (6)   If under 18 years of age, operate the device unless wearing a
protective helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened;
      (7)   If under 16 years of age, operate the device unless, during the
operation, the person is under the direct visual and audible supervision of
another person who is 18 years of age or older and is responsible for the
immediate care of the person under 16 years of age.
   (D)   No person who is under 14 years of age shall operate an electric
personal assistive mobility device.
   (E)   No person shall distribute or sell an electric personal assistive
mobility device unless the device is accompanied by a written statement that is
substantially equivalent to the following: “WARNING: TO REDUCE THE RISK OF
SERIOUS INJURY, USE ONLY WHILE WEARING FULL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT – HELMET,
WRIST GUARDS, ELBOW PADS, AND KNEE PADS”.
   (F)   Nothing in this section affects or shall be construed to affect any
rule of the Director of Natural Resources or a Board of Park District
Commissioners governing the operation of vehicles on lands under the control of
the Chief Executive Officer or Board, as applicable.
   (G)   Penalty. Whoever violates division (B) or (C) of this section and
shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   The offender shall be fined $10;
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of division (B) or (C) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to imposing
the fine required under this section, shall do one of the following:
         (a)   Order the impoundment for not less than one day but not more
than 30 days of the electric personal assistive mobility device that was
involved in the current violation of that division. The court shall order the
device to be impounded at a safe indoor location designated by the court and
may assess storage fees of not more than $5 per day; provided the total
storage, processing, and release fees assessed against the offender or the
device in connection with the device’s impoundment or subsequent release shall
not exceed $50.
         (b)    If the court does not issue an impoundment order pursuant to
this section, issue an order prohibiting the offender from operating any
electric personal assistive mobility device on the public streets, highways,
sidewalks, and paths and portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use
of bicycles for not less than one day but not more than 30 days.
(R.C. § 4511.512) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.39 OPERATION OF PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE ON SIDEWALKS AND CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ELIGIBLE ENTITY. Means a corporation, partnership, association, firm,
sole proprietorship, or other entity engaged in business.
      PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE. Means an electrically powered device to which
all of the following apply:
         (a)   The device is intended primarily to transport property and cargo
on sidewalks and crosswalks.
         (b)   The device weighs less than 250 pounds excluding any property or
cargo being carried in the device.
         (c)   The device has a maximum speed of ten miles per hour.
         (d)   The device is equipped with technology that enables the
operation of the device with active control or monitoring by a person, without
active control or monitoring by a person, or both with or without active
control or monitoring by a person.
      PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE OPERATOR. Means an agent of an eligible entity
who exercises direct physical control over, or monitoring of, the navigation
and operation of a personal delivery device. The phrase does not include, with
respect to a delivery or other service rendered by a personal delivery device,
the person who requests the delivery or service. The phrase also does not
include a person who only arranges for and dispatches a personal delivery
device for a delivery or other service.
   (B)   An eligible entity may operate a personal delivery device on sidewalks
and crosswalks so long as all of the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The personal delivery device is operated in accordance with all
regulations, if any, established by each local authority within which the
personal delivery device is operated.
      (2)   A personal delivery device operator is actively controlling or
monitoring the navigation and operation of the personal delivery device.
      (3)   The eligible entity maintains an insurance policy that includes
general liability coverage of not less than $100,000 for damages arising from
the operation of the personal delivery device by the eligible entity and any
agent of the eligible entity.
      (4)   The device is equipped with all of the following:
         (a)   A marker that clearly identifies the name and contact
information of the eligible entity operating the personal delivery device and a
unique identification number;
         (b)   A braking system that enables the personal delivery device to
come to a controlled stop;
         (c)   If the personal delivery device is being operated between sunset
and sunrise, a light on both the front and rear of the personal delivery device
that is visible in clear weather from a distance of at least 500 feet to the
front and rear of the personal delivery device when directly in front of low
beams of headlights on a motor vehicle.
   (C)   No personal delivery device operator shall allow a personal delivery
device to do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with traffic or pedestrian control devices and
signals;
      (2)   Unreasonably interfere with pedestrians or traffic;
      (3)   Transport any hazardous material that would require a permit issued
by the Public Utilities Commission;
      (4)   Operate on a street or highway, except when crossing the street or
highway within a crosswalk.
   (D)   A personal delivery device has all of the rights and obligations
applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances, except that a personal
delivery device shall yield the right-of-way to human pedestrians on sidewalks
and crosswalks.
   (E)   (1)   No person shall operate a personal delivery device unless the
person is authorized to do so under this section and complies with the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   An eligible entity is responsible for both of the following:
         (a)   Any violation of this section that is committed by a personal
delivery device operator; and
         (b)   Any other circumstance, including a technological malfunction,
in which a personal delivery device operates in a manner prohibited by
divisions (C)(1) to (C)(4) of this section.
(R.C. § 4511.513) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.40 LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   A low-speed micromobility device may be operated on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks, and shared-use paths, and may be operated on any
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance
with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this title that by their nature could apply to a low-speed micromobility device
do apply to the device and the person operating it whenever it is operated upon
any public street, highway, sidewalk, or shared-use path, or upon any portion
of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (B)   No operator of a low-speed micromobility device shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         (a)   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet;
         (b)   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
   (C)   (1)   No person who is under 16 years of age shall rent a low-speed
micromobility device.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly rent a low-speed micromobility device to
a person who is under 16 years of age.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly rent a low-speed micromobility device on
behalf of a person who is under 16 years of age.
   (D)   No person shall operate a low-speed micromobility device at a speed
greater than 20 miles per hour.
   (E)   Notwithstanding division (A)(1) of this section, the municipality,
county, township, metropolitan park district, township park district,
recreation district, or any division of the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources if the division has the approval of the Ohio Director of Natural
Resources may do any of the following:
      (1)   Regulate or prohibit the operation of low-speed micromobility
devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks, and shared-use paths, and
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, under its
jurisdiction;
      (2)   Include low-speed micromobility devices that are adapted to expand
access for people with various physical limitations into a shared bicycle,
shared electric bicycle, or similar vehicle sharing program, under its
jurisdiction;
      (3)   Require the owner or operator of a low-speed micromobility device
rental service or low-speed micromobility device sharing program to maintain
commercial general liability insurance related to the operation of the devices,
with limits of up to $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 per aggregate.
(R.C. § 4511.514) Penalty, see §
70.99
RECKLESS OPERATION
§ 72.45 RECKLESS OPERATION OF VEHICLES.
   No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway in willful or
wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property.
(R.C. § 4511.20) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.46 RECKLESS OPERATION OFF STREETS AND HIGHWAYS; COMPETITIVE OPERATION.
   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or private property
other than streets or highways in willful or wanton disregard of the safety of
persons or property.
   (B)   This section does not apply to the competitive operation of vehicles
on public or private property when the owner of such property knowingly permits
such operation thereon.
(R.C. § 4511.201) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.47 OPERATOR TO BE IN REASONABLE CONTROL.
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, agricultural tractor, or
agricultural tractor that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of
farm machinery on any street, highway, or property open to the public for
vehicular traffic without being in reasonable control of the vehicle,
agricultural tractor, or unit of farm machinery.
(R.C. § 4511.202) Penalty, see §
70.99
ACCIDENTS
§ 72.50 FAILURE TO STOP AFTER ACCIDENT.
   (A)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision with persons or
property on a public road or highway, the operator of the motor vehicle, having
knowledge of the accident or collision, immediately shall stop the operator’s
motor vehicle at the scene of the accident or collision. The operator shall
remain at the scene of the accident or collision until the operator has given
the operator’s name and address and, if the operator is not the owner, the name
and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together with the registered
number of that motor vehicle, to all of the following:
      (1)   Any person injured in the accident or collision;
      (2)   The operator, occupant, owner, or attendant of any motor vehicle
damaged in the accident or collision;
      (3)   The police officer at the scene of the accident or collision.
   (B)   In the event an injured person is unable to comprehend and record the
information required to be given under division (A) of this section, the other
operator involved in the accident or collision shall notify the nearest police
authority concerning the location of the accident or collision, and the
operator’s name, address, and the registered number of the motor vehicle the
operator was operating. The operator shall remain at the scene of the accident
or collision until a police officer arrives, unless removed from the scene by
an emergency vehicle operated by a political subdivision or an ambulance.
   (C)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended motor
vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely attach
the information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a
conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle.
(R.C. § 4549.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.51 STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT ON OTHER THAN PUBLIC ROADS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision resulting in
injury or damage to persons or property on any public or private property other
than a public road or highway, the operator of the motor vehicle, having
knowledge of the accident or collision, shall stop at the scene of the accident
or collision. Upon request of any person who is injured or damaged, or any
other person, the operator shall give that person the operator’s name and
address, and, if the operator is not the owner, the name and address of the
owner of that motor vehicle, together with the registered number of that motor
vehicle, and, if available, exhibit the operator’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license.
   (B)   If the operator of the motor vehicle involved in the accident or
collision does not provide the information specified in division (A) of this
section, the operator shall give that information, within 24 hours after the
accident or collision, to the police department of the city or village in which
the accident or collision occurred, or if it occurred outside the corporate
limits of a city or village, to the sheriff of the county in which the accident
or collision occurred.
   (C)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended motor
vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely attach
the information required under division (A) of this section, in writing, to a
conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle.
(R.C. § 4549.021) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.52 STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT INVOLVING DAMAGE TO REALTY.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in damage
to real property, or personal property attached to real property, legally upon
or adjacent to a public road or highway immediately shall stop and take
reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of the
property of that fact, of the driver’s name and address, and of the
registration number of vehicle the driver is driving and, upon request and if
available, shall exhibit the driver’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
   (B)   If the owner or person in charge of the property cannot be located
after reasonable search, the driver of the vehicle involved in the accident
resulting in damage to the property, within 24 hours after accident, shall
forward to the park district the same information required to be given to the
owner or person in control of the property and give the location of the
accident and a description of the damage insofar as it is known.
(R.C. § 4549.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.53 FAILURE TO REPORT ACCIDENT.
   No person shall fail to report a motor vehicle accident as required under
state or local law.
(R.C. § 4509.74) Penalty, see §
70.99
PROHIBITIONS
§ 72.55 OBSTRUCTION AND INTERFERENCE AFFECTING VIEW AND CONTROL OF DRIVER.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the
driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in a position as to interfere
with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
(R.C. § 4511.70) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.56 OCCUPYING TRAVEL TRAILER, FIFTH WHEEL VEHICLE, OR MANUFACTURED OR
MOBILE HOME WHILE IN MOTION.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no person shall
occupy any travel trailer, fifth wheel trailer, or manufactured or mobile home
while it is being used as a conveyance upon a street or highway.
   (B)   (1)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a fifth wheel
trailer when both of the following apply:
         (a)   Any child riding in the fifth wheel trailer is properly secured
in the manner provided in R.C. § 4511.81.
         (b)   The operator of the vehicle towing the fifth wheel trailer has
some means of viable communication with the passengers riding in the trailer.
      (2)   As used in this division, “viable communication” includes a
cellular or satellite telephone, a radio, or any other similar electronic
wireless communications device.
(R.C. § 4511.701) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.57 VEHICLES ON ROAD ONLY.
   No portion of the park shall be used for purpose of way except roads.
Roadways, paths, walks, and trails established for pedestrian travel, shall not
be used for vehicular travel.
(Prior by-law § 8C) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.58 TRUCK PROHIBITIONS.
   No person shall drive or propel or cause to be driven or propelled along or
over any park road, any truck, commercial car, trailer, semi-trailer, pole
trailer, bus or commercial tractor, unless authorized by the Board to make
deliveries within the park, or unless engaged in work in the park that has been
contracted for with the Board, or unless delivering or picking up persons using
a truck or trailer as transportation or to or from the park area. No vehicle in
excess of five tons gross vehicular weight will be used to transport people to
or from a park area without prior written permit from the Chief Executive
Officer.
(Prior by-law § 8E) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.59 OBSTRUCTING PASSAGE OF OTHER VEHICLES.
   (A)   No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk, or drive
onto any railroad grade crossing, unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection, crosswalk, or grade crossing to accommodate the
vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles, pedestrians, or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.
   (B)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.712) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.60 FOLLOWING AN EMERGENCY OR PUBLIC VEHICLE IS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle on official business, shall not follow any emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle traveling in response to an alarm closer than 500 feet,
or drive into or park the vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus has
stopped in answer to a fire alarm, unless directed to do so by a police officer
or a firefighter.
   (B)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.72) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.61 SLOW SPEED.
   (A)   No person shall stop or operate a vehicle at such an unreasonably slow
speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic,
except when stopping or reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or to
comply with law.
   (B)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.22) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.62 PROHIBITION AGAINST PLACING INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON HIGHWAY.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a
highway, lane, road, street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails,
or other articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or animal
traveling along or upon the highway, except such substances that may be placed
upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
      (2)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any
highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the
same.
      (3)   Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a
highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the
highway from such vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a highway without
proper authority.
   (B)   No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or a
vehicle, shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway, lane, road,
street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails, or other articles
which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or animal traveling along or
upon such highway, except such substances that may be placed upon the roadway
by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
(R.C. § 4511.74) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.63 TRANSPORTING CHILD NOT IN CHILD-RESTRAINT SYSTEM PROHIBITED.
   (A)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child
restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (B)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, that is owned,
leased, or otherwise under the control of a nursery school or day-care center,
the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child restraint system
that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (C)   When any child who is less than eight years of age and less than four
feet nine inches in height, who is not required by division (A) or (B) of this
section to be secured in a child restraint system, is being transported in a
motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle, that is required
by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat
belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle
shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions on a booster seat that meets federal motor vehicle safety
standards.
   (D)   When any child who is at least eight years of age but not older than
15 years of age, and who is not otherwise required by division (A), (B), or (C)
of this section to be secured in a child restraint system or booster seat, is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle, that is required by the United States Department of Transportation to
be equipped with seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the
operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly restrained either
in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child restraint system
that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards or in an occupant restraining
device.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section or causing the
arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of division
(C) or (D) of this section, and absent another violation of law, a law
enforcement officer’s view of the interior or visual inspection of a motor
vehicle being operated on any street or highway may not be used for the purpose
of determining whether a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section has
been or is being committed.
   (F)   The Director of Public Safety shall adopt such rules as are necessary
to carry out this section.
   (G)   The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a child in a
child restraint system, a booster seat, or an occupant restraining device as
required in this section is not negligence imputable to the child, is not
admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the rights of the child
against any other person allegedly liable for injuries to the child, is not to
be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the operator of the motor
vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section, and is not
admissible as evidence in any criminal action involving the operator of the
motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
   (H)   This section does not apply when an emergency exists that threatens
the life of any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle that is being
used to transport a child who otherwise would be required to be restrained
under this section. This section does not apply to a person operating a motor
vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this state that states that the
child who otherwise would be required to be restrained under this section has a
physical impairment that makes use of a child restraint system, booster seat,
or an occupant restraining device impossible or impractical, provided that the
person operating the vehicle has safely and appropriately restrained the child
in accordance with any recommendations of the physician or chiropractor as
noted on the affidavit.
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person to
carry with the person the birth certificate of a child to prove the age of the
child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for a child showing that
the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a defense against
any ticket, citation, or summons issued for violating this section.
   (J)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A), (B), (C), or (D) of this section
shall be punished as follows, provided that the failure of an operator of a
motor vehicle to secure more than one child in a child restraint system,
booster seat, or occupant restraining device as required by this section that
occurred at the same time, on the same day, and at the same location is deemed
to be a single violation of this section: The offender shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $75.
      (2)   All fines imposed pursuant to division (J)(1) of this section shall
be forwarded to the State Treasurer for deposit in the Child Highway Safety
Fund created by R.C. § 4511.81(I).
(R.C. § 4511.81(A) - (H), (K), (L)) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.64 OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICES.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      AUTOMOBILE. Means any commercial tractor, passenger car, commercial car,
or truck that is required to be factory-equipped with an occupant restraining
device for the operator or any passenger by regulations adopted by the United
States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the “National Traffic and Motor
Vehicle Safety Act of 1966”, 80 Stat. 719, 15 U.S.C. § 1392.
      COMMERCIAL CAR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      COMMERCIAL TRACTOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE. A seat safety belt, shoulder belt, harness,
or other safety device for restraining a person who is an operator of or
passenger in an automobile and that satisfies the minimum federal vehicle
safety standards established by the United States Department of Transportation.
      PASSENGER. Any person in an automobile, other than its operator, who is
occupying a seating position for which an occupant restraining device is
provided.
      PASSENGER CAR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      TORT ACTION. A civil action for damages for injury, death, or loss to
person or property. The term includes a product liability claim, as defined in
R.C. § 2307.71, and as asbestos claim, as defined in R.C. § 2307.91, but does
not include a civil action for damages for breach of contract or another
agreement between persons.
      VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE. As used in the definitions of the terms set
forth above, VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE have the same meanings as in R.C. §
4511.01.
   (B)   Prohibited acts. No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless he or she is
wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device, or operate a school bus that has an occupant restraining
device installed for use in its operator’s seat unless he or she is wearing all
of the available elements of the device, as properly adjusted;
      (2)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless each
passenger in the automobile who is subject to the requirement set forth in
division (B)(3) of this section is wearing all of the available elements of a
properly adjusted occupant restraining device;
      (3)   Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front seat of an
automobile being operated on any street or highway unless he or she is wearing
all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining
device;
      (4)   Operate a taxicab on any street or highway unless all factory-
equipped occupant restraining devices in the taxicab are maintained in usable
form.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Division (B)(3) of this section does not apply to a person who is
required by R.C. § 4511.81 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to
be secured in a child restraint device or booster seat.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
an employee of the United States Postal Service or of a newspaper home delivery
service, during any period in which the person is engaged in the operation of
an automobile to deliver mail or newspapers to addressees.
      (3)   Divisions (B)(1) and (B)(3) of this section do not apply to a
person who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that states the following:
         (a)   That the person has a physical impairment that makes use of an
occupant restraining device impossible or impractical;
         (b)   Whether the physical impairment is temporary, permanent, or
reasonably expected to be permanent;
         (c)   If the physical impairment is temporary, how long the physical
impairment is expected to make the use of an occupant restraining device
impossible or impractical.
      (4)   Divisions (B)(1) and (B)(3) of this section do not apply to a
person who has registered with the Registrar of Motor Vehicles in accordance
with division (C)(5) of this section.
      (5)   A person who has received an affidavit under division (C)(3) of
this section stating that the person has a permanent or reasonably expected to
be permanent physical impairment that makes use of an occupant restraining
device impossible or impracticable may register with the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles attesting to that fact. Upon such registration, the Registrar shall
make that information available in the law enforcement automated data system. A
person included in the database under division (C)(5) of this section is not
required to have the affidavit obtained in accordance with division (C)(3) of
this section in their possession while operating or occupying an automobile.
      (6)   A physician or chiropractor who issues an affidavit for the
purposes of division (C)(3) or (C)(4) of this section is immune from civil
liability arising from any injury or death sustained by the person who was
issued the affidavit due to the failure of the person to wear an occupant
restraining device unless the physician or chiropractor, in issuing the
affidavit, acted in a manner that constituted willful, wanton, or reckless
misconduct.
      (7)   The Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 establishing a process for a person to be included in the
database under division (C)(5) of this section. The information provided and
included in the database under division (C)(5) of this section is not a public
record subject to inspection or copying under R.C. § 149.43.
   (D)   Officers not permitted to stop cars to determine violation.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement
officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on any street
or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of determining whether a
violation of division (B) of this section has been or is being committed or for
the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or summons for the violation or
for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for the
violation. No law enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually
inspect any automobile being operated on any street or highway for the sole
purpose of determining whether the violation has been or is being committed.
   (E)   Use of fines for educational program. All fines collected for
violations of division (B) of this section shall be forwarded to the State
Treasurer for deposit in the funds as set forth in R.C. § 4513.263(E).
   (F)   Limitations on evidence used for prosecution.
      (1)   Subject to division (F)(2) of this section, the failure of a person
to wear all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device in violation of division (B)(1) or (B)(3) of this section or
the failure of a person to ensure that each minor who is a passenger of an
automobile being operated by that person is wearing all of the available
elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device in violation of
division (B)(2) of this section shall not be considered or used by the trier of
fact in a tort action as evidence of negligence or contributory negligence.
But, the trier of fact may determine based on evidence admitted consistent with
the Ohio Rules of Evidence that the failure contributed to the harm alleged in
the tort action and may diminish a recovery of compensatory damages that
represents non-economic loss, as defined in R.C. § 2307.011, in a tort action
that could have been recovered but for the plaintiff’s failure to wear all of
the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device.
Evidence of that failure shall not be used as a basis for a criminal
prosecution of the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this
section; and shall not be admissible as evidence in a criminal action involving
the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
      (2)   If, at the time of an accident involving a passenger car equipped
with occupant restraining devices, any occupant of the passenger car who
sustained injury or death was not wearing an available occupant restraining
device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a device, or was
not wearing such a device as properly adjusted, then, consistent with the Rules
of Evidence, the fact that the occupant was not wearing the available occupant
restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a
device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted is admissible in
evidence in relation to any claim for relief in a tort action to the extent
that the claim for relief satisfies all of the following:
         (a)   It seeks to recover damages for injury or death to the occupant;
         (b)   The defendant in question is the manufacturer, designer,
distributor, or seller of the passenger car;
         (c)   The claim for relief against the defendant in question is that
the injury or death sustained by the occupant was enhanced or aggravated by
some design defect in the passenger car or that the passenger car was not
crashworthy.
   (G)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section shall be fined
$30.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) or (B)(4) shall be subject to the
penalty set forth in §
70.99.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section shall be fined
$20.
      (4)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of division (B)(4) of this section, whoever violates division
(B)(4) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree, to be
prosecuted under state law.
(R.C. § 4513.263)
Cross-reference:
   Child restraint systems, see §
72.63
§ 72.65 STREET RACING DEFINED; PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section, STREET RACING means the operation of two or
more vehicles from a point side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive
attempt to outdistance each other, or the operation of one or more vehicles
over a common selected course, from the same point to the same point, wherein
timing is made of the participating vehicles involving competitive
accelerations or speeds. Persons rendering assistance in any manner to such
competitive use of vehicles shall be equally charged as the participants. The
operation of two or more vehicles side by side either at speeds in excess of
prima facie lawful speeds established by §
72.68, or rapidly accelerating from a common starting point to a speed in
excess of such prima facie lawful speeds shall be prima facie evidence of
street racing.
   (B)   No person shall participate in street racing upon any public road,
street, or highway.
(R.C. § 4511.251) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.66 PROHIBITION AGAINST DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.
   (A)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety
zone.
   (B)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.60) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.67 SNOWMOBILE PROHIBITION.
   No person shall operate a snowmobile or “all-purpose vehicle” within the
park unless authorized by the Chief Executive Officer.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.68 SPEED LIMIT.
   (A)   No person shall drive or propel or cause to be driven or propelled
along or over any road within the park, any vehicle at a greater rate of speed
than the posted speed limit. The speed limit shall be 25 mph except where
otherwise posted.
   (B)   No person shall drive or propel or cause to be driven or propelled
along or over any road within the park, any vehicle at a speed greater than 50
mph.
   (C)   No person shall violate division (A) of this section who has been
convicted of a moving traffic violation within one year previous to the present
offense.
(Prior by-law § 8) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.69 OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLES WHILE WEARING EARPHONES OR EARPLUGS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      EARPHONES. Any device that covers all or a portion of both ears and that
does either of the following:
         (a)   Through either a physical connection to another device or a
wireless connection, provides the listener with radio programs, music, or other
information;
         (b)   Provides hearing protection.
      EARPHONES does not include speakers or other listening devices that are
built into protective headgear.
      EARPLUGS. Any device that can be inserted into one or both ears and that
does either of the following:
         (a)   Through either a physical connection to another device or a
wireless connection, provides the listener with radio programs, music, or other
information;
         (b)   Provides hearing protection.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing earphones over,
or earplugs in, both ears.
   (C)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Any person wearing a hearing aid;
      (2)   Law enforcement personnel while on duty;
      (3)   Fire Department personnel and emergency medical service personnel
while on duty;
      (4)   Any person engaged in the operation of equipment for use in the
maintenance or repair of any highway;
      (5)   Any person engaged in the operation of refuse collection equipment;
      (6)   Any person wearing earphones or earplugs for hearing protection
while operating a motorcycle.
(R.C. § 4511.84) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.70 TEXTING WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or
property open to the public for vehicular traffic while using, holding, or
physically supporting with any part of the person’s body an electronic wireless
communications device.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device to make
contact, for emergency purposes, with a law enforcement agency, hospital or
health care provider, fire department, or other similar emergency agency or
entity;
      (2)   A person driving a public safety vehicle while using an electronic
wireless communications device in the course of the person’s duties;
      (3)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device when
the person’s motor vehicle is in a stationary position and is outside a lane of
travel, at a traffic control signal that is currently directing traffic to
stop, or parked on a road or highway due to an emergency or road closure;
      (4)   A person using and holding an electronic wireless communications
device directly near the person’s ear for the purpose of making, receiving, or
conducting a telephone call, provided that the person does not manually enter
letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
      (5)   A person receiving wireless messages on an electronic wireless
communications device regarding the operation or navigation of a motor vehicle;
safety-related information, including emergency, traffic, or weather alerts; or
data used primarily by the motor vehicle, provided that the person does not
hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (6)   A person using the speaker phone function of the electronic
wireless communications device, provided that the person does not hold or
support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (7)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
navigation purposes, provided that the person does not do either of the
following during the use:
         (a)   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         (b)   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (8)   A person using a feature or function of the electronic wireless
communications device with a single touch or single swipe, provided that the
person does not do either of the following during the use:
         (a)   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         (b)   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (9)   A person operating a commercial truck while using a mobile data
terminal that transmits and receives data;
      (10)   A person operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or
on behalf of a utility, if the person is acting in response to an emergency,
power outage, or circumstance that affects the health or safety of individuals;
      (11)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device in
conjunction with a voice-operated or hands-free feature or function of the
vehicle or of the device without the use of either hand except to activate,
deactivate, or initiate the feature or function with a single touch or swipe,
provided the person does not hold or support the device with any part of the
person’s body;
      (12)   A person using technology that physically or electronically
integrates the device into the motor vehicle, provided that the person does not
do either of the following during the use:
         (a)   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         (b)   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body.
      (13)   A person storing an electronic wireless communications device in a
holster, harness, or article of clothing on the person’s body.
   (C)   If a law enforcement officer issues an offender a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of division (A) of this section, the officer shall do
both of the following:
      (1)   Report the issuance of the ticket, citation, or summons to the
officer’s law enforcement agency;
      (2)   Ensure that such report indicates the offender’s race.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
operating a motor vehicle while using an electronic wireless communication
device, an offense.
         (a)   Except as provided in divisions (D)(1)(b), (D)(1)(c), (D)(1)(d),
and (D)(2) of this section, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine of
not more than $150.
         (b)   If, within two years of the violation, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one prior violation of this section, R.C. §
4511.204, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court shall
impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $250.
         (c)   If, within two years of the violation, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more prior violations of this section,
R.C. § 4511.204, or a substantially equivalent or municipal ordinance, the
court shall impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $500. The court
also may impose a suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege for 90 days.
         (d)   Notwithstanding divisions (D)(1)(a) to (D)(1)(c) of this
section, if the offender was operating the motor vehicle at the time of the
violation in a construction zone where a sign was posted in accordance with
R.C. § 4511.98, the court, in addition to all other penalties provided by law,
shall impose upon the offender a fine of two times the amount imposed for the
violation under division (D)(1)(a), (D)(1)(b), or (D)(1)(c) of this section, as
applicable.
      (2)   In lieu of payment of the fine of $150 under division (D)(1)(a) of
this section and the assessment of points under division (D)(4) of this
section, the offender instead may elect to attend the distracted driving safety
course, as described in R.C. § 4511.991. If the offender attends and
successfully completes the course, the offender shall be issued written
evidence that the offender successfully completed the course. The offender
shall not be required to pay the fine and shall not have the points assessed
against that offender’s driver’s license if the offender submits the written
evidence to the court.
      (3)   The court may impose any other penalty authorized under R.C. §§
2929.21 to 2929.28. However, the court shall not impose a fine or a suspension
not otherwise specified in division (D)(1) of this section. The court also
shall not impose a jail term or community residential sanction.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (D)(2) of this section, points shall
be assessed for a violation of division (A) of this section in accordance with
R.C. § 4510.036.
      (5)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
   (E)   A prosecution for an offense in violation of this section does not
preclude a prosecution for an offense in violation of R.C. § 4511.204 based on
the same conduct. However, the two offenses are allied offenses of similar
import under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (F)   (1)   A law enforcement officer does not have probable cause and shall
not stop the operator of a motor vehicle for purposes of enforcing this section
unless the officer visually observes the operator using, holding, or physically
supporting with any part of the person’s body the electronic wireless
communications device.
      (2)   A law enforcement officer who stops the operator of a motor vehicle
for a violation of division (A) of this section shall inform the operator that
the operator may decline a search of the operator’s electronic wireless
communications device. The officer shall not do any of the following:
         (a)   Access the device without a warrant, unless the operator
voluntarily and unequivocally gives consent for the officer to access the
device;
         (b)   Confiscate the device while awaiting the issuance of a warrant
to access the device;
         (c)   Obtain consent from the operator to access the device through
coercion or any other improper means. Any consent by the operator to access the
device shall be voluntary and unequivocal before the officer may access the
device without a warrant.
   (G)   As used in this section:
      ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Includes any of the following:
         (a)   A wireless telephone;
         (b)   A text-messaging device;
         (c)   A personal digital assistant;
         (d)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
         (e)   Any device capable of displaying a video, movie, broadcast
television image, or visual image;
         (f)   Any other substantially similar wireless device that is designed
or used to communicate text, initiate or receive communication, or exchange
information or data.
      An “electronic wireless communications device” does not include a two-way
radio transmitter or receiver used by a person who is licensed by the federal
communications commission to participate in the amateur radio service.
      UTILITY. An entity specified in R.C. § 4905.03(A), (C), (D), (E), or (G).
      UTILITY SERVICE VEHICLE. A vehicle owned or operated by a utility.
      VOICE-OPERATED OR HANDS-FREE FEATURE OR FUNCTION. A feature or function
that allows a person to use an electronic wireless communications device
without the use of either hand, except to activate, deactivate, or initiate the
feature or function with a single touch or single swipe.
(R.C. § 4511.204) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.71 USE OF ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICES BY MINORS OR
PROBATIONARY DRIVERS WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit who has not attained the
age of 18 years and no holder of a probationary driver’s license shall drive a
motor vehicle on any street, highway, or property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular traffic or parking while using in
any manner an electronic wireless communications device.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to either of the
following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law enforcement
agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or other similar
emergency agency or entity;
      (2)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device whose
motor vehicle is in a stationary position and the motor vehicle is outside a
lane of travel;
      (3)   A person using a navigation device in a voice-operated or hands-
free manner who does not manipulate the device while driving.
   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (A) of this section shall be fined $150. In addition, the
court shall impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license
or permit for a definite period of 60 days.
      (2)   If the person previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or
a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section, whoever violates
this section shall be fined $300. In addition, the court shall impose a class
seven suspension of the person’
   (D)   The filing of a sworn complaint against a person for a violation of
this section does not preclude the filing of a sworn complaint for a violation
of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same conduct. However, if a person is adjudicated a
delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section
and is also adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a
violation of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same conduct, the two offenses are allied
offenses of similar import under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (E)   As used in this section, ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE
includes any of the following:
      (1)   A wireless telephone;
      (2)   A personal digital assistant;
      (3)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
      (4)   A text-messaging device;
      (5)   Any other substantially similar electronic wireless device that is
designed or used to communicate via voice, image, or written word.
(R.C. § 4511.205) Penalty, see §
70.99
VEHICLE PERMIT
§ 72.75 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall drive or propel or cause to be driven or propelled, a
motor vehicle along or over any park road or any other portion of the park,
unless an annual motor vehicle permit or a daily motor vehicle permit, valid
under the provisions of this section, has been procured and affixed to the
windshield in accordance with instruction on the decal. An annual permit may
not be affixed in a temporary manner.
   (B)   The fee for the annual motor vehicle permit shall be determined by the
Board of Park Commissioners. The annual motor vehicle permit will admit the
motor vehicle to any park, as often as desired, during the calendar year for
which the permit is issued. All permits expire on December 31 of the year for
which they are dated.
   (C)   The fee for the daily motor vehicle permit shall be determined by the
Board of Park Commissioners. The daily motor vehicle permit will admit a motor
vehicle to any park on the day for which the permit has been issued as often as
desired during the hours the park is open.
   (D)   No annual or daily motor vehicle permit shall be required for
emergency vehicles, governmentally owned and operated vehicles, privately owned
vehicles used on park business, or others with written permission from the
Board. Certain areas of the park may be declared exempt from the requirement of
this law by official action of the Board for a specified day or days or portion
of a day or days for park-sponsored events provided for and open to the public.
   (E)   An annual or daily motor vehicle permit is not transferable. A
replacement permit may be issued for an annual motor vehicle permit which needs
replacing because of damage due to an accident. When a motor vehicle is
exchanged, a replacement permit may be purchased for display on the newly
acquired vehicle. In either of these cases, satisfactory proof of possession of
previous valid permit must be shown by presenting the scraped off portion or
portions of the old permit. The permit is not valid unless affixed to the
windshield in accordance with the instructions on the permit. The fee for the
replacement permit shall be determined by the Board of Park Commissioners.
   (F)   The requirements of this section apply only to the entry of motor
vehicles into the park and do not obviate the necessity of obtaining additional
permits for services or facilities as are otherwise required by the Board.
   (G)   A permit does not assure entry to any park or portion thereof that may
be temporarily closed by the Board for any reason or where motor vehicles are
otherwise prohibited.
   (H)   Where a motor vehicle is found parked within the confines of the park
without the required annual or daily motor vehicle permit affixed to the
windshield, the registration plate displayed on the vehicle shall constitute
prima facie evidence that the owner of the vehicle was the person who parked or
placed it at the location where found.
(Prior by-law § 8H) (Amended 10- -2004) Penalty, see §
70.99
Cross-reference:
   Value of district permits, see §
137.11
CHAPTER 73: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
73.01   Prohibition against parking on highways
   
73.02   Condition when motor vehicle left unattended
   
73.03   Parking near curb; privileges for persons with disabilities
   
73.04   Parking areas
   
73.05   No parking in closed areas
   
73.06   Removal of illegally parked vehicle
   
73.07   Officer may remove ignition key
§ 73.01 PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING ON HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   Upon any highway, no person shall stop, park, or leave standing any
vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled part
of the highway if it is practicable to stop, park, or so leave such vehicle off
the paved or main traveled part of the highway. In every event a clear and
unobstructed portion of the highway opposite such standing vehicle shall be
left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of such stopped
vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each direction upon
such highway.
   (B)   This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled while on the paved or improved or main traveled portion of a highway
in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in such position.
(R.C. § 4511.66) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.02 CONDITION WHEN MOTOR VEHICLE LEFT UNATTENDED.
   (A)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to
stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition,
removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the parking brake, and,
when the motor vehicle is standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to
the curb or side of the highway.
   (B)   The requirements of this section relating to the stopping of the
engine, locking of the ignition, and removing the key from the ignition of a
motor vehicle do not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A motor vehicle that is parked on residential property;
      (2)   A motor vehicle that is locked, regardless of where it is parked;
      (3)   An emergency vehicle;
      (4)   A public safety vehicle.
(R.C. § 4511.661) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.03 PARKING NEAR CURB; PRIVILEGES FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
   (A)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an
adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle parallel with and not more than 12 inches from the right-hand curb,
unless it is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in such case the stop
shall be made as close to the curb as possible and only for the time necessary
to discharge and receive passengers or to load or unload merchandise.
   (B)   The park district may permit parking of vehicles with the left-hand
wheels adjacent to and within 12 inches of the left-hand curb of a one-way
roadway.
   (C)   (1)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(1)(b) of this section,
no vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a road or highway with the vehicle
facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on that side of the
road or highway.
         (b)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into an
angled parking space so that when the motorcycle is parked it is facing in a
direction other than the direction of travel on the side of the road or
highway.
      (2)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into a parking
space that is located on the side of, and parallel to, a road or highway. The
motorcycle may face any direction when so parked. Not more than two motorcycles
at a time shall be parked in a parking space as described in division (C)(2) of
this section irrespective of whether or not the space is metered.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any statute or any rule, regulation, or by-law air
compressors, tractors, trucks, and other equipment, while being used in the
construction, reconstruction, installation, repair, or removal of facilities
near, on, over, or under a street or highway, may stop, stand, or park where
necessary in order to perform such work, provided a flagperson is on duty or
warning signs or lights are displayed as may be prescribed by the Director of
Transportation.
   (E)   Accessible parking locations and privileges for persons with
disabilities that limit or impair the ability to walk shall be provided and
designated by all political subdivisions and by the state and all agencies and
instrumentalities thereof at all offices and facilities where parking is
provided, whether owned, rented, or leased, and at all publicly owned parking
garages. The locations shall be designated through the posting of an elevated
sign, whether permanently affixed or movable, imprinted with the international
symbol of access and shall be reasonably close to exits, entrances, elevators,
and ramps. All elevated signs posted in accordance with this division and R.C.
§ 3781.111(C) shall be mounted on a fixed or movable post, and the distance
from the ground to the bottom edge of the sign shall measure not less than five
feet. If a new sign or a replacement sign designating an accessible parking
location is posted on or after October 14, 1999, there also shall be affixed
upon the surface of that sign or affixed next to the designating sign a notice
that states the fine applicable for the offense of parking a motor vehicle in
the designated accessible parking location if the motor vehicle is not legally
entitled to be parked in that location.
   (F)   (1)   (a)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle at
accessible parking locations provided under division (E) of this section, or at
accessible clearly marked parking locations provided in or on privately owned
parking lots, parking garages, or other parking areas and designated in
accordance with that division, unless one of the following applies:
            1.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a valid removable windshield placard or accessible license plates;
or
            2.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a person with a disability and is displaying a parking card or accessible
license plates.
         (b)   Any motor vehicle that is parked in an accessible marked parking
location in violation of division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section
may be towed or otherwise removed from the parking location by the law
enforcement agency of the municipality. A motor vehicle that is so towed or
removed shall not be released to its owner until the owner presents proof of
ownership of the motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees normally
imposed by the municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles. If the motor
vehicle is a leased vehicle, it shall not be released to the lessee until the
lessee presents proof that that person is the lessee of the motor vehicle and
pays all towing and storage fees normally imposed by the municipality for
towing and storing motor vehicles.
         (c)   If a person is charged with a violation of division (F)(1)(a)1.
or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section, it is an affirmative defense to the charge that
the person suffered an injury not more than 72 hours prior to the time the
person was issued the ticket or citation and that, because of the injury, the
person meets at least one of the criteria contained in R.C. § 4503.44(A)(1).
      (2)    No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle in an area
that is commonly known as an access aisle, which area is marked by diagonal
stripes and is located immediately adjacent to an accessible parking location
provided under division (E) of this section or at an accessible clearly marked
parking location provided in or on a privately owned parking lot, parking
garage, or other parking area and designated in accordance with that division.
   (G)   When a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a
person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a removable windshield placard or a temporary removable windshield
placard or accessible license plates, or when a motor vehicle is being operated
by or for the transport of a person with a disability and is displaying a
parking card or accessible license plates, the motor vehicle is permitted to
park for a period of two hours in excess of the legal parking period permitted
by local authorities, except where local ordinances or police rules provide
otherwise or where the vehicle is parked in such a manner as to be clearly a
traffic hazard.
   (H)   No owner of an office, facility, or parking garage where accessible
parking locations are required to be designated in accordance with division (E)
of this section shall fail to properly mark the accessible parking locations in
accordance with that division or fail to maintain the markings of the
accessible locations, including the erection and maintenance of the fixed or
movable signs.
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a person or
organization to apply for a removable windshield placard or accessible license
plates if the parking card or accessible license plates issued to the person or
organization under prior law have not expired or been surrendered or revoked.
   (J)   As used in this section:
      ACCESSIBLE LICENSE PLATES and REMOVABLE WINDSHIELD PLACARD. Mean any
license plates or removable windshield placard or temporary removable
windshield placard issued under R.C. § 4503.41 or 4503.44, and also mean any
substantially equivalent license plates or removable windshield placard or
temporary removable windshield placard issued by a state, district, country, or
sovereignty.
      PERSON WITH A DISABILITY. Means any person who has lost the use of one or
both legs or one or both arms, who is blind, deaf, or unable to move without
the aid of crutches or a wheelchair, or whose mobility is restricted by a
permanent cardiovascular, pulmonary, or other disabling condition.
      PERSON WITH A DISABILITY THAT LIMITS OR IMPAIRS THE ABILITY TO WALK. Has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 4503.44.
   (K)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (A) or (C) of this section is guilty of
an offense.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this
section shall be punished as provided in division (K)(2)(a) and (K)(2)(b) of
this section. Except as otherwise provided in division (K)(2)(a) of this
section, an offender who violates division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this
section shall be fined not less than $250 nor more than $500. An offender who
violates division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section shall be fined not
more than $100 if the offender, prior to sentencing, proves either of the
following to the satisfaction of the court:
            1.   At the time of the violation of division (F)(1)(a)1. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a removable windshield placard that then was
valid or accessible license plates that then were valid but the offender or the
person neglected to display the placard or license plates as described in
division (F)(1)(a)1. of this section.
            2.   At the time of the violation of division (F)(1)(a)2. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a parking card that then was valid or accessible
license plates that then were valid but the offender or the person neglected to
display the card or license plates as described in division (F)(1)(a)2. of this
section.
         (b)   In no case shall an offender who violates division (F)(1)(a)1.
or (F)(1)(a)2. be sentenced to any term of imprisonment.
         (c)   An arrest or conviction for a violation of division (F)(1)(a)1.
or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section does not constitute a criminal record and need
not be reported by the person so arrested or convicted in response to any
inquiries contained in any application for employment, license, or other right
or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s appearance as a witness.
         (d)   The clerk of the court shall pay every fine collected under
divisions (K)(2) and (K)(3) of this section to the park district. Except as
provided in division (K)(2) of this section, the park district shall use the
fine moneys it receives under divisions (K)(2) and (K)(3) of this section to
pay the expenses it incurs in complying with the signage and notice
requirements contained in division (E) of this section. The park district may
use up to 50% of each fine it receives under divisions (K)(2) and (K)(3) of
this section to pay the costs of educational, advocacy, support, and assistive
technology programs for persons with disabilities, and for public improvements
within the park district that benefit or assist persons with disabilities, if
governmental agencies or nonprofit organizations offer the programs.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (F)(2) of this section shall be fined not
less than $250 nor more than $500. In no case shall an offender who violates
division (F)(2) of this section be sentenced to any term of imprisonment. An
arrest or conviction for a violation of division (F)(2) of this section does
not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries contained in any application
for employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection
with the person’s appearance as a witness.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (H) of this section shall be punished as
follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (K)(4) of this section,
the offender shall be issued a warning.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (H) of this section the offender shall not be
issued a warning but shall be fined not more than $25 for each parking location
that is not properly marked or whose markings are not properly maintained.
(R.C. § 4511.69) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
       Buildings, access for disabled persons, see R.C. § 3781.111
§ 73.04 PARKING AREAS.
   Parking of any motor car, motor vehicle, motorcycle, or motorized bicycle is
restricted to designated areas maintained as parking areas, unless obeying the
directions of park personnel or a traffic-control device.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.05 NO PARKING IN CLOSED AREAS.
   No motor car, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorized bicycle, or bicycle shall
be parked or stored on any area of the park closed to vehicular access or after
park closing as set forth in §
132.10.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.06 REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE.
   (A)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in
violation of R.C. § 4511.66, such officer may move such vehicle, or require the
driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position
off the paved or improved or main traveled part of such highway.
   (B)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any
highway, bridge, or causeway, or in any tunnel, where such vehicles constitutes
an obstruction to traffic, such officer may provide for the removal of such
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
(R.C. § 4511.67)
§ 73.07 OFFICER MAY REMOVE IGNITION KEY.
   A law enforcement officer may remove the ignition key left in the ignition
switch of an unlocked and unattended motor vehicle parked on a street or
highway. The officer removing the key shall place notification upon the vehicle
detailing his or her name and badge number, the place where the key may be
reclaimed, and the procedure for reclaiming the key. The key shall be returned
to the owner of the motor vehicle upon presentation of proof of ownership.
(R.C. § 4549.05)
CHAPTER 74: EQUIPMENT AND LOADS
Section
Equipment
   
74.01   Unsafe vehicles, prohibition against operation
   
74.02   Bumpers on motor vehicles; suspension systems
   
74.03   Lighted lights required
   
74.04   Headlights
   
74.05   Taillights and illumination of rear license plate
   
74.06   Red reflectors required
   
74.07   Studded tires
   
74.08   Stoplight regulations
   
74.09   Red light or flag required
   
74.10   Lights on parked vehicles
   
74.11   Lights, emblems, and reflectors on slow-moving vehicles, farm
machinery, agricultural tractors, and animal-drawn vehicles
   
74.12   Spotlight and auxiliary driving lights
   
74.13   Cowl, fender, and back-up lights
   
74.14   Two lights displayed
   
74.15   Headlights required
   
74.16   Number of lights permitted; red and flashing lights
   
74.17   Focus and aim of headlights
   
74.18   Brake equipment; specifications
   
74.19   Horns, sirens, and warning devices
   
74.20   Mufflers; excessive smoke or gas
   
74.21   Rearview mirrors
   
74.22   Windshields and wipers
   
74.23   Wheel protectors required on heavy commercial vehicles
   
74.24   Tinted glass; other vision obscuring material
Loads
   
74.40   Limitation of load extension on left side of vehicle
   
74.41   All loads shall be properly secured
EQUIPMENT
§ 74.01 UNSAFE VEHICLES, PROHIBITION AGAINST OPERATION.
   No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to be driven or
moved, on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in such
unsafe condition as to endanger any person.
(R.C. § 4513.02(A)) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.02 BUMPERS ON MOTOR VEHICLES; SUSPENSION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING. Means the manufacturer’s gross vehicle
weight rating established for that vehicle.
      MANUFACTURER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      MULTIPURPOSE PASSENGER VEHICLE. Means a motor vehicle with motive power,
except a motorcycle, designed to carry ten persons or less, that is constructed
either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional off-road
operation.
      PASSENGER CAR. Means any motor vehicle with motive power, designed for
carrying ten persons or less, except a multipurpose passenger vehicle or
motorcycle.
      TRUCK. Means every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers,
designed and used to carry property and having a gross vehicle weight rating of
10,000 pounds or less.
   (B)   Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, in accordance with
R.C. Chapter 119, shall govern the maximum bumper height or, in the absence of
bumpers and in cases where bumper height have been lowered or modified, the
maximum height to the bottom of the frame rail of any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck.
   (C)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state that does not
conform to the requirements of this section or any applicable rule adopted
pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021.
   (D)   No person shall modify any motor vehicle registered in this state in
such a manner as to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in contact with
the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage from collision, or cause the wheels
to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and no person
shall disconnect any part of the original suspension system of the vehicle to
defeat the safe operation of that system.
   (E)   Nothing contained in this section or in the rules adopted pursuant to
R.C. § 4513.021 shall be construed to prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   The installation upon a passenger car, multipurpose passenger
vehicle or truck registered in this state of heavy duty equipment, including
shock absorbers and overload springs;
      (2)   The operation on a street or highway of a passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle, or truck registered in this state with normal
wear to the suspension system if the normal wear does not adversely affect the
control of the vehicle.
   (F)   This section and the rules adopted pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021 do not
apply to any specially designed or modified passenger car, multipurpose
passenger vehicle, or truck when operated off a street or highway in races and
similar events.
(R.C. § 4513.021) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.03 LIGHTED LIGHTS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a street
or highway within this park district shall display lighted lights and
illuminating devices as required by R.C. §§ 4513.04 to 4513.37 during all of
the following times:
      (1)   The time from sunset to sunrise;
      (2)   At any other time when, due to insufficient natural light or
unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons, vehicles, and substantial objects
on the highway are not discernible at a distance of 1,000 feet ahead;
      (3)   At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle are in use
because of precipitation on the windshield.
   (B)   Every motorized bicycle shall display at such times lighted lights
meeting the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4511.521. No motor vehicle, during any time specified in this section, shall be
operated upon a street or highway within this park district using only parking
lights as illumination.
   (C)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the distance
from which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible, or within
which such lamps or devices shall be visible, such distance shall be measured
upon a straight level unlighted highway under normal atmospheric conditions
unless a different condition is expressly stated.
   (D)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the mounted
height of lights or devices, it shall mean from the center of such light or
device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a vehicle being operated upon a
street or highway within this park district to stop the vehicle solely because
the officer observes that a violation of division (A)(3) of this section has
been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket,
citation, or summons for a violation of that division, or causing the arrest of
or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that division.
(R.C. § 4513.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.04 HEADLIGHTS.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall be equipped with
at least two headlights with at least one near each side of the front of the
motor vehicle.
   (B)   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more than
two headlights.
(R.C. § 4513.04) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.05 TAILLIGHTS AND ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATE.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or vehicle
which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles shall be equipped with
at least one tail light mounted on the rear which, when lighted, shall emit a
red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear, provided that in the
case of a train of vehicles only the tail light on the rearmost vehicle need be
visible from the distance specified.
   (B)   Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so constructed and
placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate, when
such registration plate is required, and render it legible from a distance of
50 feet to the rear. Any tail light, together with any separate light for
illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted
whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving lights are lighted, except where
separate lighting systems are provided for trailers for the purpose of
illuminating such registration plate.
(R.C. § 4513.05) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.06 RED REFLECTORS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every new motor vehicle sold after September 6, 1941, and operated on
a highway, other than a commercial tractor to which a trailer or semitrailer is
attached, shall carry at the rear, either as a part of the tail lamps or
separately, two red reflectors meeting the requirements of this section, except
that vehicles of the type mentioned in R.C. § 4513.07 shall be equipped with
reflectors as required by the regulations provided for in that section.
   (B)   Every such reflector shall be of such size and characteristics and so
maintained as to be visible at night from all distances within 300 feet to 50
feet from such vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.06) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.07 STUDDED TIRES.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, STUDDED TIRE means any tire designed
for use on a vehicle and equipped with metal studs or studs of wear-resisting
material that project beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, no person
shall operate any motor vehicle other than a public safety vehicle or school
bus that is equipped with studded tires on any street or highway in this park
district, except during the period extending from the first day of November of
each year through the fifteenth day of April of the succeeding year.
      (2)   A person may operate a motor vehicle that is equipped with
retractable studded tires with the studs retracted at any time of the year, but
shall operate the motor vehicle with the studs extended only as provided in
division (B)(1) of this section.
   (C)   This section does not apply to the use of tire chains when there is
snow or ice on the streets or highways where such chains are being used, or the
immediate vicinity thereof.
(R.C. § 5589.081) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.08 STOPLIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and pole trailer when
operated upon a highway shall be equipped with two or more stop lights, except
that passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January 1, 1967,
motorcycles, and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least one stop
light. Stop lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle, actuated upon
application of the service brake, and may be incorporated with other rear
lights. Such stop lights when actuated shall emit a red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear; provided that in the case of a train of
vehicles only the stop lights on the rearmost vehicle need be visible from the
distance specified.
   (B)   Such stop lights when actuated shall give a steady warning light to
the rear of a vehicle or train of vehicles to indicate the intention of the
operator to diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train of vehicles.
   (C)   When stop lights are used as required by this section, they shall be
constructed or installed so as to provide adequate and reliable illumination
and shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations established under
R.C. § 4513.19.
   (D)   Historical motor vehicles as defined in R.C. § 4503.181, not
originally manufactured with stop lights, are not subject to this section.
(R.C. § 4513.071) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.09 RED LIGHT OR FLAG REQUIRED.
   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or more
beyond the bed or body of this vehicle, there shall be displayed at the extreme
rear end of the load, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, a red light or
lantern plainly visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and
rear. The red light or lantern required by this section is in addition to the
red rear light required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be
displayed at the extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less
than 16 inches square.
(R.C. § 4513.09) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.10 LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES.
   Except in case of an emergency, whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon
a roadway open to traffic or a shoulder adjacent thereto, whether attended or
unattended, during the times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03, such vehicle shall be
equipped with one or more lights which shall exhibit a white or amber light on
the roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such
vehicle, and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. No
lights need be displayed upon any such vehicle when it is stopped or parked
within the park district where there is sufficient light to reveal any person
or substantial object within a distance of 500 feet upon such highway. Any
lighted headlights upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
(R.C. § 4513.10) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.11 LIGHTS, EMBLEMS, AND REFLECTORS ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES, FARM
MACHINERY, AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS, AND ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      BOAT TRAILER. Means any vehicle designed and used exclusively to
transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a
marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more
than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
      SLOW-MOVING VEHICLE and SMV. Mean a boat trailer, unit of farm machinery,
road construction machinery, or other machinery designed by the manufacturer to
operate at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less. The term does not include a
bicycle, motorized bicycle, electric bicycle, or animal-drawn vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.11)
   (B)   Generally.
      (1)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall operate
either of the following vehicles unless it is equipped with and displays the
lamps described in division (B)(2) of this section:
         (a)   A vehicle not specifically required to be equipped with lamps or
other lighting devices by R.C. §§ 4513.03 to 4513.10;
         (b)   A vehicle referred to in R.C. § 4513.02(G).
      (2)   Vehicles described in division (B)(1) of this section shall be
equipped with both of the following:
         (a)   At least one lamp displaying a white light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the vehicle;
         (b)   Two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the vehicle, or as an alternative, one lamp
displaying a red light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to
the rear and two red reflectors visible from all distances of 600 feet to 100
feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlamps.
      (3)   (a)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall
operate a multi- wheel agricultural tractor model year 2001 or earlier on a
street or highway unless it is equipped with and displays reflectors and
illuminated amber lamps so that the extreme left and right projections of the
tractor are indicated by all of the following:
            1.   Flashing lamps displaying amber light, visible to the front
and the rear. The lamps need not flash simultaneously and need not flash in
conjunction with any directional signals of the tractor.
            2.   Amber reflectors, all visible to the front;
            3.   Red reflectors, all visible to the rear.
         (b)   Rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4513.111 governing the lamps and reflectors described in division (B)(3)(a) of
this section and their placement correlate with and, as far as possible,
conform with paragraphs 4.1.4.1, 4.1.7.1, and 4.1.7.2 respectively of the
American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S279.10 OCT 98,
Lighting and Marking of Agricultural Equipment on Highways.
      (4)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall operate a
unit of farm machinery model year 2002 or later on a street or highway unless
it is equipped with and displays markings and illuminated lamps that meet or
exceed the lighting, illumination, and marking standards and specifications
that are applicable to that type of farm machinery for the unit's model year
specified in the American society of agricultural engineers standard ANSI/ASAE
S279.10 OCT 98, lighting and marking of agricultural equipment on highways.
      (5)   Any unit of farm machinery designed by its manufacturer to operate
at a speed of 25 miles per hour or greater or any SMV may be equipped with and
display a red flashing light that is visible from a distance of not less than
1,000 feet to the rear at all times specified in R.C. § 4513.03. When a double-
faced light is used, it shall display amber light to the front and red light to
the rear.
      (6)   Lights and reflectors required under divisions (B)(3) and (B)(4) of
this section and authorized under division (B)(5) of this section are in
addition to other lights required or permitted by this division (B) or R.C. §
4513.17.
      (7)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 that establish standards and specifications for lamps and
reflectors required or authorized by this section. Lamps and reflectors
required or authorized by this section shall meet those standards and
specifications.
      (8)   This division (B) does not apply to a bicycle, motorized bicycle,
electric bicycle, or animal-drawn vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.111)
   (C)   Slow-moving vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall
operate an SMV on a street or highway as follows:
         (a)   At a speed exceeding 25 miles per hour;
         (b)   Without displaying the triangular SMV emblem mounted in
accordance with division (C)(2) of this section.
      (2)   The SMV emblem shall be mounted so as to be visible from a distance
of not less than 500 feet to the rear. In accordance with R.C. Chapter 119, the
Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt standards and specifications for the
design and position of mounting the SMV emblem. The standards and
specifications for the SMV emblem correlate with and, so far as possible,
conform with those approved by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers.
      (3)   A person may operate an SMV on a street or highway without
displaying the triangular SMV emblem when any of the following apply:
         (a)   The SMV is being used in actual construction and maintenance
work in an area guarded by a flagperson, or where flares are used.
         (b)   The SMV is operating or traveling within the limits of a
construction area designated by the Ohio Director of Transportation, a city
engineer, or the county engineer of the several counties, when such
construction area is marked in accordance with requirements of the Ohio
Director of Transportation and the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
as set forth in R.C. § 4511.09.
      (4)   No person shall display an SMV emblem on any of the following:
         (a)   Any vehicle not required to use the SMV emblem by this division
(C) or R.C. § 4513.113 or 4513.114;
         (b)   An SMV being transported upon any other vehicle;
         (c)   Any stationary object on the highway.
      (5)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate an SMV, except a unit
designed to be completely mounted on a primary power unit that is manufactured
or assembled on or after April 1, 1966, unless it is equipped with an SMV
emblem mounting device.
(R.C. § 4513.112)
   (D)   Farm machinery and agricultural tractors.
      (1)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate on a street or
highway any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the unit displays both
of the following:
         (a)   The SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. § 4513.112(B);
         (b)   A speed identification symbol that does both of the following:
            1.   Meets the specifications contained in the American Society of
Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment:
Speed Identification Symbol (SIS);
            2.   Indicates the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the
unit of farm machinery is designed by its manufacturer to operate.
      (2)   No person operating a tractor on a street or highway that is
designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per
hour and that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery
while operating at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour shall fail to display
both of the following on the unit of farm machinery:
         (a)   The SMV emblem;
         (b)   The speed identification symbol that matches the speed
identification symbol required to be displayed on the agricultural tractor.
      (3)   No person shall operate an agricultural tractor that is designed by
its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless
the person possesses documentation published or provided by the manufacturer
indicating the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the manufacturer
designed the agricultural tractor to operate.
(R.C. § 4513.113)
   (E)   Animal-drawn vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (E)(4) of this section, no
person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle on a street or highway unless it
is equipped with and displays, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, both
of the following:
         (a)   At least one lamp displaying a white light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the animal-drawn vehicle;
         (b)   Two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the animal-drawn vehicle, or as an
alternative, one lamp displaying a red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear and two red reflectors visible from all
distances of 600 feet to one hundred feet to the rear when illuminated by the
lawful lower beams of headlamps.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (E)(4) of this section, no
person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle on a street or highway unless it
is equipped with and displays, at all times, all of the following:
         (a)   One yellow flashing lamp displaying yellow light that is visible
from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet and that is mounted in either of
the following positions:
            1.   On the top most portion of the rear of the animal-drawn
vehicle;
            2.   On the top of the animal-drawn vehicle.
         (b)   At least one of the following:
            1.   An SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. § 4513.112(B);
            2.   Micro-prism reflective tape that is visible from a distance of
not less than 500 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams
of headlamps;
            3.   Both an SMV emblem and micro-prism reflective tape, as
specified in this division.
         (c)   Lamps and micro-prism reflective tape required by this section
shall meet standards and specifications adopted by the Ohio Director of Public
Safety under R.C. § 4513.114.
      (3)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety, in accordance with R.C. Chapter
119, shall adopt rules establishing standards and specifications for the
position and mounting of the lamps and micro-prism reflective tape required by
R.C. § 4513.114. The rules permit the micro-prism reflective tape to be red,
amber, white, or silver in color.
      (4)   (a)   Divisions (E)(1) and (E)(2) of this section do not apply to
the operator of animal-drawn agricultural equipment who is not transporting any
livestock or a person other than the operator.
         (b)   No operator described in division (E)(4)(a) of this section
shall operate animal-drawn agricultural equipment unless it is equipped with
and displays, at all times, the SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. §
4513.112(B).
         (c)   As used in division (E)(4) of this section, “animal-drawn
agricultural equipment” means equipment drawn by the muscular power of an
animal that is used solely for agricultural purposes. “Animal-drawn
agricultural equipment” includes any of the following:
            1.   A plow;
            2.   A manure spreader;
            3.   A thresher.
(R.C. § 4513.114)
   (F)   Strict liability offenses. The offenses established under this section
are strict liability offenses, and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The
designation of these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be
construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no specified
degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4513.115) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.12 SPOTLIGHT AND AUXILIARY DRIVING LIGHTS.
   (A)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one
spotlight and every lighted spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon
approaching another vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the
beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side
of the vehicle, nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than three
auxiliary driving lights mounted on the front of the vehicle. Any such lights
which do not conform to the specifications for
auxiliary driving lights and the regulations for their use prescribed by the
Director of Public Safety shall not be used.
(R.C. § 4513.12) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.13 COWL, FENDER, AND BACK-UP LIGHTS.
   (A)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or fender lights
which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
   (B)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with lights on each side thereof
which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
   (C)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights, either
separately or in combination with another light. No back-up lights shall be
continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion.
(R.C. § 4513.13) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.14 TWO LIGHTS DISPLAYED.
   At all times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03, at least two lighted lights shall
be displayed, one near each side of the front of every motor vehicle, except
when such vehicle is parked subject to the regulations governing lights on
parked vehicles.
(R.C. § 4513.14) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.15 HEADLIGHTS REQUIRED.
   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder adjacent
thereto during the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, the driver shall use a
distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of
sufficient intensity to reveal persons, vehicles and substantial objects at a
safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements.
   (A)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle, such
driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that the
glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver.
   (B)   Every new motor vehicle registered in this state which has multiple-
beam road lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam indicator, which
shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of light from the
headlights is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. This indicator shall
be so designed and located that, when lighted, it will be readily visible
without glare to the driver of the vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.15) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.16 NUMBER OF LIGHTS PERMITTED; RED AND FLASHING LIGHTS.
   (A)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights is also equipped
with any auxiliary lights or spotlight or any other light on the front thereof
projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower, not more than a
total of five of any such lights on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at
any one time when the vehicle is upon a highway.
   (B)   Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other
than headlights, spotlights, signal lights, or auxiliary driving lights, that
projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower shall be
so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of the roadway on
which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than 75 feet from the vehicle.
   (C)   (1)   Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles, except as a
means for indicating a right or a left turn, or in the presence of a vehicular
traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, or overtaking or passing.
      (2)   The prohibition in division (C)(1) of this section does not apply
to any of the following:
         (a)   Emergency vehicles, road service vehicles servicing or towing a
disabled vehicle, stationary waste collection vehicles actively collecting
garbage, refuse, trash, or recyclable materials on the roadside, rural mail
delivery vehicles, vehicles as provided in R.C. § 4513.182, highway maintenance
vehicles, and similar equipment operated by state or local authorities,
provided such vehicles are equipped with and display, when used on a street or
highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing,
oscillating, or rotating amber light;
         (b)   Vehicles or machinery permitted by R.C. § 4513.111 to have a
flashing red light;
         (c)   Farm machinery and vehicles escorting farm machinery, provided
such machinery and vehicles are equipped with and display, when used on a
street or highway, a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber light. Farm
machinery also may display the lights described in R.C. § 4513.111.
         (d)   A funeral hearse or funeral escort vehicle, provided that the
funeral hearse or funeral escort vehicle is equipped with and displays, when
used on a street or highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights,
a flashing, oscillating, or rotating purple or amber light.
      (3)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to animal-drawn
vehicles subject to R.C. § 4513.114.
   (D)   (1)   Except a person operating a public safety vehicle, as defined in
R.C. § 4511.01(E), or a school bus, no person shall operate, move, or park
upon, or permit to stand within the right-of-way of any public street or
highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with and displaying a
flashing red or a flashing combination red and white light, or an oscillating
or rotating red light, or a combination red and white oscillating or rotating
light.
      (2)   Except a public law enforcement officer, or other person sworn to
enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state, operating a public safety
vehicle when on duty, no person shall operate, move, or park upon, or permit to
stand within the right-of-way of any street or highway any vehicle or equipment
that is equipped with, or upon which is mounted, and displaying a flashing blue
or a flashing combination blue and white light, or an oscillating or rotating
blue light, or a combination blue and white oscillating or rotating light.
   (E)   This section does not prohibit the use of warning lights required by
law or the simultaneous flashing of turn signals on disabled vehicles or on
vehicles being operated in unfavorable atmospheric conditions in order to
enhance their visibility. This section also does not prohibit the simultaneous
flashing of turn signals or warning lights whether on farm machinery or
vehicles escorting farm machinery when used on a street or highway.
(R.C. § 4513.17)
   (F)   (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a motor vehicle
operated by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator may be equipped
with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and siren, whistle
or bell capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a
distance of not less than 500 feet. Such a vehicle may display the flashing,
oscillating or rotating red or blue light and may give the audible signal of
the siren, whistle or bell only when responding to a fatality or a fatal motor
vehicle accident on a street or highway and only at those locations where the
stoppage of traffic impedes the ability of the coroner, deputy coroner or
coroner’s investigator to arrive at the site of the fatality.
      (2)   This division (F) does not relieve the coroner, deputy coroner or
coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with
due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4513.171) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.17 FOCUS AND AIM OF HEADLIGHTS.
   (A)   No person shall use any lights mentioned in R.C. §§ 4513.03 through
4513.18 upon any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer unless these lights are
equipped, mounted, and adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance with
regulations which are prescribed by the Director of Public Safety.
   (B)   The headlights on any motor vehicle shall comply with the headlamp
color requirements contained in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number
108, 49 C.F.R. § 571.108. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in violation
of this division (B).
(R.C. § 4513.19) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.18 BRAKE EQUIPMENT; SPECIFICATIONS.
   The following requirements govern as to brake equipment on vehicles.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated upon a
highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and
to stop and hold the motor vehicle, including two separate means of applying
the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at
least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are
connected in any way, then on such motor vehicles, manufactured or assembled
after January 1, 1942, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one
part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without
brakes on at least two wheels.
   (B)   Every motorcycle, when operated upon a highway shall be equipped with
at least one adequate brake, which may be operated by hand or by foot.
   (C)   Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes meeting the
rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety under R.C. § 4511.521.
   (D)   When operated upon the highways, the following vehicles shall be
equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to
hold the vehicle, designed to be applied by the driver of the towing motor
vehicle from its cab, and also designed and connected so that, in case of a
breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically applied:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every trailer or
semitrailer, except a pole trailer, with an empty weight of 2,000 pounds or
more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1942;
      (2)   Every manufactured home or travel trailer with an empty weight of
2,000 pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2001.
   (E)   Every watercraft trailer with a gross weight or manufacturer’s gross
vehicle weight rating of 3,000 pounds or more that is manufactured or assembled
on or after January 1, 2008, shall have separate brakes equipped with hydraulic
surge or electrically operated brakes on two wheels.
   (F)   In any combination of motor-drawn trailers or semitrailers equipped
with brakes, means shall be provided for applying the rearmost brakes in
approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle, and developing
the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest rate; or
means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the rearmost
brakes; or both of the above means, capable of being used alternatively, may be
employed.
   (G)   Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles and
motorized bicycles, and except trailers and semitrailers of a gross weight of
less than 2,000 pounds, and pole trailers, shall be equipped with parking
brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under
all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice, or loose material.
The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in conformance with the
foregoing requirements by the driver’s muscular effort or by spring action or
by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the service brakes or
other source of power provided that failure of the service brake actuation
system or other power assisting mechanism will not prevent the parking brakes
from being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements. The parking
brakes shall be so designed that when once applied they shall remain applied
with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of any source of energy or
leakage of any kind.
   (H)   The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies, brake shoe
anchors, and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally associated with
the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service brakes and the
parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes and the service
brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of
any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative brakes.
   (I)   Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall, at
all times and under all conditions of loading, be capable of being stopped on a
dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon application of the
service or foot brake, within the following specified distances, or shall be
capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate corresponding to these
distances:
      (1)   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles having brakes on all wheels
shall come to a stop in 30 feet or less from a speed of 20 mph;
      (2)   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles not having brakes on all
wheels shall come to a stop in 40 feet or less from a speed of 20 mph.
   (J)   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be so
adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels on
opposite sides of the vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.20) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.19 HORNS, SIRENS, AND WARNING DEVICES.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway shall be equipped
with a horn which is in good working order and capable of emitting sound
audible, under normal conditions, from a distance of not less than 200 feet.
   (B)   No motor vehicle shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon
a vehicle, any siren, whistle, or bell. Any vehicle may be equipped with a
theft alarm signal device which shall be so arranged that it cannot be used as
an ordinary warning signal. Every emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a
siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal
conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a type approved by
the Director of Public Safety. Such equipment shall not be used except when
such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or is in the
immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which case
the driver of the emergency vehicle shall sound such equipment when it is
necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof.
(R.C. § 4513.21) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.20 MUFFLERS; EXCESSIVE SMOKE OR GAS.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle with an internal combustion engine
shall at all times be equipped with a muffler which is in good working order
and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, and no person
shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor vehicle on a
highway. Every motorcycle muffler shall be equipped with baffle plates.
   (B)   No person shall own, operate, or have in the person’s possession any
motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with a device for producing excessive
smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit oil or any other chemical to flow
into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of such vehicle, or equipped in any
way to produce or emit smoke or dangerous or annoying gases from any portion of
such vehicle, other than the ordinary gases emitted by the exhaust of an
internal combustion engine under normal operation.
(R.C. § 4513.22) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.21 REARVIEW MIRRORS.
   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall be equipped with a mirror so
located as to reflect to the operator a view of the highway to the rear of such
vehicle or motorcycle. Operators of vehicles and motorcycles shall have a clear
and unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of their vehicles and
motorcycles and shall have a clear view to the rear of their vehicles and
motorcycles by mirror.
(R.C. § 4513.23) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.22 WINDSHIELDS AND WIPERS.
   (A)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle on a street or highway in this
park district, other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, that is not
equipped with a windshield.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a bus, with
any sign, poster, or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield,
sidewings, side, or rear windows of such vehicle other than a certificate or
other paper required to be displayed by law, except that there may be in the
lower left-hand or right-hand corner of the windshield a sign, poster, or decal
not to exceed four inches in height by six inches in width. No sign, poster, or
decal shall be displayed in the front windshield in such a manner as to conceal
the vehicle identification number for the motor vehicle when, in accordance
with federal law, that number is located inside the vehicle passenger
compartment and so placed as to be readable through the vehicle glazing without
moving any part of the vehicle.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a passenger car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if either of
the following apply to the device:
         (a)   It is a “vehicle safety technology” as defined in 49 C.F.R. §
393.5 and complies with 49 C.F.R. § 393.60(e)(1)(ii).
         (b)   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals, and it does not conceal the vehicle
identification number.
      (3)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a commercial car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if either of
the following apply to the device:
         (a)   It is a “vehicle safety technology” as defined in 49 C.F.R. §
393.5 and complies with 49 C.F.R. § 393.60(e)(1)(ii).
         (b)   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals, and it is mounted not more than 8.5 inches
below the upper edge of the windshield.
   (C)   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device
for cleaning rain, snow, or other moisture from the windshield. The device
shall be maintained in good working order and so constructed as to be
controlled or operated by the operator of the vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.24) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.23 WHEEL PROTECTORS REQUIRED ON HEAVY COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated,
any commercial car, trailer, or semitrailer, used for the transportation of
goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons,
upon the public highways, streets, bridges, and culverts within the park
district, unless such vehicle is equipped with suitable metal protectors or
substantial flexible flaps on the rearmost wheels of such vehicle or
combination of vehicles to prevent, as far as practicable, the wheels from
throwing dirt, water, or other materials on the windshields of following
vehicles. Such protectors or flaps shall have a ground clearance of not more
than one-third of the distance from the center of the rearmost axle to the
center of the flaps under any conditions of loading of the vehicle, and they
shall be at least as wide as the tires they are protecting. If the vehicle is
so designed and constructed that such requirements are accomplished by means of
fenders, body construction, or other means of enclosure, then no such
protectors or flaps are required. Rear wheels not covered at the top by
fenders, bodies, or other parts of the vehicle shall be covered at the top by
protective means extending at least to the center line of the rearmost axle.
(R.C. § 5577.11)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $25.
(R.C. § 5577.99(E))
§ 74.24 TINTED GLASS; OTHER VISION OBSCURING MATERIAL.
   (A)   No person shall operate, on any highway or other public or private
property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking, lease, or rent any
motor vehicle that is registered in this state unless the motor vehicle
conforms to the requirements concerning tinted glass and reflectorized material
of R.C. § 4513.241 and of any applicable rule adopted under that section.
   (B)   No person shall install in or on any motor vehicle, any glass or other
material that fails to conform to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any
rule adopted under that section.
   (C)   (1)   No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor vehicle dealer, as
defined in R.C. § 4517.01, shall sell any motor vehicle that fails to conform
to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that
section.
      (2)   No manufacturer, remanufacturer, or distributor, as defined in R.C.
§ 4517.01, shall provide to a motor vehicle dealer licensed under R.C. Chapter
4517 or to any other person, a motor vehicle that fails to conform to the
requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that section.
   (D)   No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in any front
windshield, side windows, sidewings, or rear window.
   (E)   This section does not apply to the manufacturer’s tinting or glazing
of motor vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise in compliance with or
permitted by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard #205.
   (F)   With regard to any side window behind a driver’s seat or any rear
window other than any window on an emergency door, this section does not apply
to any school bus used to transport a child with disabilities pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 3323, whom it is impossible or impractical to transport by regular
school bus in the course of regular route transportation provided by a school
district. As used in this division (F), CHILD WITH DISABILITIES has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 3323.01.
   (G)   This section does not apply to any school bus that is to be sold and
operated outside the park district.
   (H)   (1)   This section does not apply to a motor vehicle used by a law
enforcement agency under either of the following circumstances:
         (a)   The vehicle does not have distinctive markings of a law
enforcement vehicle but is operated by or on behalf of the law enforcement
agency in an authorized investigation or other activity requiring that the
presence and identity of the vehicle occupants be undisclosed.
         (b)   The vehicle primarily is used by the law enforcement canine unit
for transporting a police dog.
      (2)   As used in this division, LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY means a police
department, the office of a sheriff, the State Highway Patrol, a county
prosecuting attorney, or a federal, state, or local governmental body that
enforces criminal laws and that has employees who have a statutory power of
arrest.
(R.C. § 4513.241(C) - (J))
   (I)   (1)   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section,
whoever violates division (B) of this section is liable in a civil action to
the owner of a motor vehicle on which was installed the nonconforming glass or
material for any damages incurred by that person as a result of the
installation of the nonconforming glass or material, costs of maintaining the
civil action, and attorney fees.
      (2)   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section, if the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (B) of this section and the offender is a motor vehicle repair
operator registered under R.C. Chapter 4775 or a motor vehicle dealer licensed
under R.C. Chapter 4517, whoever violates division (B) of this section is
subject to a registration or license suspension, as applicable, for a period of
not more than 180 days.
(R.C. § 4513.241(K)) Penalty, see §
70.99
LOADS
§ 74.40 LIMITATION OF LOAD EXTENSION ON LEFT SIDE OF VEHICLE.
   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a highway with any load
carried on the vehicle which extends more than six inches beyond the line of
the fenders on the vehicle’s left side.
(R.C. § 4513.30) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.41 ALL LOADS SHALL BE PROPERLY SECURED.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the vehicle
is so constructed, loaded, or covered as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand
or other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or
water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or
maintaining the roadway.
   (B)   Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the process of
acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans, bottles, waste
paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper, cartons, boxes,
glass, solid waste, or any other material of an unsanitary nature that is
susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a moving vehicle shall be driven or
moved on any highway unless the load is covered with a sufficient cover to
prevent the load or any part of the load from spilling onto the highway.
(R.C. § 4513.31) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 75: BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES
Section
   
75.01   Bicycles
   
75.02   Operation of motorized bicycle
   
75.03   Rules for bicycles, motorcycles, and snowmobiles
   
75.04   Prohibition against attaching bicycles and sleds to vehicles
   
75.05   Riding bicycles; motorcycles abreast
   
75.06   Signal devices on bicycle
   
75.07   Electric bicycles
§ 75.01 BICYCLES.
   (A)   The provisions of this title that are applicable to bicycles and
electric bicycles apply whenever a bicycle or electric bicycle is operated upon
any public street, roadway, bike paths adjacent to roadways and upon any path
set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or a shared use path.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, ELECTRIC BICYCLE shall mean a bicycle
equipped with fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750
watts that meets the requirements of one of three classes:
      CLASS 1 ELECTRIC BICYCLE shall mean an electric bicycle equipped with a
motor that provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling, and that ceases
to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 mph.
      CLASS 2 ELECTRIC BICYCLE shall mean an electric bicycle equipped with a
motor that may be used exclusively to propel the bicycle, and that is not
capable of providing assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 mph.
      CLASS 3 ELECTRIC BICYCLE shall mean an electric bicycle equipped with a
motor that provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling, and that ceases
to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 28 mph.
      (1)   CLASS 1 and CLASS 2 ELECTRIC BICYCLES  
         (a)   May be operated on public streets, roadways, bike paths adjacent
to roadways and shared use paths.
         (b)   Are prohibited from being operated on a path intended to be used
primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or other similar uses,
or any other single track or natural surface trail.
      (2)   CLASS 3 ELECTRIC BICYCLES  
         (a)   May be operated on public streets, roadways and bike paths
adjacent to roadways
         (b)   Are prohibited frm being operated on a path intended to be used
primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or other similar uses,
or any single track, natural surface or shared use trails.
            (By-law 8-05)
   (C)   Except as provided in division (E) of this section, a bicycle operator
or electric bicycle operator who violates any provisions of this title
described in division (A) of this section that is applicable to bicycles or
electric bicycles may be issued a ticket, citation, or summons by a law
enforcement officer for the violation in the same manner as the operator of a
motor vehicle would be cited for the same violation. A person who commits any
such violation while operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall not have any
points assessed against the person’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary license under R.C. §
4510.036.
   (D)   Except as provided in division (E) of this section, in the case of a
violation of any provision of this title described in division (A) of this
section by a bicycle operator, electric bicycle operator, or motor vehicle
operator when the trier of fact finds that the violation by the motor vehicle
operator endangered the lives of bicycle riders or electric bicycle riders at
the time of the violation, the court, notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio
Revised Code to the contrary, may require the bicycle operator, electric
bicycle operator, or motor vehicle operator to take and successfully complete a
bicycling skills course approved by the court in addition to or in lieu of any
penalty otherwise prescribed by this traffic code or the Ohio Revised Code for
that violation.
   (E)   Divisions (C) and (D) of this section do not apply to violations of
R.C. § 4511.19.
(R.C. § 4511.52) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.02 OPERATION OF MOTORIZED BICYCLE.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, unless all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The person is 14 or 15 years of age and holds a valid probationary
motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test provided
for in this section, or the person is 16 years of age or older and holds either
a valid commercial driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 or a
driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid motorized bicycle
license issued after the person has passed the test provided for in this
section, except that if a person is 16 years of age, has a valid probationary
motorized bicycle license and desires a motorized bicycle license, the person
is not required to comply with the testing requirements provided for in this
section;
      (2)   The motorized bicycle is equipped in accordance with the rules
adopted under division (B) of this section and is in proper working order;
      (3)   The person, if under 18 years of age, is wearing a protective
helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened and the
motorized bicycle is equipped with a rearview mirror;
      (4)   The person operates the motorized bicycle when practicable within
three feet of the right edge of the roadway obeying all traffic rules
applicable to vehicles.
   (B)   The Director of Public Safety, subject to R.C. Chapter 119, shall
adopt and promulgate rules concerning protective helmets, the equipment of
motorized bicycles, and the testing and qualifications of persons who do not
hold a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license. The test shall be as near
as practicable to the examination required for a motorcycle operator’s
endorsement under R.C. § 4507.11. The test shall also require the operator to
give an actual demonstration of the operator’s ability to operate and control a
motorized bicycle by driving one under the supervision of an examining officer.
   (C)   Every motorized bicycle license expires on the birthday of the
applicant in the fourth or eighth year after the date it is issued, based on
the period of renewal requested by the applicant. No motorized bicycle license
shall be issued for a period longer than eight years. A person who is 65 years
of age or older may only apply for a motorized bicycle license that expires on
the birthday of the applicant in the fourth year after the date it is issued.
   (D)   No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry another person
upon the motorized bicycle.
   (E)   The protective helmet and rearview mirror required by division (A)(3)
of this section shall, on and after January 1, 1985, conform with rules adopted
by the Chief Executive Officer under division (B) of this section.
(R.C. § 4511.521) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Suspension of probationary motorized bicycle license by the state, see R.C.
§ 4510.34
§ 75.03 RULES FOR BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, AND SNOWMOBILES.
   (A)   As used in this section, SNOWMOBILE has the same meaning as given that
term in R.C. § 4519.01.
   (B)   (1)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall ride
other than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto or
carry any other person upon such bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon a
firmly attached and regular seat thereon, and no person shall ride upon a
bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon such a firmly attached and regular
seat.
      (2)   No person operating a motorcycle shall ride other than upon or
astride the permanent and regular seat or saddle attached thereto, or carry any
other person upon such motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular
seat or saddle thereon, and no person shall ride upon a motorcycle other than
upon such a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle.
      (3)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a
saddle other than while sitting astride the saddle, facing forward, with one
leg on each side of the motorcycle.
      (4)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a seat
other than while sitting upon the seat.
      (5)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall carry any
package, bundle, or article that prevents the driver from keeping at least one
hand upon the handlebars.
      (6)   No bicycle, electric bicycle, or motorcycle shall be used to carry
more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
No motorcycle shall be operated on a highway when the handlebars rise higher
than the shoulders of the operator when the operator is seated in the
operator’s seat or saddle.
   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this section, no person
shall operate or be a passenger on a snowmobile or motorcycle without using
safety glasses or other protective eye device. Except as provided in division
(C)(3) of this section, no person who is under the age of 18 years, or who
holds a motorcycle operator’s endorsement or license bearing a “novice”
designation that is currently in effect as provided in R.C. § 4507.13, shall
operate a motorcycle on a highway, or be a passenger on a motorcycle, unless
wearing a protective helmet on the person’s head, and no other person shall be
a passenger on a motorcycle operated by such a person unless similarly wearing
a protective helmet. The helmet, safety glasses, or other protective eye device
shall conform with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. The
provisions of this paragraph or a violation thereof shall not be used in the
trial of any civil action.
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this section, no
person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary instruction permit and
temporary instruction permit identification card issued by the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 unless the person, at the time of
such operation, is wearing on the person’s head a protective helmet that
conforms with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety.
         (b)   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary
instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 in any of the
following circumstances:
            1.   At any time when lighted lights are required by R.C. § 4513.03
(A)(1);
            2.   While carrying a passenger;
            3.   On any limited access highway.
      (3)   Divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2)(a) of this section do not apply to a
person who operates or is a passenger in an autocycle or cab-enclosed
motorcycle when the occupant compartment top is in place enclosing the
occupants.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the carrying
of a child in a seat or trailer that is designed for carrying children and is
firmly attached to the bicycle or electric bicycle.
(R.C. § 4511.53) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.04 PROHIBITION AGAINST ATTACHING BICYCLES AND SLEDS TO VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person riding upon any bicycle, electric bicycle, coaster, roller
skates, sled, skateboard, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or self to any
vehicle upon a roadway.
   (B)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding upon any bicycle,
electric bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, skateboard, or toy vehicle to
attach the same or self to any vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway.
   (C)   This section does not apply to towing a disabled vehicle.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.54) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.05 RIDING BICYCLES; MOTORCYCLES ABREAST.
   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle upon a roadway or
a trail shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable
obeying all traffic rules applicable to vehicles and exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. Where a
walking or bicycle trail has been provided adjacent to any road or highway, all
pedestrians, equestrians and bicyclists shall use said path.
   (B)   Persons riding bicycles, electric bicycles, or motorcycles upon a
roadway shall ride not more than two abreast in a single lane, except on paths
or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, electric
bicycles, or motorcycles.
   (C)   This section does not require a person operating a bicycle or electric
bicycle to ride at the edge of the roadway when it is unreasonable or unsafe to
do so. Conditions that may require riding away from the edge of the roadway
include when necessary to avoid fixed or moving objects, parked or moving
vehicles, surface hazards, or if it otherwise is unsafe or impracticable to do
so, including if the lane is too narrow for the bicycle or electric bicycle and
an overtaking vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under R.C. §
4511.991.
(R.C. § 4511.55) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.06 SIGNAL DEVICES ON BICYCLE.
   (A)   Every bicycle or electric bicycle when in use at the times specified
in R.C. § 4513.03 shall be equipped with the following:
      (1)   A lamp mounted on the front of either the bicycle or electric
bicycle or the operator that shall emit a white light visible from a distance
of at least 500 feet to the front and 300 feet to the sides. A generator-
powered lamp that emits light only when the bicycle or electric bicycle is
moving may be used to meet this requirement;
      (2)   A red reflector on the rear that shall be visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle;
      (3)   A lamp emitting either flashing or steady red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear shall be used in addition to the red
reflector. If the red lamp performs as a reflector in that it is visible as
specified in division (A)(2) of this section, the red lamp may serve as the
reflector and a separate reflector is not required.
   (B)   Additional lamps and reflectors may be used in addition to those
required under division (A) of this section, except that red lamps and red
reflectors shall not be used on the front of the bicycle or electric bicycle
and white lamps and white reflectors shall not be used on the rear of the
bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (C)   A bicycle or electric bicycle may be equipped with a device capable of
giving an audible signal, except that a bicycle or electric bicycle shall not
be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle or electric bicycle
any siren or whistle.
   (D)   Every bicycle or electric bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate
brake when used on a street or highway.
(R.C. § 4511.56) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.07 ELECTRIC BICYCLES.
   (A)   (1)   On and after January 1, 2020, manufacturers and distributors of
electric bicycles shall permanently affix a label, in a prominent location, to
each electric bicycle. The label shall specify whether the electric bicycle is
a class 1, class 2, or class 3 electric bicycle, the top assisted speed that
the electric bicycle is capable of reaching, and the motor wattage of the
electric bicycle.
      (2)   No person shall modify an electric bicycle in a manner that changes
the top assisted speed that the electric bicycle is capable of reaching unless
the person also modifies the label required under division (A)(1) of this
section to reflect the modification.
   (B)   (1)   The manufacturer of an electric bicycle shall ensure that the
electric bicycle complies with the equipment and manufacturing requirements for
bicycles established by the consumer product safety commission under 16 C.F.R.
§§ 1512 et seq.
      (2)   The manufacturer shall manufacture all class 1 electric bicycles
and class 3 electric bicycles so that when the rider ceases pedaling the
electric motor ceases to provide assistance. The manufacturer shall manufacture
all class 2 electric bicycles so that when the rider applies the brakes or
releases or activates a switch or similar mechanism the electric motor ceases
to provide assistance.
      (3)   All class 3 electric bicycles shall be equipped with a speedometer
that displays the speed of the electric bicycle in miles per hour.
   (C)   (1)   The operation of a class 1 electric bicycle and a class 2
electric bicycle is permitted on a path set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles or on a shared-use path, unless the county, township, municipal
corporation, other local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60
with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule prohibits the use
of a class 1 electric bicycle or class 2 electric bicycle on such a path.
      (2)   No person shall operate a class 3 electric bicycle on a path set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or a shared-use path unless that path
is within or adjacent to a highway or the county, township, municipal
corporation, or local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60 with
control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule authorizes the use of a
class 3 electric bicycle on such a path.
      (3)   No person shall operate a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2
electric bicycle, or a class 3 electric bicycle on a path that is intended to
be used primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or other similar
uses, or any other single track or natural surface trail that has historically
been reserved for non-motorized use, unless the county, township, municipal
corporation, other local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60
with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule authorizes the use
of a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2 electric bicycle, or a class 3
electric bicycle on such a path.
      (4)   Divisions (C)(2) and (C)(3) of this section do not apply to a law
enforcement officer, or other person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic
laws of the state, using an electric bicycle while in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
   (D)   (1)   No person under 16 years of age shall operate a class 3 electric
bicycle; however, a person under 16 years of age may ride as a passenger on a
class 3 electric bicycle that is designed to accommodate passengers.
      (2)   No person shall operate or be a passenger on a class 3 electric
bicycle unless the person is wearing a protective helmet that meets the
standards established by the Consumer Product Safety Commission or the American
Society for Testing and Materials.
(R.C. § 4511.522) Penalty, see §
70.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
92.   FIREARMS, FIREWORKS, FIRE PREVENTION
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
   
90.01   Hunting and molesting wildlife
   
90.02   Domestic animals prohibited
   
90.03   Certain pets permitted; supervision; removal of fecal matter
   
90.04   Pets in play areas
   
90.05   Jacklighting prohibited
   
90.06   Wild animals; ownership by state
   
90.07   Fishing license required
   
90.08   Fishing regulations
 
   
90.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Animal compliance with traffic regulations, see §
72.27
§ 90.01 HUNTING AND MOLESTING WILDLIFE.
   (A)   No person in the confines of the park shall hunt, pursue with dogs,
trap, molest, harm, harass, injure, feed, or disturb wild animals or take wild
birds or animals, or therein rob or molest any bird nest or take the eggs of
any bird found in the confines of the park. Feeding in designated areas for
educational purposes may be permitted with authorization from the Chief
Executive Officer.
   (B)   Special exceptions to trapping, hunting, or other control measures for
a population of wild animal species may be permitted for purposes of scientific
research or wildlife management. These measures must be conducted in accordance
with established park district policies and procedures and with written
authorization from the Chief Executive Officer.
   (C)   Trapping and removal of non-native animals to preserve native wildlife
and habitats may be accomplished by park personnel.
(Prior by-law § 3) (Amended 8- -2005) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.02 DOMESTIC ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall herd, graze, drive, or permit to run at large within the
park, any cattle, horse, mule, donkey, goat, swine, sheep, or other animals, or
any poultry or other fowl, without specific written permission from the Chief
Executive Officer.
(Prior by-law § 15) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 CERTAIN PETS PERMITTED; SUPERVISION; REMOVAL OF FECAL MATTER.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, PET shall mean any privately owned
animal, whether domestic or wild.
   (B)   Without specific written permission from the Chief Executive Officer,
or in designated authorized off-leash area, no person shall bring into, feed,
or keep in the park, any animal destructive of wildlife, nor bring into or
permit within the park a domestic dog, or a domestic cat unless such is under
constant control and supervision, and held on a leash no longer than six feet
in length.
   (C)   No pets or other animals shall be allowed to disturb or become a
nuisance to other users of the park.
   (D)   No person shall release, abandon, or deposit any animal, domestic or
wild, without permission from the Chief Executive Officer.
   (E)   No person, while in or on a moving motor vehicle, motorized bicycle,
or bicycle, shall lead or permit to be led, any leashed pet or animal.
   (F)   It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner, keeper, or
person in control of any pet which has deposited any fecal matter on park
district trails or in park district recreation areas, to immediately cause said
fecal matter to be removed and deposited in a suitable container or receptacle
under the immediate control of the owner, keeper, or person in control of the
pet.
   (G)   This section does not assure admittance of park visitors with their
pets to such locations and at such times as may conflict with Board of Health
requirements or preservation of public safety and order within the park.
(Prior by-law § 15A) (Amended 4-19-2006) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 PETS IN PLAY AREAS.
   Pets are not permitted in play equipment areas in the park.
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 JACKLIGHTING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall throw or cast the rays of a spotlight or other
artificial light from any vehicle into any field, woodland, or forest while
having in his or her possession a hunting device, or throw or cast the rays of
a spotlight or other artificial light from any vehicle into any field,
woodland, or forest for the purpose of locating a wild animal.
   (B)   This section does not apply to law enforcement officers, wildlife
officers, military personnel, and officers or employees of the Department of
Natural Resources while in the performance of their duties, or to any landowner
or lessee having a reason to use a light while engaged in surveillance or
protection of his or her property.
   (C)   An officer whose duty it is to enforce this chapter may arrest a
person whom he or she has reasonable grounds to believe is violating this
section, search the vehicle for firearms or other hunting implements in the
possession or under the control of that person, and seize the same.   
(R.C. § 1533.161) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 WILD ANIMALS; OWNERSHIP BY STATE.
   (A)   The ownership of and the title to all wild animals in this state, not
legally confined or held by private ownership legally acquired, is in the
state, which holds such title in trust for the benefit of all the people.
Individual possession shall be obtained only in accordance with the Revised
Code or division rules. No person at any time of the year shall take in any
manner or possess any number or quantity of wild animals, except wild animals
that the Revised Code or division rules permit to be taken, hunted, killed, or
had in possession, and only at the time and place and in the manner that the
Revised Code or division rules prescribe. No person shall buy, sell, or offer
any part of wild animals for sale, or transport any part of wild animals,
except as permitted by the Revised Code or division rules. No person shall
possess or transport a wild animal that has been taken or possessed unlawfully
outside the state.
   (B)   A person doing anything prohibited or neglecting to do anything
required by this chapter or R.C. Chapter 1533 or contrary to any division rule
violates this section. A person who counsels, aids, shields, or harbors an
offender under those chapters or any division rule, or who knowingly shares in
the proceeds of such a violation, or receives or possesses any wild animal in
violation of the Revised Code or division rule, violates this section.
(R.C. § 1531.02) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 FISHING LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Except as provided in this section or R.C. § 1533.12(A)(2) or (C), or
as exempted at the discretion of the Chief of the Division of Wildlife, no
person, including nonresidents, shall take or catch any fish by angling in any
of the waters in the state or engage in fishing in those waters without a
license. No person shall take or catch frogs or turtles without a valid fishing
license, except as provided in this section. Persons fishing in privately owned
ponds, lakes, or reservoirs to or from which fish are not accustomed to migrate
are exempt from the license requirements set forth in this section. Persons
fishing in privately owned ponds, lakes, or reservoirs that are open to public
fishing through an agreement or lease with the Division of Wildlife shall
comply with the license requirements set forth in this section.
   (B)   The fee for an annual license for a resident of a state that is not a
party to an agreement under R.C. § 1533.91 shall be as set by this state. The
fee for an annual license for a resident of a state that is a party to such an
agreement shall be as set by this state. The fee for an annual license for
residents of this state shall be as set by this state unless the rules adopted
under R.C. § 1533.12(B) provide for issuance of a resident fishing license to
the applicant free of charge. Except as provided in rules adopted under R.C. §
1533.12(B)(2), each applicant who is a resident of this state and who at the
time of application is 66 years of age or older shall procure a special senior
fishing license, the fee for which shall be one-half of the annual resident
fishing license fee.
   (C)   Any person under the age of 16 years may take or catch frogs and
turtles and take or catch fish by angling without a license.
   (D)   The Chief of the Division of Wildlife may issue a tourist’s license
expiring three days from the effective date of the license to a resident of a
state that is not a party to an agreement under R.C. §
   (E)   The Chief shall adopt rules under R.C. § 1531.10 providing for the
issuance of a one-day fishing license to a resident of this state or of any
other state. The fee for such a license shall be 55% of the amount established
under this section for a tourist’s license, rounded up to the nearest whole
dollar. A one-day fishing license shall allow the holder to take or catch fish
by angling in the waters in the state, engage in fishing in those waters, or
take or catch frogs or turtles in those waters for one day without obtaining an
annual license or a tourist’s license under this section. At the request of a
holder of a one-day fishing license who wishes to obtain an annual license, a
clerk or agent authorized to issue licenses under R.C. § 1533.13, not later
than the last day on which the one-day license would be valid if it were an
annual license, shall credit the amount of the fee paid for the one-day license
toward the fee charged for the annual license if so authorized by the Chief.
The clerk or agent shall issue the annual license upon presentation of the one-
day license and payment of a fee in an amount equal to the difference between
the fee for the annual license and the fee for the one-day license.
   (F)   Unless otherwise provided by division rule, each annual license shall
begin on the date of issuance and expire a year from the date of issuance.
   (G)   Unless otherwise provided by division rule, each multi-year license
issued in accordance with R.C. § 1533.321 shall begin on the date of issuance
and expire three years, five years, or ten years from the date of issuance, as
applicable.
   (H)   No person shall alter a fishing license or possess a fishing license
that has been altered.
   (I)   No person shall procure or attempt to procure a fishing license by
fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, or any false statement.
   (J)   A resident of this state who owns land over, through, upon, or along
which any water flows or stands, except where the land is in or borders on
state parks or state-owned lakes, together with the members of the immediate
families of such owners, may take frogs and turtles and may take or catch fish
of the kind permitted to be taken or caught therefrom without procuring a
license provided for in this section. This exemption extends to tenants
actually residing upon such lands and to the members of the immediate families
of the tenants. A resident of any other state who owns land in this state over,
through, upon, or along which any water flows or stands, except where the land
is in or borders on state parks or state-owned lakes, and the spouse and
children living with the owner, may take frogs and turtles and may take or
catch fish of the kind permitted to be taken or caught from that water without
obtaining a license under this section, provided that the state of residence of
the owner allows residents of this state owning real property in that state,
and the spouse and children living with such a property owner, to take frogs
and turtles and take or catch fish without a license. If the owner of such land
in this state is a limited liability company or a limited liability partnership
that consists of three or fewer individual members or partners, as applicable,
an individual member or partner who is a resident of this state and the
member’s or partner’s children of any age may take frogs and turtles and may
take or catch fish of the kind permitted to be taken or caught therefrom
without procuring a license provided for in this section. In addition, if the
owner of such land in this state is a trust that has a total of three or fewer
trustees and beneficiaries, an individual who is a trustee or beneficiary and
who is a resident of this state and the individual’s children of any age may
take frogs and turtles and may take or catch fish of the kind permitted to be
taken or caught therefrom without procuring a license provided for in this
section. Residents of state or county institutions, charitable institutions,
and military homes in this state may take frogs and turtles without procuring
the required license, provided that a member of the institution or home has an
identification card, which shall be carried on that person when fishing.
   (K)   Every fisher required to be licensed, while fishing or taking or
attempting to take frogs or turtles, shall carry the license and exhibit it to
any person. Failure to so carry and exhibit the license constitutes an offense
under this section.
(R.C. § 1533.32) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 FISHING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   In permitted areas and waters within the park, fishing is subject to
the statutes of the State of Ohio, except that the use of hooks left
unattended, traps, spears, gigs, or bows and arrows for fishing are prohibited,
and fishing shall not be permitted during the hours the park is closed. Fishing
is only permitted in park waters or from park areas designated by the Chief
Executive Officer. No person shall fish in park waters or from park areas not
designated for fishing by the Chief Executive Officer.
   (B)   Seining, netting, or trapping of fish or other animals from park
streams and waters is prohibited unless for authorized research or control.
   (C)   Ice fishing is permitted at designated areas and times only.
(Amended 8- -2005) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than
$150 for a first offense and not more than $1,000 for each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 1545.99)
CHAPTER 91: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Activities prohibited without permit
   
91.03   Misrepresentation to obtain alcoholic beverage for a minor prohibited
   
91.04   Misrepresentation by a minor under 21 years
   
91.041   Prohibitions; minors under 18 years; low alcohol beverages
   
91.05   Prohibition against consumption in motor vehicle
   
91.06   Open container prohibited in park
   
91.07   Open container near roadway
   
91.08   Bringing alcohol onto permit premises
   
91.09   Furnishing alcohol to minors
 
   
91.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Public intoxication, see §
132.12
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, whether rectified or diluted with water or not,
whatever its origin may be, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol. The term does
not include denatured alcohol and wood alcohol.
   AT RETAIL. For use or consumption by the purchaser and not for resale.
   BEER.
      (1)   Includes all beverages brewed or fermented wholly or in part from
malt products and containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
      (2)   Beer, regardless of the percent of alcohol by volume, is not
intoxicating liquor for purposes of this code, the Ohio Revised Code, or any
rules adopted under it.
   CIDER. All liquids that are fit to use for beverage purposes that contain
0.5% of alcohol by volume, but not more than 6% of alcohol by weight that are
made through the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of sound, ripe
apples, including, without limitation, flavored, sparkling, or carbonated cider
and cider made from pure condensed apple must.
   CLUB. A corporation or association of individuals organized in good faith
for social, recreational, benevolent, charitable, fraternal, political,
patriotic, or athletic purposes, which is the owner, lessor, or occupant of a
permanent building or part of a permanent building operated solely for such
purposes, membership in which entails the prepayment of regular dues, and
includes the place so operated.
   COMMUNITY FACILITY. Means either of the following:
      (1)   Any convention, sports, or entertainment facility or complex, or
any combination of these, that is used by or accessible to the general public
and that is owned or operated in whole or in part by the state, a state agency,
or a political subdivision of the state or that is leased from, or located on
property owned by or leased from, the state, a state agency, a political
subdivision of the state, or a convention facilities authority created pursuant
to R.C. § 351.02;
      (2)   An area designated as a community entertainment district pursuant
to R.C. § 4301.80.
   CONTROLLED ACCESS ALCOHOL AND BEVERAGE CABINET. A closed container, either
refrigerated, in whole or in part, or nonrefrigerated, access to the interior
of which is restricted by means of a device that requires the use of a key,
magnetic card, or similar device and from which beer, intoxicating liquor,
other beverages, or food may be sold.
   HOTEL. The same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01, subject to the exceptions
mentioned in R.C. § 3731.03.
   INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR. All liquids and compounds, other than beer,
containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume which are fit to use for beverage
purposes, from whatever source and by whatever process produced, by whatever
name called, and whether they are medicated, proprietary, or patented. The
terms include cider and alcohol, and all solids and confections which contain
0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
   LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGE. Any brewed or fermented malt product or any product
made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other agricultural
products that contains either no alcohol or less than 0.5% of alcohol by
volume. The beverages described in this definition do not include a soft drink
such as root beer, birch beer, or ginger beer.
   MANUFACTURE. All processes by which beer or intoxicating liquor is produced,
whether by distillation, rectifying, fortifying, blending, fermentation,
brewing, or in any other manner.
   MANUFACTURER. Any person engaged in the business of manufacturing beer or
intoxicating liquor.
   MIXED BEVERAGES. Include bottled and prepared cordials, cocktails,
highballs, and solids and confections that are obtained by mixing any type of
whiskey, neutral spirits, brandy, gin, or other distilled spirits with, or
over, carbonated or plain water, pure juices from flowers and plants, and other
flavoring materials. The completed product shall contain not less than 0.5% of
alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume. The phrase
includes the contents of a pod.
   NIGHTCLUB. A place habitually operated for profit, where food is served for
consumption on the premises, and one or more forms of amusement are provided or
permitted for a consideration that may be in the form of a cover charge or may
be included in the price of the food and beverages, or both, purchased by
patrons.
   PERSON. Includes firms and corporations.
   PHARMACY. An establishment as defined in R.C. § 4729.01, that is under the
management or control of a licensed pharmacist in accordance with R.C. §
4729.27.
   POD. Means a sealed capsule made from plastic, glass, aluminum, or a
combination thereof to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The capsule contains intoxicating liquor of more than 21% of
alcohol by volume.
      (2)   The capsule also contains a concentrated flavoring mixture.
      (3)   The contents of the capsule are not readily accessible or intended
for consumption unless certain manufacturer’s processing instructions are
followed.
      (4)   The instructions include releasing the contents of the capsule
through a machine specifically designed to process the contents.
      (5)   After being properly processed according to the manufacturer’s
instructions, the final product produced from the capsule contains not less
than 0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume.
   RESTAURANT. A place located in a permanent building provided with space and
accommodations wherein, in consideration of the payment of money, hot meals are
habitually prepared, sold, and served at noon and evening, as the principal
business of the place. The term does not include pharmacies, confectionery
stores, lunch stands, nightclubs, and filling stations.
   SALE and SELL. The exchange, barter, gift, offer for sale, sale,
distribution, and delivery of any kind, and the transfer of title or possession
of beer and intoxicating liquor either by constructive or actual delivery by
any means or devices whatever, including the sale of beer or intoxicating
liquor by means of a controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet pursuant to
R.C. § 4301.21. Such terms do not include the mere solicitation of orders for
beer or intoxicating liquor from the holders of permits issued by the Division
of Liquor Control authorizing the sale of the beer or intoxicating liquor, but
no solicitor shall solicit any orders until the solicitor has been registered
with the Division pursuant to R.C. § 4303.25.
   SALES AREA OR TERRITORY. An exclusive geographic area or territory that is
assigned to a particular A or B permit holder and that either has one or more
political subdivisions as its boundaries or consists of an area of land with
readily identifiable geographic boundaries. The term does not include, however,
any particular retail location in an exclusive geographic area or territory
that had been assigned to another A or B permit holder before April 9, 2001.
   SEALED CONTAINER. Any container having a capacity of not more than 128 fluid
ounces, the opening of which is closed to prevent the entrance of air.
   SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR. All intoxicating liquors containing more than 21% of
alcohol by volume. The phrase does not include the contents of a pod.
   VEHICLE. All means of transportation by land, by water, or by air, and
everything made use of in any way for such transportation.
   WHOLESALE DISTRIBUTOR and DISTRIBUTOR. A person engaged in the business of
selling to retail dealers for purposes of resale.
   WINE. All liquids fit to use for beverage purposes containing not less than
0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume, that is
made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other agricultural
products. The term includes cider, except as used in R.C. §§ 4301.13, 4301.421,
4301.422, 4301.432, and 4301.44, and, for purposes of determining the rate of
the tax that applies, R.C. § 4301.43(B), the term does not include cider.
(R.C. §§ 4301.01, 4301.244)
§ 91.02 ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED WITHOUT PERMIT.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. An organization described under section 501(c)
(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and exempt from federal income taxation under
section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      FUNDRAISER. Means a raffle, silent auction, or event where a door prize
is awarded.
      POLITICAL ORGANIZATION. Means a political organization defined under
section 527 of the Internal Revenue Code.
      RAFFLE. Means a raffle conducted in accordance with R.C. Chapter 2915.
      SILENT AUCTION. Means a method of submitting bids in writing by one or
more persons and, after a review of all the bids received, personal property is
awarded to the highest and most responsive bidder.
   (B)   No person, personally or by the person’s clerk, agent, or employee,
who is not the holder of an A permit issued by the Ohio Division of Liquor
Control, in force at the time, and authorizing the manufacture of beer or
intoxicating liquor, or who is not an agent or employee of the Division
authorized to manufacture such beer or intoxicating liquor, shall manufacture
any beer or intoxicating liquor for sale, or shall manufacture spirituous
liquor.
   (C)   No person, personally or by the person’s clerk, agent, or employee,
who is not the holder of an A, B, C, D, E, F, G, I, or S permit issued by the
Division, in force at the time, and authorizing the sale of beer, intoxicating
liquor, or alcohol, or who is not an agent or employee of the Division or the
Tax Commissioner authorized to sell such beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol,
shall sell, keep, or possess beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol for sale to
any persons other than those authorized by R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 to
purchase any beer or intoxicating liquor, or sell any alcohol at retail.
   (D)   No person, personally or by the person’s clerk, agent, or employee,
who is the holder of a permit issued by the Division, shall sell, keep, or
possess for sale any intoxicating liquor not purchased from the Division or
from the holder of a permit issued by the Division authorizing the sale of such
intoxicating liquor unless the same has been purchased with the special consent
of the Division. The Division shall revoke the permit of any person convicted
of a violation of division (C) of this section.
   (E)   Division (C) of this section does not apply to either of the
following:
      (1)   The sale or possession for sale of any low-alcohol beverage;
      (2)   Beer and intoxicating liquor that is given away if all of the
following apply:
         (a)   The beer or intoxicating liquor is given away by a charitable or
political organization to a participant in a fundraiser.
         (b)   Any beer, wine, or mixed beverages given away via the fundraiser
is purchased from a person issued a permit under R.C. Chapter 4303.
         (c)   Any spirituous liquor given away via the fundraiser is purchased
from an agency store located in this state.
         (d)   Regarding any spirituous liquor donated to the charitable or
political organization for purposes of the fundraiser, the donor is not an
agency store located in this state and submits to the charitable or political
organization receipts showing that the donor purchased the spirituous liquor
from an agency store located in this state.
         (e)   The charitable or political organization submits purchase
receipts for the spirituous liquor given away via a fundraiser to the Division
of Liquor Control as proof that the spirituous liquor was purchased from an
agency store located in this state. The charitable or political organization
shall submit the receipts in accordance with procedures that the Division shall
establish.
(R.C. § 4301.58) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 MISREPRESENTATION TO OBTAIN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE FOR A MINOR PROHIBITED.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301, no
person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the name, age, or
other identification of any person under 21 years of age, for the purpose of
obtaining, or with the intent to obtain, beer or intoxicating liquor for a
person under 21 years of age, by purchase, or as a gift.
(R.C. § 4301.633) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 MISREPRESENTATION BY A MINOR UNDER 21 YEARS.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301, no
person under the age of 21 years shall knowingly show or give false information
concerning his or her name, age, or other identification for the purpose of
purchasing or otherwise obtaining beer or intoxicating liquor in any place in
this park district where beer or intoxicating liquor is sold under a permit
issued by the Division of Liquor Control, or sold by the Division of Liquor
Control.
(R.C. § 4301.634) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.041 PROHIBITIONS; MINORS UNDER 18 YEARS; LOW ALCOHOL BEVERAGES.
   (A)   As used in this section, UNDERAGE PERSON means a person under 18 years
of age.
   (B)   No underage person shall purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (C)   No underage person shall order, pay for, share the cost of, or attempt
to purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the
name, age, or other identification of any underage person for the purpose of
obtaining or with the intent to obtain any low- alcohol beverage for an
underage person, by purchase or as a gift.
   (E)   No underage person shall knowingly show or give false information
concerning his or her name, age, or other identification for the purpose of
purchasing or otherwise obtaining any low-alcohol beverage in any place in this
state.
   (F)   No person shall sell or furnish any low-alcohol beverage to, or buy
any low-alcohol beverage for, an underage person, unless given by a physician
in the regular line of his or her practice or given for established religious
purposes, or unless the underage person is accompanied by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person, or legal guardian.
   (G)   (1)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private
place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place
while possessing or consuming any low-alcohol beverage, unless the low-alcohol
beverage is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that person’s
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, and the
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present when
the person possesses or consumes the low-alcohol beverage.
      (2)   An owner of a public or private place is not liable for acts or
omissions in violation of division (G)(1) that are committed by a lessee of
that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s acts or
omissions.
   (H)   No permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control shall be suspended,
revoked, or cancelled because of a violation of either division (F) or (G).
   (I)   No underage person shall knowingly possess or consume any low-alcohol
beverage in any public or private place, unless he or she is accompanied by a
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or unless the
low-alcohol beverage is given by a physician in the regular line of his or her
practice or given for established religious purposes.
   (J)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
an underage person shall knowingly permit the underage person to violate this
section.
(R.C. § 4301.631) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.05 PROHIBITION AGAINST CONSUMPTION IN MOTOR VEHICLE.
   No person shall consume any beer or intoxicating liquor in a motor vehicle.
This section does not apply to persons described in R.C. § 4301.62(D).
(R.C. § 4301.64) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 OPEN CONTAINER PROHIBITED IN PARK.
   (A)   No person shall possess an open container of beer or intoxicating
liquor, as defined by R.C. § 4301.01, within any park, except within the
confines and privacy afforded in a cabin, tent, camping vehicle, permit
premises, or other non-public areas reserved or leased from the Board.
   (B)   No person under the age of 21 years shall possess a container of beer
or intoxicating liquor.
(Prior by-law § 9) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.07 OPEN CONTAINER NEAR ROADWAY.
   No person shall possess nor consume an open container of beer or
intoxicating liquor within 20 feet of a parking area or roadway.
(Prior by-law § 9C) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.08 BRINGING ALCOHOL ONTO PERMIT PREMISES.
   No person shall have in his or her possession an opened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor on the premises of the holder of any permit issued by the
Department of Liquor Control as defined in R.C. § 4301.62. This section does
not apply to beer or intoxicating liquor which has been lawfully purchased from
the permit holder for consumption on the premises.
(Prior by-law § 9D) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.09 FURNISHING ALCOHOL TO MINORS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor to an underage person, shall
buy beer or intoxicating liquor for an underage person, or shall furnish it to
an underage person unless given by a physician in the regular line of the
physician’s practice or given for established religious purposes or unless the
underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage
person, or legal guardian. In proceedings before the Liquor Control Commission,
no permit holder, or no employee or agent of a permit holder, charged with a
violation of this division (A) shall be charged, for the same offense, with a
violation of R.C. § 4301.22(A)(1).
   (B)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private place
shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place while
possessing or consuming beer or intoxicating liquor, unless the intoxicating
liquor or beer is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that
person’s parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian and
the parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present
at the time of the person’s possession or consumption of the beer or
intoxicating liquor. An owner of a public or private place is not liable for
acts or omissions in violation of this division (B) that are committed by a
lessee of that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s
acts or omissions.
   (C)   No person shall engage or use accommodations at a hotel, inn, cabin,
campground, or restaurant when the person knows or has reason to know either of
the following:
      (1)   That beer or intoxicating liquor will be consumed by an underage
person on the premises of the accommodations that the person engages or uses,
unless the person engaging or using the accommodations is the spouse of the
underage person and who is not an underage person, or is the parent or legal
guardian of all of the underage persons, who consume beer or intoxicating
liquor on the premises and that person is on the premises at all times when
beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by an underage person;
      (2)   That a drug of abuse will be consumed on the premises of the
accommodations by any person, except a person who obtained the drug of abuse
pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professionals authorized
to prescribe drugs and has the drug of abuse in the original container in which
it was dispensed to the person.
   (D)   (1)   No person is required to permit the engagement of accommodations
at any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground by an underage person or for an
underage person, if the person engaging the accommodations knows or has reason
to know that the underage person is intoxicated, or that the underage person
possesses any beer or intoxicating liquor and is not supervised by a parent,
spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian who is or will be
present at all times when the beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by
the underage person.
      (2)   No underage person shall knowingly engage or attempt to engage
accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground by presenting
identification that falsely indicates that the underage person is 21 years of
age or older for the purpose of violating this section.
   (E)   (1)   No underage person shall knowingly order, pay for, share the
cost of, attempt to purchase, possess, or consume any beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public or private place. No underage person shall knowingly be
under the influence of any beer or intoxicating liquor in any public place. The
prohibitions set forth in this division (E) against an underage person
knowingly possessing, consuming, or being under the influence of any beer or
intoxicating liquor shall not apply if the underage person is supervised by a
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or the beer or
intoxicating liquor is given by a physician in the regular line of the
physician’s practice or given for established religious purposes.
      (2)   (a)   If a person is charged with violating division (E)(1) of this
section in a complaint filed under R.C. § 2151.27, the court may order the
child into a diversion program specified by the court and hold the complaint in
abeyance pending successful completion of the diversion program. A child is
ineligible to enter into a diversion program under this division (E)(2) if the
child previously has been diverted pursuant to this division (E)(2). If the
child completes the diversion program to the satisfaction of the court, the
court shall dismiss the complaint and order the child’s record in the case
sealed under R.C. §§ 2151.356 through 2151.358. If the child fails to
satisfactorily complete the diversion program, the court shall proceed with the
complaint.
         (b)   If a person is charged in a criminal complaint with violating
division (E)(1) of this section, R.C. § 2935.36 shall apply to the offense,
except that a person is ineligible for diversion under that section if the
person previously has been diverted pursuant to divisions (E)(2)(a) or (E)(2)
(b) of this section. If the person completes the diversion program to the
satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss the complaint and order the
record in the case sealed under R.C. § 2953.33. If the person fails to
satisfactorily complete the diversion program, the court shall proceed with the
complaint.
   (F)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
a minor shall knowingly permit the minor to violate this section or R.C. §
4301.63, 4301.633, or 4301.634.
   (G)   The operator of any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground shall make the
provisions of this section available in writing to any person engaging or using
accommodations at the hotel, inn, cabin, or campground.
   (H)   As used in this section:
      DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
      HOTEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01.
      LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
      MINOR. Means a person under the age of 18 years.
      PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
      UNDERAGE PERSON. Means a person under the age of 21 years.
(R.C. § 4301.69) (Prior by-law § 9B)
   (I)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4301.633 through 4301.637 shall not be
deemed to modify or affect divisions (A) through (H) of this section or R.C. §
4301.69.
(R.C. § 4301.638) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty
is otherwise provided, shall be fined not more than $150 for a first offense
and not more than $1,000 for each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 1545.99)
CHAPTER 92: FIREARMS, FIREWORKS, FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Firearms
   
92.01   Carrying concealed weapons
   
92.02   Using weapons while intoxicated
   
92.03   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle
   
92.04   Underage purchase of firearms or handguns
   
92.05   Discharging firearms
   
92.06   Possession in park prohibited
   
92.07   Definitions
Fireworks
   
92.10   Restrictions
   
92.11   Permit for possession in park
Fire Prevention
   
92.20   Fires
 
   
92.99   Penalty
FIREARMS
§ 92.01 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly carry or have, concealed on the person’s
person or concealed ready at hand, any of the following:
      (1)   A deadly weapon other than a handgun;
      (2)   A handgun other than a dangerous ordnance;
      (3)   A dangerous ordnance.
   (B)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license shall do any
of the following:
      (1)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, before or at the time a law enforcement officer
asks if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to disclose
that the person then is carrying a concealed handgun, provided that it is not a
violation of this division if the person fails to disclose that fact to an
officer during the stop and the person already has notified another officer of
that fact during the same stop;
      (2)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins approaching
the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless
the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer;
      (3)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose, if the
person is carrying a concealed handgun, and if the person is approached by any
law enforcement officer while stopped, knowingly remove or attempt to remove
the loaded handgun from the holster, pocket, or other place in which the person
is carrying it, knowingly grasp or hold the loaded handgun, or knowingly have
contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with the person’s hands or
fingers at any time after the law enforcement officer begins approaching and
before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the person removes, attempts
to remove, grasps, holds, or has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to
and in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer;
      (4)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any
lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the person is stopped,
including but not limited to a specific order to the person to keep the
person’s hands in plain sight.
   (C)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or to a law enforcement officer, who is authorized to carry
concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry handguns and
is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         (b)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry
handguns, and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C.
§ 109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly
specified that the exemption provided in this division (C)(1)(b) does not apply
to the person;
         (c)   A person’s transportation or storage of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in a motor vehicle for any
lawful purpose if the firearm is not on the actor’s person;
         (d)   A person’s storage or possession of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in the actor’s own home for any
lawful purpose.
      (2)   Division (A)(2) of this section does not apply to any person who
has been issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time of the
alleged carrying or possession of a handgun or who, at the time of the alleged
carrying or possession of a handgun, is an active duty member of the armed
forces of the United States and is carrying a valid military identification
card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets
or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), unless
the person knowingly is in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(1) of this
section of carrying or having control of a weapon other than a handgun and
other than a dangerous ordnance, that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by
law from having the weapon, and that any of the following applies:
      (1)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in or was going to or from the
actor’s lawful business or occupation, which business or occupation was of a
character or was necessarily carried on in a manner or at a time or place as to
render the actor particularly susceptible to criminal attack, such as would
justify a prudent person in going armed;
      (2)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in a lawful activity and had
reasonable cause to fear a criminal attack upon the actor, a member of the
actor’s family, or the actor’s home, such as would justify a prudent person in
going armed;
      (3)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for any
lawful purpose and while in the actor’s own home.
   (E)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of this section shall
be required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a condition for the
dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to, or
has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B)(1) of this section as it
existed prior to June 13, 2022, the person may file an application under R.C. §
2953.35 requesting the expungement of the record of conviction.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of carrying concealed
weapons. Except as otherwise provided in this division (F)(1) or divisions (F)
(2), (F)(6), and (F)(7) of this section, if the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state
law or of any offense of violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is
either loaded or for which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the
weapon involved is dangerous ordnance, carrying concealed weapons in violation
of division (A) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. Except as otherwise provided in divisions (F)(2), (F)(6), and (F)(7)
of this section, if the offense is committed aboard an aircraft, or with
purpose to carry a concealed weapon aboard an aircraft, regardless of the
weapon involved, carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (A) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A person shall not be arrested for a violation of division (A)(2)
of this section solely because the person does not promptly produce a valid
concealed handgun license. If a person is arrested for a violation of division
(A)(2) of this section and is convicted of or pleads guilty to the violation,
the offender shall be punished as follows:
         (a)   The offender shall be guilty of a minor offense if both of the
following apply:
            1.   Within ten days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license, which license was valid at the time of the arrest to
the law enforcement agency that employs the arresting officer;
            2.   At the time of the arrest, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
         (b)   The offender shall be guilty and shall be fined $500 if all of
the following apply:
            1.   The offender previously had been issued a concealed handgun
license, and that license expired within the two years immediately preceding
the arrest;
            2.   Within 45 days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license to the law enforcement agency that employed the
arresting officer, and the offender waives in writing the offender’s right to a
speedy trial on the charge of the violation that is provided in R.C. § 2945.71;
            3.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
not knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
         (c)   If divisions (F)(2)(a) and (F)(2)(b) and (F)(6) of this section
do not apply, the offender shall be punished under division (F)(1) or (F)(7) of
this section.
      (3)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(1) of this
section is an offense.
      (4)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(2) or (B)
(4) of this section is an offense, or, if the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B)(2) or (B)(4) of
this section or any substantially equivalent state law, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. In addition to any other penalty or
sanction imposed for a violation of division (B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section,
the offender’s concealed handgun license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. §
2923.128(A)(2).
      (5)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(3) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (6)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (A)(2) of
this section is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States
and is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of
successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), and if at the time of the
violation the person was not knowingly in a place described in R.C. 2923.126
(B), the officer shall not arrest the person for a violation of that division.
If the person is not able to promptly produce a valid military identification
card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets
or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) and if
the person is not in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B), the officer shall
issue a citation and the offender shall be assessed a civil penalty of not more
than $500. The citation shall be automatically dismissed and the civil penalty
shall not be assessed if both of the following apply:
         (a)   Within ten days after the issuance of the citation, the offender
presents a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), which were both valid at the time of the
issuance of the citation to the law enforcement agency that employs the citing
officer.
         (b)   At the time of the citation, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
      (7)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (A)(2) of
this section is knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B)(5) and is
not authorized to carry a handgun or have a handgun concealed on the person’s
person or concealed ready at hand under that division, the following shall
apply:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person
produces a valid concealed handgun license within ten days after the arrest and
has not previously been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(A)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of an offense;
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A)
(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of an offense;
         (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division
(A)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a an offense;
         (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of
division (A)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, or convicted of or pleaded guilty to any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is a
dangerous ordnance, the person is guilty of an offense.
   (G)   If a law enforcement officer stops a person to question the person
regarding a possible violation of this section, for a traffic stop, or for any
other law enforcement purpose, if the person surrenders a firearm to the
officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the officer,
and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this section
or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise prohibited by
law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not contraband, the officer
shall return the firearm to the person at the termination of the stop. If a
court orders a law enforcement officer to return a firearm to a person pursuant
to the requirement set forth in this division (G), R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.
   (H)   For purposes of this section, “deadly weapon” or “weapon” does not
include any knife, razor, or cutting instrument if the instrument was not used
as a weapon.
(R.C. § 2923.12) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.02 USING WEAPONS WHILE INTOXICATED.
   No person, while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse, shall
carry or use any firearm or dangerous ordnance.
(R.C. § 2923.15) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 IMPROPERLY HANDLING FIREARMS IN A MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly discharge a firearm while in or on a motor
vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded firearm in a
motor vehicle in such a manner that the firearm is accessible to the operator
or any passenger without leaving the vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a motor
vehicle, unless the person may lawfully possess that firearm under applicable
law of this state or the United States, the firearm is unloaded, and the
firearm is carried in one of the following ways:
      (1)   In a closed package, box, or case;
      (2)   In a compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle;
      (3)   In plain sight and secured in a rack or holder made for the
purpose;
      (4)   If the firearm is at least 24 inches in overall length as measured
from the muzzle to the part of the stock furthest from the muzzle and if the
barrel is at least 18 inches in length, either in plain sight with the action
open or the weapon stripped, or, if the firearm is of a type on which the
action will not stay open or which cannot easily be stripped, in plain sight.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded handgun in a
motor vehicle if, at the time of that transportation or possession, any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them;
      (2)   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine
contains a concentration of alcohol, a listed controlled substance, or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance prohibited for persons operating a
vehicle, as specified in R.C. § 4511.19(A), regardless of whether the person at
the time of the transportation or possession as described in this division (D)
(2) is the operator of or a passenger in the motor vehicle.
   (E)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license or who is an
active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a
valid military identification card and documentation of successful completion
of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described
in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), who is the driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle
that is stopped as a result of a traffic stop or a stop for another law
enforcement purpose or is the driver or an occupant of a commercial motor
vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit
for the purposes defined in R.C. § 5503.34, and who is transporting or has a
loaded handgun in the motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle in any manner,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Before or at the time a law enforcement officer asks if the person
is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to disclose that the person
then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle, provided that it
is not a violation of this division if the person fails to disclose that fact
to an officer during the stop and the person already has notified another
officer of that fact during the same stop;
      (2)   Before or at the time an employee of the motor carrier enforcement
unit asks if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to
disclose that the person then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the
commercial motor vehicle, provided that it is not a violation of this division
if the person fails to disclose that fact to an employee of the unit during the
stop and the person already has notified another employee of the unit of that
fact during the same stop;
      (3)   Knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle while stopped, or
knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in plain sight at any time after any
law enforcement officer begins approaching the person while stopped and before
the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in
accordance with directions given by a law enforcement officer;
      (4)   Knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with
the person’s hands or fingers in the motor vehicle at any time after the law
enforcement officer begins approaching and before the law enforcement officer
leaves, unless the person has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to and
in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer;
      (5)   Knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful order of any
law enforcement officer given while the motor vehicle is stopped, including but
not limited to a specific order to the person to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight.
   (F)   (1)   Divisions (A), (B), (C), and (E) of this section do not apply to
any of the following:
         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, when authorized to carry or have
loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles and acting within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         (b)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles, and who is
subject to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless
the appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the
exemption provided in this division (F)(1)(b) does not apply to the person.
      (2)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following circumstances apply:
         (a)   The person discharges a firearm from a motor vehicle at a coyote
or groundhog, the discharge is not during the deer gun hunting season as set by
the Chief of the Division of Wildlife of the Department of Natural Resources,
and the discharge at the coyote or groundhog, but for the operation of this
section, is lawful;
         (b)   The motor vehicle from which the person discharges the firearm
is on real property that is located in an unincorporated area of a township and
that is either zoned for agriculture or is used for agriculture;
         (c)   The person owns the real property described in division (F)(2)
(b) of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that
real property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is
the spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real
property;
         (d)   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the
following manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, highway, or other public or
private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including but not
limited to a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (3)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following apply:
         (a)   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife;
         (b)   The person discharges a firearm at a wild quadruped or game bird
as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 during the open hunting season for the applicable
wild quadruped or game bird;
         (c)   The person discharges a firearm from a stationary all-purpose
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 from private or publicly owned lands or
from a motor vehicle that is parked on a road that is owned or administered by
the Division of Wildlife;
         (d)   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the
following manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, a highway, or other public or
private property that is used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including but not
limited to a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (4)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following circumstances apply:
         (a)   At the time of the alleged violation of either of those
divisions, the person is the operator of or a passenger in a motor vehicle;
         (b)   The motor vehicle is on real property that is located in an
unincorporated area of a township and that is either zoned for agriculture or
is used for agriculture;
         (c)   The person owns the real property described in division (F)(4)
(b) of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that
real property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is
the spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real
property;
         (d)   The person, prior to arriving at the real property described in
division (F)(4)(b) of this section, did not transport or possess a firearm in
the motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (B) or (C) of this section
while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway, or other
public or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking.
      (5)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a person who
transports or possesses a handgun in a motor vehicle if, at the time of that
transportation or possession, both of the following apply:
         (a)   The person transporting or possessing the handgun has been
issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         (b)   The person transporting or possessing the handgun is not
knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
      (6)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following apply:
         (a)   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         (b)   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 or a motor vehicle during the open hunting season for a wild
quadruped or game bird.
         (c)   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 on private or publicly owned lands or on or in a motor vehicle that
is parked on a road that is owned or administered by the Division of Wildlife.
   (G)   (1)   The affirmative defenses authorized in R.C. § 2923.12(D)(1) and
(D)(2) are affirmative defenses to a charge under division (B) or (C) of this
section that involves a firearm other than a handgun.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B) or (C)
of this section of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle that the
actor transported or had the firearm in the motor vehicle for any lawful
purpose and while the motor vehicle was on the actor’s own property, provided
that this affirmative defense is not available unless the person, immediately
prior to arriving at the actor’s own property, did not transport or possess the
firearm in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (B) or (C) of
this section while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway,
or other public or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic.
   (H)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of division (B), (C),
or (D) of this section shall be required to obtain a concealed handgun license
as a condition for the dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   (a)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty
to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E) of this section as it
existed prior to September 30, 2011, and the conduct that was the basis of the
violation no longer would be a violation of division (E) of this section on or
after September 30, 2011, or if a person is convicted of, was convicted of,
pleads guilty to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E)(1) or
(E)(2) of this section as it existed prior to June 13, 2022, the person may
file an application under R.C. § 2953.35 requesting the expungement of the
record of conviction.
         (b)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to,
or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B) or (C) of this section as
the division existed prior to September 30, 2011, and if the conduct that was
the basis of the violation no longer would be a violation of division (B) or
(C) of this section on or after September 30, 2011, due to the application of
division (F)(5) of this section as it exists on and after September 30, 2011,
the person may file an application under R.C. § 2953.35 requesting the
expungement of the record of conviction.
   (I)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly handling
firearms in a motor vehicle. A violation of division (A) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division
(C) of this section is an offense. A violation of division (D) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law and, if the loaded
handgun is concealed on the person’s person, it is also a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (E)(1) or (E)
(2) of this section is an offense. A violation of division (E)(4) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation
of division (E)(3) or (E)(5) of this section is an offense, or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(E)(3) or (E)(5) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of division (E)(3) or (E)(5) of this section, the offender’s concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2). A violation of
division (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (J)   If a law enforcement officer stops a motor vehicle for a traffic stop
or any other purpose, if any person in the motor vehicle surrenders a firearm
to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the
officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this
section or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise
prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not
contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the
termination of the stop. If a court orders a law enforcement officer to return
a firearm to a person pursuant to the requirement set forth in this division
(J), R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.
   (K)   As used in this section:
      AGRICULTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 519.01.
      COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.25(A).
      HIGHWAY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      MOTOR CARRIER ENFORCEMENT UNIT. Means the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit
in the Department of Public Safety, Division of State Highway Patrol, that is
created by R.C. § 5503.34.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.01.
      STREET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      TENANT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.
      UNLOADED.
         (a)   With respect to a firearm other than a firearm described in
division (d) of this definition, means that no ammunition is in the firearm in
question, no magazine or speed loader containing ammunition is inserted into
the firearm, and one of the following applies:
            1.   There is no ammunition in a magazine or speed loader that is
in the vehicle in question and that may be used with the firearm in question.
            2.   Any magazine or speed loader that contains ammunition and that
may be used with the firearm in question is stored in a compartment within the
vehicle in question that cannot be accessed
without leaving the vehicle or is stored in a container that provides complete
and separate enclosure.
         (b)   For the purposes of division (a)2. of this definition, a
“container that provides complete and separate enclosure” includes, but is not
limited to, any of the following:
            1.   A package, box, or case with multiple compartments, as long as
the loaded magazine or speed loader and the firearm in question either are in
separate compartments within the package, box, or case, or, if they are in the
same compartment, the magazine or speed loader is contained within a separate
enclosure in that compartment that does not contain the firearm and that closes
using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop closing mechanism, or other
fastener that must be opened to access the contents or the firearm is contained
within a separate enclosure of that nature in that compartment that does not
contain the magazine or speed loader;
            2.   A pocket or other enclosure on the person of the person in
question that closes using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop
closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be opened to access the
contents.
         (c)   For the purposes of divisions (a) and (b) of this definition,
ammunition held in stripper-clips or in en-bloc clips is not considered
ammunition that is loaded into a magazine or speed loader.
         (d)   “Unloaded” means, with respect to a firearm employing a
percussion cap, flintlock, or other obsolete ignition system, when the weapon
is uncapped or when the priming charge is removed from the pan.
   (L)   Divisions (a) and (b) of the definition of “unloaded” in division (K)
of this section do not affect the authority of a person who has been issued a
concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question to have one or
more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a vehicle,
without being transported as described in those divisions, as long as no
ammunition is in a firearm, other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as
permitted under any other provision of this chapter. A person who has been
issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question may
have one or more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a
vehicle without further restriction, as long as no ammunition is in a firearm,
other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as permitted under any
provision of this chapter.
(R.C. § 2923.16) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 UNDERAGE PURCHASE OF FIREARMS OR HANDGUNS.
   (A)   No person under 18 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a firearm.
   (B)   No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a handgun; provided, that this division (B) does not apply to the purchase or
attempted purchase of a handgun by a person 18 years of age or older and under
21 years of age if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is a law enforcement officer and has received firearms
training approved by the Ohio Peace Officer Training Council or equivalent
firearms training;
      (2)   The person is an active or reserve member of the armed services of
the United States or the Ohio National Guard, or was honorably discharged from
military service in the active or reserve armed services of the United States
or the Ohio National Guard, and the person has received firearms training from
the armed services or the national guard or equivalent firearms training.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of underage
purchase of a firearm, a delinquent act. Whoever violates division (B) of this
section is guilty of underage purchase of a handgun.
(R.C. § 2923.211) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 DISCHARGING FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge any cannon, pistol, or other firearm of
any kind whatsoever within the park district without permission from the Chief
Executive Officer. This section shall not prohibit the firing of a military
salute or the firing of weapons by men of the nation’s armed forces acting
under military authority, and shall not apply to law enforcement officials in
the proper enforcement of the law or officers, agents, or employees of the park
district in the execution of their duties or to any person in the proper
exercise of the right of self-defense.
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.06 POSSESSION IN PARK PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person, except authorized employees or agents of the Board,
licensed concealed carry permit holders in full compliance with R.C. § 2923.125
or 2923.1213, or motor vehicle operators in full compliance with R.C. § 2923.16
and those individuals who are legally permitted to openly carry a firearm shall
possess a firearm within Great Parks of Hamilton County.
   (B)   No person shall have a deadly weapon, dangerous ordnance, pellet gun,
air rifle, slingshot or missile-propelling device within Great Parks of
Hamilton County without permission from the Chief Executive Officer.
(Prior by-law § 5) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.07 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTIVE DUTY. Has the same meaning as defined in 10 U.S.C. § 101.
   ALIEN REGISTRATION NUMBER. The number issued by the United States
Citizenship and Immigration Services Agency that is located on the alien’s
permanent resident card and may also be commonly referred to as the “USCIS
number” or the “alien number”.
   AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a
succession of cartridges with a single function of the trigger.
   BALLISTIC KNIFE. A knife with a detachable blade that is propelled by a
spring-operated mechanism.
   CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED HANDGUN.
      (1)   Means, subject to division (2) of this definition, a license or
temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun issued under R.C. §
2923.125 or R.C. § 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed handgun issued
by another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
      (2)   A reference in any provision of this code to a concealed handgun
license issued under R.C. § 2923.125 or a license to carry a concealed handgun
issued under R.C. § 2923.125 means only a license of the type that is specified
in that section. A reference in any provision of this code to a concealed
handgun license issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, a license to carry a concealed
handgun issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, or a license to carry a concealed
handgun on a temporary emergency basis means only a license of the type that is
specified in R.C. § 2923.1213. A reference in any provision of this code to a
concealed handgun license issued by another state or a license to carry a
concealed handgun issued by another state means only a license issued by
another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
      (1)   Any of the following, except as provided in division (2) of this
definition:
         (a)   Any automatic or sawed-off firearm, zip-gun, or ballistic knife;
         (b)   Any explosive device or incendiary device;
         (c)   Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitrostarch, PETN, cyclonite,
TNT, picric acid, and other high explosives; amatol, tritonal, tetrytol,
pentolite, pecretol, cyclotol, and other high explosive compositions; plastic
explosives; dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin dynamite, sensitized ammonium
nitrate, liquid-oxygen blasting explosives, blasting powder, and other blasting
agents; and any other explosive substance having sufficient brisance or power
to be particularly suitable for use as a military explosive, or for use in
mining, quarrying, excavating, or demolitions;
         (d)   Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery piece, grenade,
mine, bomb, torpedo, or similar weapon, designed and manufactured for military
purposes, and the ammunition for that weapon;
         (e)   Any firearm muffler or suppressor;
         (f)   Any combination of parts that is intended by the owner for use
in converting any firearm or other device into a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   The term does not include any of the following:
         (a)   Any firearm, including a military weapon and the ammunition for
that weapon, and regardless of its actual age, that employs a percussion cap or
other obsolete ignition system, or that is designed and safe for use only with
black powder;
         (b)   Any pistol, rifle, or shotgun, designed or suitable for sporting
purposes, including a military weapon as issued or as modified, and the
ammunition for that weapon, unless the firearm is an automatic or sawed-off
firearm;
         (c)   Any cannon or other artillery piece that, regardless of its
actual age, is of a type in accepted use prior to 1887, has no mechanical,
hydraulic, pneumatic, or other system for absorbing recoil and returning the
tube into battery without displacing the carriage, and is designed and safe for
use only with black powder;
         (d)   Black powder, priming quills, and percussion caps possessed and
lawfully used to fire a cannon of a type defined in division (2)(c) of this
definition during displays, celebrations, organized matches or shoots, and
target practice, and smokeless and black powder, primers, and percussion caps
possessed and lawfully used as a propellant or ignition device in small-arms or
small- arms ammunition;
         (e)   Dangerous ordnance that is inoperable or inert and cannot
readily be rendered operable or activated, and that is kept as a trophy,
souvenir, curio, or museum piece;
         (f)   Any device that is expressly excepted from the definition of a
destructive device pursuant to the Gun Control Act of 1968, 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)
(4), as amended, and regulations issued under that act.
         (g)   Any firearm with an overall length of at least 26 inches that is
approved for sale by the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and
Explosives under the “Gun Control Act of 1968”, 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. § 921
(a)(3), but that is found by the Bureau not to be regulated under the “National
Firearms Act”, 68A Stat. 725 (1934), 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).
   DEADLY WEAPON. Any instrument, device, or thing capable of inflicting death,
and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon, or possessed, carried,
or used as a weapon.
   EXPLOSIVE. Any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or common
purpose of which is to function by explosion. The term includes all materials
that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division 1.3, or
division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of Transportation in
its regulations and includes but is not limited to dynamite, black powder,
pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps, electric blasting caps,
safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant fuses, instantaneous
fuses, and igniter cords and igniters. The term does not include “fireworks”,
as defined in R.C. § 3743.01, or any substance or material otherwise meeting
the definition of explosive set forth in this section that is manufactured,
sold, possessed, transported, stored, or used in any activity described in R.C.
§ 3743.80, provided the activity is conducted in accordance with all applicable
laws, rules, and regulations, including but not limited to the provisions of
R.C. § 3743.80 and the rules of the Fire Marshal adopted pursuant to R.C. §
3737.82.
   EXPLOSIVE DEVICE. Any device designed or specially adapted to cause physical
harm to persons or property by means of an explosion, and consisting of an
explosive substance or agency and a means to detonate it. The term includes
without limitation any bomb, any explosive demolition device, any blasting cap
or detonator containing an explosive charge, and any pressure vessel that has
been knowingly tampered with or arranged so as to explode.
   FIREARM.
      (1)   Any deadly weapon capable of expelling or propelling one or more
projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible propellant. The term
includes an unloaded firearm, and any firearm that is inoperable but that can
readily be rendered operable.
      (2)   When determining whether a firearm is capable of expelling or
propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible
propellant, the trier of fact may rely upon circumstantial evidence, including
but not limited to the representations and actions of the individual exercising
control over the firearm.
   HANDGUN. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be held and
fired by the use of a single hand;
      (2)   Any combination of parts from which a firearm of a type described
in division (1) of this definition can be assembled.
   INCENDIARY DEVICE. Any firebomb, and any device designed or specially
adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of fire, and
consisting of an incendiary substance or agent and a means to ignite it.
   SAWED-OFF FIREARM. A shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches long, or a
rifle with a barrel less than 16 inches long, or a shotgun or rifle less than
26 inches long overall. “Sawed-off firearm” does not include any firearm with
an overall length of at least 26 inches that is approved for sale by the
Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives under the “Gun
Control Act of 1968”, 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(3), but that is found
by the Bureau not to be regulated under the “National Firearms Act”, 68A Stat.
725 (1934), 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).
   SEMI-AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a
single cartridge and automatically chamber a succeeding cartridge ready to
fire, with a single function of the trigger.
   VALID CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or VALID LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED
HANDGUN. A concealed handgun license that is currently valid, that is not under
a suspension under R.C. § 2923.128(A)(1), under R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a
suspension provision of the state other than this state in which the license
was issued, and that has not been revoked under R.C. § 2923.128(B)(1), under
R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a revocation provision of the state other than this
state in which the license was issued.
   ZIP-GUN. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm of crude and extemporized manufacture;
      (2)   Any device, including without limitation a starter’s pistol, not
designed as a firearm, but that is specially adapted for use as a firearm;
      (3)   Any industrial tool, signaling device, or safety device, not
designed as a firearm, but that as designed is capable of use as such, when
possessed, carried, or used as a firearm.
(R.C. § 2923.11)
FIREWORKS
§ 92.10 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall possess fireworks in the park district or shall
possess for sale or sell fireworks in the park district, except a licensed
manufacturer of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.02 through 3743.08, a
licensed wholesaler of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.15 through
3743.21, a shipping permit holder as authorized by R.C. § 3743.40, an out-of-
state resident as authorized by R.C. § 3743.44, a resident of this state as
authorized by R.C. § 3743.45, or a licensed exhibitor of fireworks as
authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55, and except as provided in R.C. §
3743.80.
   (B)   Except as provided in R.C. § 3743.80, and except for licensed
exhibitors of fireworks authorized to conduct a fireworks exhibition pursuant
to R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55, no person shall discharge, ignite, or
explode any fireworks in the park district.
   (C)   No person shall use in a theater or public hall what is technically
known as fireworks showers, or a mixture containing potassium chlorate and
sulphur.
   (D)   No person shall sell fireworks of any kind to a person under 18 years
of age.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 3743.44, no person, other than
a licensed manufacturer, licensed wholesaler, licensed exhibitor, or shipping
permit holder shall possess 1.3G fireworks in the park district.
(R.C. § 3743.65) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.11 PERMIT FOR POSSESSION IN PARK.
   No person, except authorized employees or agents of the Board shall possess
fireworks within the park without a specific written permit from the Chief
Executive Officer.
(Prior by-law § 5) Penalty, see §
92.99
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 92.20 FIRES.
   No person shall start, maintain, or assist in maintaining a fire in the
park, except small fires in grills for cooking purposes or fires in places or
designated areas approved for such purpose, without written permit from the
Chief Executive Officer. The Chief Executive Officer may at his or her
discretion prohibit fires or smoking for limited periods at any location or for
any purpose when necessary for the protection of park property. All fires shall
be put out by the person or persons starting or using the same before leaving
the immediate vicinity of the fire.
(Prior by-law § 4) Penalty, see §
92.99
Cross-reference:
   Burning material, see §
131.15
   Pollution from fires, see §
131.13
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no other penalty
has been provided shall be fined not more than $150 for a first offense and not
more than $1,000 for each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 1545.99)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
110.01   Commercial enterprises
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISES.
   Engaging in or soliciting any business in any area owned or controlled by
Great Parks of Hamilton County, except in accordance with the provisions of a
permit, contract or other written agreement with the Great Parks of Hamilton
County is prohibited.
(Prior by-law § 13) (Amended 8- -2005; amended 12-5-2014) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than
$150 for a first offense and not more than $1,000 for each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 1545.99)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY AND ENVIRONMENT
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
      
133.   SEX OFFENSES
      
134.   GAMBLING
      
135.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
      
136.   OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
      
137.   THEFT AND FRAUD
      
138.   DRUG OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
130.01   Definitions
   
130.02   Attempt
   
130.03   Complicity
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRABAND. Any property that is illegal for a person to acquire or possess
under a statute, ordinance, or rule, or that a trier of fact lawfully
determines to be illegal to possess by reason of the property’s involvement in
an offense. The term includes but is not limited to all of the following:
      (1)   Any controlled substance, as defined in R.C. § 3719.01, or any
device or paraphernalia related thereto;
      (2)   Any unlawful gambling device or paraphernalia;
      (3)   Any dangerous ordnance or obscene material.
   DANGEROUS OFFENDER. A person who has committed an offense, whose history,
character, and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she will be a
danger to others, and whose conduct has been characterized by a pattern of
repetitive, compulsive, or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to
the consequences.
   DEADLY FORCE. Any force that carries a substantial risk that it will
proximately result in the death of any person.
   FORCE. Any violence, compulsion, or constraint physically exerted by any
means upon or against a person or thing.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any of the following:
      (1)   A sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police officer of a township
or joint police district, marshal, deputy marshal, municipal police officer,
member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under
R.C. § 3735.31(D) or state highway patrol trooper;
      (2)   An officer, agent, or employee of the state or any of its agencies,
instrumentalities, or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, a duty to
conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the
authority to arrest violators is conferred, within the limits of such statutory
duty and authority;
      (3)   The Mayor, in a capacity as chief conservator of the peace within
the municipality;
      (4)   A member of an auxiliary police force organized by the county,
township, or municipal law enforcement authorities, within the scope of the
member’s appointment or commission;
      (5)   A person lawfully called pursuant to R.C. § 311.07 to aid a sheriff
in keeping the peace, for the purposes and during the time when the person is
called;
      (6)   A person appointed by a Mayor pursuant to R.C. § 737.10 as a
special patrolling officer during a riot or emergency, for the purposes and
during the time when the person is appointed;
      (7)   A member of the organized militia of this state or the armed forces
of the United States, lawfully called to duty to aid civil authorities in
keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence;
      (8)   A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, secret
service officer, or municipal prosecutor;
      (9)   A veterans’ home police officer appointed under R.C. § 5907.02;
      (10)   A member of a police force employed by a regional transit
authority under R.C. § 306.35(Y);
      (11)   A special police officer employed by a port authority under R.C. §
4582.04 or 4582.28;
      (12)   The House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms if the House of
Representatives Sergeant at Arms has arrest authority pursuant to R.C. §
101.311(E)(1) and an Assistant House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms;
      (13)   The Senate Sergeant at Arms and an Assistant Senate Sergeant at
Arms;
      (14)   A special police officer employed by a municipal corporation at a
municipal airport, or other municipal air navigation facility, that has
scheduled operations, as defined in 14 C.F.R. § 119.3, as amended, and that is
required to be under a security program and is governed by aviation security
rules of the Transportation Security Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation as provided in 49 C.F.R. parts 1542 and 1544, as
amended.
   NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF INSANITY. A person is “not guilty by reason of
insanity” relative to a charge of an offense only if the person proves, in the
manner specified in R.C. § 2901.05, that at the time of the commission of the
offense, he or she did not know, as a result of a severe mental disease or
defect, the wrongfulness of his or her acts.
   OFFENSE OF VIOLENCE.
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.11,
2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.15, 2903.18, 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, 2905.01,
2905.02, 2905.11, 2905.32, 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.05, 2909.02, 2909.03,
2909.24, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2917.01, 2917.02, 2917.03, 2917.31,
2917.321, 2919.25, 2921.03, 2921.04, 2921.34, or 2923.161, of division (A)(1)
of R.C. § 2903.34, of division (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of R.C. § 2911.12, or
of division (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3) or (B)(4) of R.C. § 2919.22, or felonious
sexual penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States, substantially equivalent to
any section, division or offense listed in division (1) of this definition;
      (3)   An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an existing or
former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or of the United
States, committed purposely or knowingly, and involving physical harm to
persons or a risk of serious physical harm to persons;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition;
      (5)   A violation of division (C) of R.C. § 959.131.
   PERSON.
      (1)   (a)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, as used in any
section contained in Title XIII of this code that sets forth a criminal
offense, the term includes all of the following:
            1.   An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, and association;
            2.   An unborn human who is viable.
         (b)   As used in any section contained in Title XIII of this code that
does not set forth a criminal offense, the term includes an individual,
corporation, business trust, estate, partnership, and association.
         (c)   As used in division (1)(a)2. of this definition, “unborn human”
means an individual organism of the species Homo sapiens from fertilization
until live birth. “Viable” means the stage of development of a human fetus at
which there is a realistic probability of maintaining and nourishing of a life
outside the womb with or without temporary artificial life-sustaining support.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (1)(a) of this definition, in no case
shall the portion of the definition of the term “person” that is set forth in
division (1)(a)2. of this definition be applied or construed in any section
contained in Title XIII of this code that sets forth a criminal offense in any
of the following manners.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (2)(a) of this
definition, in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as
prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion
with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman
implied by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise
authorized by law to consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant
woman. An abortion that violates the conditions described in the immediately
preceding sentence may be punished as a violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02,
2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13,
2903.14, 2903.21, or 2903.22, as applicable. An abortion that does not violate
the conditions described in the second immediately preceding sentence but that
does violate R.C. § 2919.12, 2919.13(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17, or
2919.18, may be punished as a violation of such section, as applicable. Consent
is sufficient under this division (a) if it is of the type otherwise adequate
to permit medical treatment to the pregnant woman, even if it does not comply
with R.C. § 2919.12.
         (b)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
            1.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby;
            2.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying;
            3.   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who
dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human;
            4.   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human;
            5.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in
any other manner, an injury, illness, or other psychological illness or
condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human
that she is carrying.
   PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any injury, illness, or other physiological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
   PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any tangible or intangible damage to property
that, in any degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with its use or
enjoyment. The term does not include wear and tear occasioned by normal use.
   PRIVILEGE. An immunity, license, or right conferred by law, or bestowed by
express or implied grant, or arising out of status, position, office, or
relationship, or growing out of necessity.
   PROPERTY.
      (1)   Any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, and any
interest or license in that property. The term includes but is not limited to
cable television service, other telecommunications service, telecommunications
devices, information service, computers, data, computer software, financial
instruments associated with computers, other documents associated with
computers, or copies of the documents, whether in machine or human-readable
form, trade secrets, trademarks, copyrights, patents, and property protected by
a trademark, copyright or patent. “Financial instruments associated with
computers” include but are not limited to checks, drafts, warrants, money
orders, notes of indebtedness, certificates of deposit, letters of credit,
bills of credit or debit cards, financial transaction authorization mechanisms,
marketable securities, or any computer system representations of any of them.
      (2)   As used in this definition, “trade secret” has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 1333.61, and “telecommunications service” and “information service”
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (3)   As used in this definition and in the definition of “contraband” in
this section, “cable television service”, “computer”, “computer network”,
“computer software”, “computer system”, “data”, and “telecommunications device”
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   REPEAT OFFENDER. A person who has a history of persistent criminal activity
and whose character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she will
commit another offense. It is prima facie evidence that a person is a repeat
offender if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Having been convicted of one or more offenses of violence, as
defined in R.C. § 2901.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent offense of
violence;
      (2)   Having been convicted of one or more sexually oriented offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2950.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent sexually oriented
offense;
      (3)   Having been convicted of one or more theft offenses, as defined in
R.C. § 2913.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for one or more
of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent theft offense;
      (4)   Having been convicted of one or more felony drug abuse offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2925.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent felony drug abuse
offense;
      (5)   Having been convicted of two or more felonies, and having been
imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense, he or she commits a
subsequent offense;
      (6)   Having been convicted of three or more offenses of any type or
degree other than traffic offenses, alcoholic intoxication offenses, or minor
misdemeanors, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such
offense, he or she commits a subsequent offense.
   RISK. A significant possibility, as contrasted with a remote possibility,
that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances may exist.
   SCHOOL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   SCHOOL ACTIVITY. Any activity held under the auspices of a board of
education of a city, local, exempted village, joint vocational, or cooperative
education school district; a governing authority of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314; a governing board of an educational
service center; or the governing body of a nonpublic school for which the State
Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07.
   SCHOOL BUILDING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   SCHOOL PREMISES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   SCHOOL SAFETY ZONE. Consists of a school, school building, school premises,
school activity, and school bus.
   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would normally
require hospitalization or prolonged psychiatric treatment;
      (2)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
      (3)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent incapacity, whether
partial or total, or that involves some temporary, substantial incapacity;
      (4)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent disfigurement, or
that involves some temporary, serious disfigurement;
      (5)   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of such duration as to
result in substantial suffering, or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.
   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any physical harm to property that does
either of the following:
      (1)   Results in substantial loss to the value of the property, or
requires a substantial amount of time, effort, or money to repair or replace;
      (2)   Temporarily prevents the use or enjoyment of the property, or
substantially interferes with its use or enjoyment for an extended period of
time.
   SUBSTANTIAL RISK. A strong possibility, as contrasted with a remote or
significant possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain
circumstances may exist.
(R.C. §§ 2901.01, 2935.36(E))
§ 130.02 ATTEMPT.
   (A)   No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or knowledge is
sufficient culpability for the commission of an offense, shall engage in
conduct that, if successful, would constitute or result in the offense.
   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in retrospect,
commission of the offense that was the object of the attempt was either
factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances, if that
offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the
actor believed them to be.
   (C)   No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense, of
complicity in the commission of an offense, or of conspiracy to commit an
offense, shall be convicted of an attempt to commit the same offense in
violation of this section.
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor abandoned his or her effort to commit the offense or otherwise prevented
its commission, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary
renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt to commit an
offense. An attempt to commit aggravated murder, murder, or an offense for
which the maximum penalty is imprisonment for life is a felony of the first
degree, to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to commit a
drug abuse offense for which the penalty is determined by the amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance involved in the drug abuse offense is
an offense of the same degree as the drug abuse offense attempted would be if
that drug abuse offense had been committed and had involved an amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance that is within the next lower range
of controlled substance
amounts than was involved in the attempt. An attempt to commit any other
offense is an offense of the next lesser degree than the offense attempted. In
the case of an attempt to commit an offense other than a violation of R.C.
Chapter 3734 that is not specifically classified, an attempt is a misdemeanor
of the first degree if the offense attempted is a felony, and a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree if the offense attempted is a misdemeanor. In the case of an
attempt to commit a violation of any provision of R.C. Chapter 3734, other than
R.C. § 3734.18, that relates to hazardous wastes, an attempt is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to commit a minor
misdemeanor, or to engage in conspiracy, is not an offense under this section.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
(R.C. § 2923.02) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 COMPLICITY.
   (A)   No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for the
commission of an offense, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Solicit or procure another to commit the offense;
      (2)   Aid or abet another in committing the offense;
      (3)   Conspire with another to commit the offense in violation of R.C. §
2923.01;
      (4)   Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the offense.
   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person with
whom the accused was in complicity has been convicted as a principal offender.
   (C)   No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section unless
an offense is actually committed, but a person may be convicted of complicity
in an attempt to commit an offense in violation of §
130.02.
   (D)   If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against the
defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with complicity in the
commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an attempt to commit an
offense, or an offense, the court shall charge the jury in accordance with R.C.
§ 2923.03(D).
   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that,
prior to the commission of or attempt to commit the offense, the actor
terminated his or her complicity, under circumstances manifesting a complete
and voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the
commission of an offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished as if he or she
were a principal offender. A charge of complicity may be stated in terms of
this section, or in terms of the principal offense.
(R.C. § 2923.03) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this title for which no specific penalty
is otherwise provided, shall be fined not more than $150 for a first offense
and not more than $1,000 for each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 1545.99)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY AND ENVIRONMENT
Section
   
131.01   Criminal damaging or endangering; vehicular vandalism
   
131.02   Criminal mischief
   
131.03   Criminal trespass
   
131.04   Tampering with coin machines
   
131.05   Desecration
   
131.06   Preservation of property and natural features
   
131.07   Waste materials and litter
   
131.08   Camps
   
131.09   Water regulations
   
131.10   Climbing
   
131.11   Throwing objects
   
131.12   Aerosol paint cans
   
131.13   Air pollution
   
131.14   Play equipment
   
131.15   Burning material
   
131.16   Model toys
   
131.17   Aircraft and hot air balloons
   
131.18   Sledding, skiing, and ice skating
   
131.19   Defacing roadways
   
131.20   Roller skating; skateboards
§ 131.01 CRIMINAL DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING; VEHICULAR VANDALISM.
   (A)   Criminal damaging or endangering.
      (1)   No person shall cause or create a substantial risk of physical harm
to any property of another without the other person’s consent:
         (a)   Knowingly, by any means;
         (b)   Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood, poison gas,
poison, radioactive material, caustic or corrosive material, or other
inherently dangerous agency or substance.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of criminal damaging
or endangering. If the property involved in a violation of this division (A) is
an aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other
equipment or implement used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft and if the violation creates a risk of physical harm to any person,
criminal damaging or endangering is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. If the property involved in a violation of this division (A) is an
aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other
equipment or implement used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft and if the violation creates a substantial risk of physical harm to
any person or if the property involved in a violation of this division (A) is
an occupied aircraft, criminal damaging or endangering is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.06)
   (B)   Vehicular vandalism.
      (1)   As used in this division (B):
         ALLEY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
         HIGHWAY. Means any highway as defined in R.C. § 4511.01 or any lane,
road, street, alley, bridge, or overpass.
         STREET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
         VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
         VESSEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1546.01.
         WATERS IN THIS STATE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1546.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any
object at, onto, or in the path of any of the following:
         (a)   Any vehicle on a highway;
         (b)   Any boat or vessel on any of the waters in this state.
      (3)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of vehicular
vandalism. If the violation of this division (B) creates a substantial risk of
physical harm to any person or the violation of this division (B) causes
serious physical harm to property, vehicular vandalism is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the violation of this division (B)
causes physical harm to any person or serious physical harm to any person,
vehicular vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.09) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.02 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with the either of the following:
         (a)   The property of another;
         (b)   One’s own residential real property with the purpose to decrease
the value of or enjoyment of the residential real property, if both of the
following apply:
            1.   The residential real property is subject to a mortgage.
            2.   The person has been served with a summons and complaint in a
pending residential mortgage loan foreclosure action relating to that real
property. As used in this division, “pending” includes the time between
judgment entry and confirmation of sale.
      (2)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of property of
another, employ a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator, or other device
releasing a substance that is harmful or offensive to persons exposed, or that
tends to cause public alarm;
      (3)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with a bench mark, triangulation
station, boundary marker, or other survey station, monument, or marker;
      (4)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with any safety device, the property of
another, or the property of the offender when required or placed for the safety
of others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or availability for
its intended purpose;
      (5)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of the property
of another, set a fire on the land of another or place personal property that
has been set on fire on the land of another, which fire or personal property is
outside and apart from any building, other structure, or personal property that
is on that land;
      (6)   Without privilege to do so, and with intent to impair the
functioning of any computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software, or computer program, knowingly do any of the following:
         (a)   In any manner or by any means, including but not limited to
computer hacking, alter, damage, destroy, or modify a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software, or computer program or data
contained in a computer, computer system, computer network, computer software,
or computer program;
         (b)   Introduce a computer contaminant into a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software, or computer program.
      (7)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly destroy or improperly tamper
with a critical infrastructure facility.
   (B)   As used in this section:
      CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2911.21.
      IMPROPERLY TAMPER. Means to change the physical location or the physical
condition of the property.
      SAFETY DEVICE. Means any fire extinguisher, fire hose, or fire axe, or
any fire escape, emergency exit, or emergency escape equipment, or any life
line, life-saving ring, life preserver, or life boat or raft, or any alarm,
light, flare, signal, sign, or notice intended to warn of danger or emergency,
or intended for other safety purposes, or any guard railing or safety
barricade, or any traffic sign or signal, or any railroad grade crossing sign,
signal, or gate, or any first aid or survival equipment, or any other device,
apparatus, or equipment intended for protecting or preserving the safety of
persons or property.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal mischief, and
shall be punished as provided in division (C)(1), (C)(2) or (C)(3) of this
section.
      (1)   If the property involved in the violation of division (A)(1), (A)
(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is an aircraft, an aircraft
engine, propeller, appliance, spare part, fuel, lubricant, hydraulic fluid, any
other equipment, implement, or material used or intended to be used in the
operation of an aircraft, or any cargo carried or intended to be carried in an
aircraft and if the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person,
or if the aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the value of the computer, computer system, computer network,
computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation of
division (A)(6) of this section or the loss to the victim resulting from the
violation is $1,000 or more, or if the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (A)(6) is used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft and the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or
if the aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Criminal mischief committed in violation of division (A)(7) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.07) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.03 CRIMINAL TRESPASS.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another;
      (2)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, the
use of which is lawfully restricted to certain persons, purposes, modes, or
hours, when the offender knows the offender is in violation of any such
restriction or is reckless in that regard;
      (3)   Recklessly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, as
to which notice against unauthorized access or presence is given by actual
communication to the offender, or in a manner prescribed by law, or by posting
in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential
intruders, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to restrict
access;
      (4)   Being on the land or premises of another, negligently fail or
refuse to leave upon being notified by signage posted in a conspicuous place or
otherwise being notified to do so by the owner or occupant, or the agent or
servant of either;
      (5)   Knowingly enter or remain on a critical infrastructure facility.
   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the land or
premises involved was owned, controlled, or in custody of a public agency.
   (C)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the offender was
authorized to enter or remain on the land or premises involved, when the
authorization was secured by deception.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
criminal trespass.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, if the person, in committing the
violation of this section, used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-
purpose vehicle, the court shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount
imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to two or more violations of this section or R.C. § 2911.21, and the offender,
in committing each violation, used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle, the court, in addition to or independent of all other
penalties imposed for the violation, may impound the certificate of
registration of that snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle or the certificate of
registration and license plate of that all- purpose vehicle for not less than
60 days. In such a case, R.C. § 4519.47 applies.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, if the
offender, in committing the violation of this section, used an all-purpose
vehicle, the Clerk of the Court shall pay the fine imposed pursuant to this
section to the State Recreational Vehicle Fund created by R.C. § 4519.11.
   (F)   As used in divisions (A) through (E) of this section:
      ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE, and SNOWMOBILE. Have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4519.01.
      CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Means:
         (a)   One of the following, if completely enclosed by a fence or other
physical barrier that is obviously designed to exclude intruders, or if clearly
marked with signs that are reasonably likely to come to the attention of
potential intruders and that indicate entry is forbidden without site
authorization:
            1.   A petroleum or alumina refinery;
            2.   An electric generating facility, substation, switching
station, electrical control center, or electric transmission and distribution
lines and associated equipment;
            3.   A chemical, polymer, or rubber manufacturing facility;
            4.   A water intake structure, water treatment facility, waste
water facility, drainage facility, water management facility, or any similar
water or sewage treatment system and its water and sewage piping;
            5.   A natural gas company facility or interstate natural gas
pipeline, including a pipeline interconnection, a natural gas compressor
station and associated facilities, city gate or town border station, metering
station, above-ground piping, regulator station, valve site, delivery station,
fabricated assembly, or any other part of a natural gas storage facility
involved in the gathering, storage, transmission, or distribution of gas;
            6.   A telecommunications central switching office or remote
switching facility or an equivalent network facility that serves a similar
purpose;
            7.   Wireline or wireless telecommunications infrastructure,
including telecommunications towers and telephone poles and lines, including
fiber optic lines;
            8.   A port, trucking terminal, or other freight transportation
facility;
            9.   A gas processing plant, including a plant used in the
processing, treatment, or fractionation of natural gas or natural gas liquids;
            10.   A transmission facility used by a federally licensed radio or
television station;
            11.   A steel-making facility that uses an electric arc furnace to
make steel;
            12.   A facility identified and regulated by the United States
Department of Homeland Security’s Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards
Program under 6 C.F.R. part 27;
            13.   A dam that is regulated by the state or federal government;
            14.   A crude oil or refined products storage and distribution
facility, including valve sites, pipeline interconnections, pump station,
metering station, below- or above-ground pipeline, or piping and truck loading
or off-loading facility;
            15.   A video service network and broadband infrastructure,
including associated buildings and facilities, video service headends, towers,
utility poles, and utility lines such as fiber optic lines. As used in this
division, “video service network” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
            16.   Any above-ground portion of an oil, gas, hazardous liquid or
chemical pipeline, tank, or other storage facility;
            17.   Any above-ground portion of a well, well pad, or production
operation;
            18.   A laydown area or construction site for pipe and other
equipment intended for use on an interstate or intrastate natural gas or crude
oil pipeline;
            19.   Any mining operation, including any processing equipment,
batching operation, or support facility for that mining operation.
         (b)   With respect to a video service network or broadband or wireless
telecommunications infrastructure, the above-ground portion of a facility
installed in a public right-of-way on a utility pole or in a conduit;
         (c)   Any railroad property;
         (d)   An electronic asset of any of the following:
            1.   An electric light company that is a public utility under R.C.
§ 4905.02;
            2.   An electric cooperative, as defined in R.C. § 4928.01;
            3.   A municipal electric utility, as defined in R.C. § 4928.01;
            4.   A natural gas company that is a public utility under R.C. §
4905.02;
            5.   A telephone company that is a public utility under R.C. §
4905.02;
            6.   A video service provider, including a cable operator, as those
terms are defined in R.C. § 1332.21.
      ELECTRONIC ASSET. Includes, but is not limited to, the hardware,
software, and data of a programmable electronic device; all communications,
operations, and customer data networks; and the contents of those data
networks.
      LAND or PREMISES. Includes any land, building, structure, or place
belonging to, controlled by, or in custody of another, and any separate
enclosure or room, or portion thereof.
      PRODUCTION OPERATION, WELL, and WELL PAD. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 1509.01.
(R.C. § 2911.21) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.04 TAMPERING WITH COIN MACHINES.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to commit theft or to defraud, shall knowingly
enter, force an entrance into, tamper with, or insert any part of an instrument
into any coin machine.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with coin
machines. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section or of any theft offense as defined in R.C. § 2913.01, tampering with
coin machines is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2911.32) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.05 DESECRATION.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall purposely deface, damage,
pollute, or otherwise physically mistreat any of the following:
      (1)   The flag of the United States or of this state;
      (2)   Any public monument;
      (3)   Any historical or commemorative marker, or any structure, Indian
mound or earthwork, cemetery, thing, or site of great historical or
archaeological interest;
      (4)   A place of worship, its furnishings, or religious artifacts or
sacred texts within the place of worship or within the grounds upon which the
place of worship is located;
      (5)   A work of art or museum piece;
      (6)   Any other object of reverence or sacred devotion.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of desecration. A violation of
division (A)(4) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (C)   As used in this section, CEMETERY means any place of burial and
includes burial sites that contain American Indian burial objects placed with
or containing American Indian human remains.
(R.C. § 2927.11) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.06 PRESERVATION OF PROPERTY AND NATURAL FEATURES.
   (A)   No person shall injure, deface, disturb, or befoul any part of the
park district, nor any building, sign, equipment, or other property found
therein.
   (B)   No person shall remove, injure, or destroy any trees, shrubs,
wildflowers or other plants, animals, fossils, or minerals within the park
district.
   (C)   Special exceptions to the above may be permitted for purposes of
scientific research, if approved guidelines are followed and collecting of
natural materials is authorized by written permit from the Chief Executive
Officer.
   (D)   Exceptions to the above could also be made for removal of non-native
(alien or exotic) species by park personnel and for generally accepted land
management practices.
(Prior by-law § 1) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.07 WASTE MATERIALS AND LITTER.
   (A)   No person, regardless of intent, shall deposit litter or cause litter
to be deposited on any part of the park district, or in or on waters of the
state, unless one of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is directed to do so by a public official as part of a
litter collection drive;
      (2)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, the person
deposits the litter in a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents its being
carried away by the elements;
      (3)   The person is issued a permit or license covering the litter
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3734 or 6111.
   (B)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly deposit litter,
or cause it to be deposited, in a litter receptacle located on any park
district property, unless one of the following applies:
      (1)   The litter was generated or located on the property on which the
litter receptacle is located;
      (2)   The person is directed to do so by a public official as part of a
litter collection drive;
      (3)   The person is directed to do so by a person whom the person
reasonably believes to have the privilege to use the litter receptacle;
      (4)   The litter consists of any of the following:
         (a)   The contents of a litter bag or container of a type and size
customarily carried and used in a motor vehicle;
         (b)   The contents of an ash tray of a type customarily installed or
carried and used in a motor vehicle;
         (c)   Beverage containers and food sacks, wrappings, and containers of
a type and in an amount that reasonably may be expected to be generated during
routine commuting or business or recreational travel by a motor vehicle;
         (d)   Beverage containers, food sacks, wrappings, containers, and
other materials of a type and in an amount that reasonably may be expected to
be generated during a routine day by a person and deposited in a litter
receptacle by a casual passerby.
(R.C. § 3767.32)
   (C)   No person shall, either within or without the park district, discharge
into, throw, cast, lay, drop, or leave in any river, brook, stream, storm
sewer, or drain flowing into or through the park district, or into any river,
brook, or stream which may be tributary to any river, brook, or stream flowing
into or through the park district, any substance, matter, or thing, either
liquid or solid, which may or shall result in the pollution of the river,
brook, or stream within the park district to such an extent as to unreasonably
or improperly prevent or interfere with, or lessen, to an improper or
unreasonable degree, the use of said river, brook, or stream for recreational
or other proper park uses, or to endanger the health of visitors or wildlife in
the park in the proper use and enjoyment of the same.
   (D)   (1)   No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless of
intent, throw, drop, discard, or deposit litter from any motor vehicle in
operation upon any street, road, or highway, except into a litter receptacle in
a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
      (2)   No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road,
or highway shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded, or deposited
from the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in a manner that
prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
      (3)   As used in this division (D), LITTER means garbage, trash, waste,
rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts,
furniture, glass, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
(R.C. § 4511.82)
   (E)   (1)   As used in this section, LITTER means garbage, trash, waste,
rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts,
furniture, glass, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature thrown,
dropped, discarded, placed, or deposited by a person on public property or in
or on waters of the park district, unless the person has:
         (a)   Been directed to do so by a public official as part of a litter
collection drive;
         (b)   Thrown, dropped, discarded, placed, or deposited the material in
a receptacle in a manner that prevented its being carried away by the elements;
         (c)   Been issued a permit or license covering the material pursuant
to R.C. Chapters 3734 or 6111.
      (2)   No person shall, regardless of intent, throw, drop, discard, place,
or deposit litter or cause litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded, placed, or
deposited on any public property or in or on waters of the park district,
unless the person has:
         (a)   Been directed to do so by a public official as a part of a
litter collection drive;
         (b)   Thrown, dropped, discarded, placed, or deposited the litter in a
litter receptacle in a manner that prevents its being carried away by the
elements;
         (c)   Been issued a permit or license covering the litter pursuant to
R.C. Chapters 3734 or 6111.
(Prior by-law § 2)
   (F)   The sentencing court may, in addition to or in lieu of the penalty
provided in this division, require a person who violates division (A) or (B) to
remove litter from any public or private property or in or on waters of the
state.
(R.C. § 3767.99(C)) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.08 CAMPS.
   No person shall establish or maintain any camp or other temporary lodging
place within the park district, without specific written permit from the Chief
Executive Officer, except in locations especially set aside by the Board as
camps.
(Prior by-law § 6) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.09 WATER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any watercraft on
waters under the jurisdiction of Great Parks of Hamilton County except for the
following:
      (1)   Rental boats owned and operated by Great Parks of Hamilton County;
      (2)   Privately owned watercraft at Miami Whitewater Forest Lake, Winton
Woods Lake, Sharon Woods Lake, and Campbell Lakes Preserve;
      (3)   Watercraft owned by Great Parks of Hamilton County and those used
for official government business; or
      (4)   Watercraft authorized with specific permission from Great Parks of
Hamilton County Chief Executive Officer.
   (B)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any motor or motors
used to propel watercraft on waters under the jurisdiction of Great Parks of
Hamilton County except for the following:
      (1)   Privately owned outboard motors up to six horsepower at Winton
Woods Lake;
      (2)   Privately owned outboard motors up to four horsepower at Miami
Whitewater Forest Lake and Sharon Woods Lake;
      (3)   Privately owned electric trolling motors at Lake Isabella;
      (4)   Motors owned by Great Parks of Hamilton County and those used for
official government business; and
      (5)   Motors used to propel watercraft authorized with written permission
from Great Parks of Hamilton County Chief Executive Officer.
   (C)   Privately owned wind-powered watercraft are permitted at Miami
Whitewater Forest Lake, Winton Woods Lake, and Sharon Woods Lake only.
   (D)   All watercraft and their operators shall comply with the requirements
of R.C. Chapters 1547 and 1548 when using any waters under the jurisdiction of
Great Parks of Hamilton County.
   (E)   No person while utilizing any waters under the jurisdiction of Great
Parks of Hamilton County shall operate a watercraft in such a manner as to
endanger the operator or any other person or any property. Every watercraft
shall at all times maintain a proper lookout by sight and hearing as well as by
all available means appropriate in the prevailing circumstances and conditions
so as to make a full appraisal of the situation and of all the risk of
collision. No person shall operate or permit to be operated any watercraft on
park waters in violation of this rule.
   (F)   No person shall swim, bathe, wade, nor enter into any waters under the
jurisdiction of Great Parks of Hamilton County where prohibited or in a manner
contrary to posted regulations.
   (G)   No person shall fish in any waters under the jurisdiction of Great
Parks of Hamilton County in a manner contrary to posted regulations or in
waters where fishing is prohibited.
(Prior by-law § 7F) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.10 CLIMBING.
   (A)   No person, except park district employees or others authorized by the
Chief Executive Officer, shall use equipment or devices, including climbing
spikes, ropes, harnesses, ladders, or scaffolding for climbing of trees.
   (B)   No person shall engage in rappelling or any rock climbing activity
within the park district, without permission from the Chief Executive Officer.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.11 THROWING OBJECTS.
   No person shall throw, toss, drop, propel, or cause, directly or indirectly,
the throwing, tossing, dropping, or propelling of any object over or off any
cliff, precipice, bridge, observation tower, or other similar structure or
natural formation in or adjacent to the park district.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.12 AEROSOL PAINT CANS.
   No person in the park district, except a park district employee or other
authorized agent, shall carry on or about their person a container capable of
propelling paint by means of a gaseous charge.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.13 AIR POLLUTION.
   No person, occupant, owner, or person in charge, by himself or herself, his
or her agent, or employee, shall cause, suffer, or allow burning of garbage,
waste material, trash, refuse, vehicle or any part thereof, or other
combustibles within or adjacent to the park district so as to cause smoke,
odor, sparks, dust, dirt, or other residue to come upon, pass through, or over
the park which would cause air pollution, nuisance, or danger.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.14 PLAY EQUIPMENT.
   Playing of horseshoes, golf, or other games with play equipment shall, for
the safety and welfare of all other persons using the parks, be confined to the
areas set aside and designated for such purposes and with due regard for the
safety of others.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.15 BURNING MATERIAL.
   No person shall throw away or discard any lighted match, cigar, or
cigarette, nor deposit burning material or hot ashes on grass or plants, or in
refuse receptacles within or adjacent to the park district.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.16 MODEL TOYS.
   Engine-powered, self-propelled radio controlled, or free sailing model and
toy airplanes, rockets, boats, cars, sirens, or other noise-making devices are
not permitted to be operated within the park district, except in designated
areas or with written permission of the Chief Executive Officer.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.17 AIRCRAFT AND HOT AIR BALLOONS.
   No person shall voluntarily bring, land, or cause to descend, or alight upon
or adjacent to park land or water, any helicopter, airplane, balloon,
parachute, hang glider, or other apparatus for aviation, without specific
written permission from the Chief Executive Officer.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.18 SLEDDING, SKIING, AND ICE SKATING.
   No person shall sled ride, ski, or ice skate within the park district,
except in areas authorized for such purposes.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.19 DEFACING ROADWAYS.
   No person shall accelerate a motor vehicle causing the rubber tires to spin,
mark, or deface any park roadway or parking lot surface.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.20 ROLLER SKATING; SKATEBOARDS.
   (A)   Roller skating shall be permitted only in authorized areas of the park
district.
   (B)   The riding of skateboards is prohibited within the park district.
Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Section
   
132.01   Riot
   
132.02   Failure to disperse
   
132.03   Disorderly conduct
   
132.04   Disturbing a lawful meeting
   
132.05   Misconduct at an emergency
   
132.06   Inducing panic
   
132.07   Making false alarms
   
132.08   Observance of good order; removal
   
132.09   Noise; sound amplification
   
132.10   Hours of operation
   
132.11   Loitering with the intention of committing unlawful drug transaction
   
132.12   Public intoxication
   
132.13   Signs
   
132.14   Event notification
   
132.15   Impeding public passage of an emergency service responder
§ 132.01 RIOT.
   (A)   No person shall participate with four or more others in a course of
disorderly conduct in violation of §
132.03:
      (1)   With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a
misdemeanor, other than disorderly conduct;
      (2)   With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee into
taking or refraining from official action, or with purpose to hinder, impede,
or obstruct a function of government;
      (3)   With purpose to hinder, impede, or obstruct the orderly process of
administration or instruction at an educational institution, or to interfere
with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at the institution.
   (B)   No person shall participate with four or more others with purpose to
do an act with unlawful force or violence, even though the act might otherwise
be lawful.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot.
(R.C. § 2917.03)
   (D)   For the purposes of prosecuting violations of this section, the
prosecution is not required to allege or prove that the offender expressly
agreed with four or more others to commit any act that constitutes a violation
this section prior to or while committing those acts.
(R.C. § 2917.031) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.02 FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
   (A)   Where five or more persons are participating in a course of disorderly
conduct in violation of §
132.03, and there are other persons in the vicinity whose presence creates the
likelihood of physical harm to persons or property or of serious public
inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm, a law enforcement officer or other public
official may order the participants and the other persons to disperse. No
person shall knowingly fail to obey the order.
   (B)   Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are peaceably
assembled for a lawful purpose.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disperse.
(R.C. § 2917.04) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.03 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm to
another, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or property,
or in violent or turbulent behavior;
      (2)   Making unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse utterance,
gesture, or display, or communicating unwarranted and grossly abusive language
to any person;
      (3)   Insulting, taunting, or challenging another, under circumstances in
which that conduct is likely to provoke a violent response;
      (4)   Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a public street,
road, highway, or right-of-way, or to, from, within, or upon public or private
property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, and by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender;
      (5)   Creating a condition that is physically offensive to persons or
that presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender.
   (B)   No person while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   In a public place or in the presence of two or more persons, engage
in conduct likely to be offensive or to cause inconvenience, annoyance, or
alarm to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which conduct the offender, if he
or she were not intoxicated, should know is likely to have such effect on
others;
      (2)   Engage in conduct or create a condition that presents a risk of
physical harm to himself, herself or another, or to the property of another.
   (C)   Violation of any statute or by-law of which an element is operating a
motor vehicle, locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse is not a violation of division
(B) of this section.
   (D)   If a person appears to an ordinary observer to be intoxicated, it is
probable cause to believe that the person is voluntarily intoxicated for
purposes of division (B) of this section.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disorderly conduct.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2925.01.
      EMERGENCY FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency medical
services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
(R.C. § 2917.11) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.04 DISTURBING A LAWFUL MEETING.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting,
procession, or gathering, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Do any act which obstructs or interferes with the due conduct of
the meeting, procession, or gathering.
      (2)   Make any utterance, gesture, or display which outrages the
sensibilities of the group.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful
meeting.
   (C)   As used in this section:
      COMPUTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      COMPUTER SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      VIRTUAL MEETING OR GATHERING. A meeting or gathering by interactive video
conference or teleconference, or by a combination thereof.
(R.C. § 2917.12) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.05 MISCONDUCT AT AN EMERGENCY.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement officer,
firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services person, or
other authorized person engaged in the person’s duties at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind;
      (2)   Hamper the lawful activities of any emergency facility person who
is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility;
      (3)   Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement officer
engaged in the law enforcement officer’s duties at the scene of or in
connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or deny
information to any news media representative in the lawful exercise of the news
media representative’s duties.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an emergency.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      EMERGENCY FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency medical
services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
(R.C. § 2917.13) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.06 INDUCING PANIC.
   (A)   No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place, or otherwise
cause serious public inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false;
      (2)   Threatening to commit any offense of violence;
      (3)   Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the likelihood
that its commission will cause serious public inconvenience or alarm.
   (B)   Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to any person
conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing panic.
      (2)   If a violation of this section results in physical harm to any
person, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of $1,000 or more,
inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If a
violation of this section pertains to a purported, threatened or actual use of
a weapon of mass destruction, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (D)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or this code may be prosecuted under this section, the
other section, or both sections.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      BIOLOGICAL AGENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2917.33.
      ECONOMIC HARM. Means any of the following:
         (a)   All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary harm suffered
by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. “Economic harm” as described
in this division (E) includes but is not limited to all of the following:
            1.   All wages, salaries, or other compensation lost as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            2.   The cost of all wages, salaries, or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            3.   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is
shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;
            4.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
         (b)   All costs incurred by the state or any political subdivision as
a result of, or in making any response to, the criminal conduct that
constituted the violation of this section or R.C. § 2917.32,
including but not limited to all costs so incurred by any law enforcement
officers, firefighters, rescue personnel, or emergency medical services
personnel of the state or the political subdivision.
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2133.21.
      WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any weapon that is designed or intended to cause death or
serious physical harm through the release, dissemination, or impact of toxic or
poisonous chemicals, or other precursors;
         (b)   Any weapon involving a disease organism or biological agent;
         (c)   Any weapon that is designed to release radiation or
radioactivity at a level dangerous to human life;
         (d)   Any of the following, except to the extent that the item or
device in question is expressly excepted from the definition of “destructive
device” pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(4) and regulations issued under that
section:
            1.   Any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas bomb, grenade, rocket
having a propellant charge of more than four ounces, missile having an
explosive or incendiary charge of more than one-quarter ounce, mine, or similar
device;
            2.   Any combination of parts either designed or intended for use
in converting any item or device into any item or device described in division
(d)1. of this definition and from which an item or device described in that
division may be readily assembled.
(R.C. § 2917.31) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.07 MAKING FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to cause public inconvenience or alarm;
      (2)   Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be
transmitted to or within any organization, public or private, for dealing with
emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons or property;
      (3)   Report to any law enforcement agency an alleged offense or other
incident within its concern, knowing that the offense did not occur;
      (4)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to impede the operation of a critical
infrastructure facility.
   (B)   This section does not apply to any person conducting an authorized
fire or emergency drill.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making false alarms. If a
violation of this section results in economic harm of $1,000 or more, making
false alarms is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If a
violation of this section pertains to a purported, threatened, or actual use of
a weapon of mass destruction, making false alarms is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
   (D)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or this code may be prosecuted under this section, the
other section, or both sections.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2911.21.
      ECONOMIC HARM and WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION. Have the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2917.31.
(R.C. § 2917.32) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.08 OBSERVANCE OF GOOD ORDER; REMOVAL.
   (A)   All persons while within the park district shall abide by conditions
adopted and posted by the Board for the preservation of good order and the
protection of property within the park.
   (B)   No person shall remain within the park district who does not abide by
the instructions and directions of duly authorized peace officers or agents of
the Board, in the lawful performance of their duties. Any person directed by a
police officer or agent of the Board to leave the park shall do so promptly and
peaceably.
(Prior by-law § 7B) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.09 NOISE; SOUND AMPLIFICATION.
   No person shall indulge in any noisy, boisterous conduct nor shall any
person use any sound amplification device audible more than 20 feet from the
device without specific written permit from the Chief Executive Officer
(Prior by-law § 7D) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.10 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   No person shall remain in or use any part of the facilities of the
park district during the times the park district is closed, unless by special
written permit from the Chief Executive Officer.
   (B)   The park district is open from dawn until dusk daily unless otherwise
authorized by the Chief Executive Officer or with permission.
(Prior by-law § 7E) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.11 LOITERING WITH THE INTENTION OF COMMITTING UNLAWFUL DRUG TRANSACTION.
   (A)   Definitions as used in this section:
      CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as that term has in R.C. §
3719.01(C).
      LOITER. To sit, stand, lie, pace, or otherwise remain in essentially the
same place in a manner or at a time not usual for a law abiding citizen.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any area of property, either publicly owned or to which the
public has access. The term shall specifically include, but not be limited to,
a street, sidewalk, alley, park, playground, parking lot, or garage, the
doorway or entrance to any building that fronts such location, and a motor
vehicle that is parked or idling in such a location.
      UNLAWFUL DRUG-RELATED ACTIVITY. Conduct which constitutes an offense
defined in R.C. Chapter 2925; conduct which constitutes complicity to commit
such an offense, for example, acting as a lookout, or conduct which constitutes
conspiracy to commit such an offense.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in a public place with
the intention of engaging in unlawful drug-related activity.
   (C)   An officer who observes a person loitering under circumstances which
provide the officer with a reasonable basis to believe that the person intends
to engage in unlawful drug-related activity may detain the individual for the
purpose of investigating whether the person is in violation of division (B) of
this section.
   (D)   An officer may not detain an individual under division (C) of this
section unless both of the following elements are satisfied:
      (1)   The person engages in one or more of the following behaviors:
         (a)   The person passes or receives from passers-by, bystanders or
persons in motor vehicles money, objects having characteristics consistent with
controlled substances, and/or an envelope, bag, or other container which could
reasonably contain such objects or money;
         (b)   The person conceals or attempts to conceal an object having
characteristics consistent with controlled substances and/or an envelope, bag
or other container which could reasonably contain such objects;
         (c)   The person flees or obscures himself or herself upon seeing law
enforcement officers;
         (d)   The person communicates the fact that law enforcement officers
are in the vicinity to another person in a manner which suggests that the
communication is a warning;
         (e)   The officer observes the person in possession of any instrument
or object which is customarily used in the sale, administration or use of
controlled substances.
      (2)   One of the following factors applies:
         (a)   The officer is aware that, within the preceding three years, the
person has been convicted or found delinquent of an offense defined in R.C.
Chapter 2925, of complicity to commit such an offense, or of conspiracy to
commit such an offense within the preceding three years;
         (b)   The officer has knowledge of a specific tip concerning unlawful
drug-related activity at a specific location, and the person who is loitering
is doing so at a time, in a place or in a manner that is otherwise reasonably
similar to the details provided in the tip;
         (c)   The person is loitering in an area that is notorious for
unlawful drug-related activity;
         (d)   The person is in an area where he or she is prohibited by court
order from being, and the officer is aware of the court order;
         (e)   The officer knows that the person has previously been convicted
of loitering with the intention of engaging in unlawful drug-related activity
under this section;
         (f)   Any vehicle the person has approached or communicated with is
registered to an individual who has been convicted of an unlawful drug-related
activity in the previous three years, and the officer is aware of that fact.
   (E)   Neither the race or the ethnic background of the person shall be
considered in determining a person’s specific intent under this section.
   (F)   Upon detaining a person pursuant to division (C) of this section, a
police officer must afford the person an opportunity to explain his or her
conduct or otherwise dispel the officer’s suspicion. No person shall be
convicted upon trial if it appears that the officer failed to do so, and no
person shall be convicted upon trial if it appears that the explanation he or
she provided the officer at the scene is true and disclosed a lawful purpose.
   (G)   If a police officer who detains a person pursuant to (C) of this
section develops probable cause to believe that the person is in violation of
(B) of this section, the officer shall order the person to immediately leave
the location and to remain at least 500 feet away from the location for five
hours. In the event that the person refuses to comply with such an order, the
police officer may arrest the person and charge him or her with a violation of
this section.
   (H)   Penalty: whoever violates this section is guilty with the intention of
engaging in unlawful drug-related activity.
(Amended By-Law 132.15, passed 3-19-15) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.12 PUBLIC INTOXICATION.
   No person shall be under the influence of any beer, intoxicating liquor,
controlled substance, or harmful intoxicant within the park district.
(Prior by-law § 12) Penalty, see §
130.99
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic beverages, see
Ch. 91
§ 132.13 SIGNS.
   (A)   No person shall post or place any sign, banner, or advertisement in
Great Parks of Hamilton County, without specific written permission from the
Chief Executive Officer, except reasonable temporary freestanding event related
signs at the location of the event provided the signs are removed at the
conclusion of the event.
   (B)   Directional and/or wayfinding signage is prohibited.
   (C)   Digging or the placement of in-ground signs and sign posts is
prohibited.
   (D)   The attachment of any signs by nails, staples, tacks, or brads or
other similar devices to trees, posts, buildings, shelters, or any other
property managed or controlled by Great Parks of Hamilton County is prohibited.
   (E)   Signs must have a set back from the edge of roadways of not less than
20 feet and no sign shall obstruct the view of drivers or the flow of traffic.
   (F)   Persons in control of the signage are responsible for any and all
damages and for clean-up where the sign is placed.
   (G)   Any sign communicating transactions involving money, goods, or
services is prohibited.
(Prior by-law § 14) (Amended 12-5-2014) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.14 EVENT NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   Great Parks of Hamilton County provides designated indoor and outdoor
reserveable areas such as banquet centers, lodges, meeting rooms, picnic areas,
shelters, and wedding settings which may be reserved for private functions.
Reservations for these reservable areas may be made through and confirmed by
Great Parks of Hamilton County. Great Parks of Hamilton County also provides
general use areas such as open lawn areas, plazas, trails, and trailheads for
the public’s use and enjoyment.
   (B)   No group of 50 or more persons shall hold a special event, such as but
not limited to a walk-a-thon, running race, bicycle race, boating event,
fishing event, sporting event, athletic competition, rally, or other public
gathering in a general use area of Great Parks of Hamilton County without a
special use permit. Applications for permits shall be obtained from and issued
by Great Parks of Hamilton County.
   (C)   The event notification process is designed to assist Great Parks of
Hamilton County in understanding the needs of the applicant in order to plan
for appropriate visitor support services, planning for public safety and
resource protection needs and to make visits to the park enjoyable for all.
Great Parks of Hamilton County will issue permits on a first come, first served
basis provided that the applicant satisfies each of the following objective
factors:
      (1)   The applicant submits a legible, completed application form;
      (2)   The requested location, date, and time are available and the size
and type of the requested event does not exceed the carrying capacity of the
requested area;
      (3)   The applicant obtains any necessary permits or licenses required by
law such as those mandated by the Board of Health or the Ohio Department of
Commerce Division of Liquor Control;
      (4)   Permits shall not be unduly denied. However, the following factors
shall be taken into consideration when making the determination to either grant
or deny a permit:
         (a)   Prior commitment of the site on the date requested;
         (b)   Suitability of the site requested based on the size and nature
of the proposed activity;
         (c)   Availability of alternate sites;
         (d)   Potential injury or damage to park area resources;
         (e)   The activity’s compatibility with the purposes of natural,
historic, wilderness, or commemorative areas;
         (f)   Whether the activity would impair the peace and tranquility
maintained in the Great Parks of Hamilton County;
         (g)   Whether the activity would interfere with naturalists, visitor
services, other program activities or with the administrative activities of
Great Parks of Hamilton County;
         (h)   Whether the activity would impair the operation of public use
facilities or services of Great Parks of Hamilton County or its concessioners,
holders of commercial use authorizations, or contractors;
         (i)   Whether the activity will present a clear and present danger to
the public health and safety;
         (j)   Whether any application is complete and all fees paid;
         (k)   Whether the applicant has allowed sufficient time for the GPHC
to plan for and coordinate the requested activity;
         (l)   The willingness and ability of the applicant to cover expenses
related to the activity, including but not limited to first aid, traffic
control, security, and utilities.
         (m)   Whether the applicant has knowingly provided material falsehoods
relative to the application or proposed event;
         (n)   Whether the applicant has a record of unpaid damages from prior
events;
         (o)   Whether the applicant has a record of previous violations of the
Great Parks of Hamilton County permits, rules, or by-laws.
   (D)   Any person whose permit is denied may file a written appeal to the
Chief Executive Officer of the Great Parks of Hamilton County. The Chief
Executive Officer shall review the appeal and within ten business days after
receipt of the written appeal, provide written notice of his or her decision to
the appellant. The Chief Executive Officer may deny or condition a permit for
good cause, including without limitation that the activity or event authorized
by the permit is being conducted in violation of this chapter or represents a
nuisance or a threat to the public health or safety.
   (E)   The Chief Executive Officer or his or her designee may consider a
request to waive the fees for the use of any Great Parks of Hamilton County
park area. In considering the request the Chief Executive Officer can consider
the following factors:
      (1)   Whether the request is for off-season or prime-time use;
      (2)   Whether the purpose is nonprofit, charitable, or for profit;
      (3)   The size and complexity of the event;
      (4)   There is an offer to perform a needed service for the Great Parks
of Hamilton County in exchange for use;
      (5)   Some other valuable exchange is offered for use;
      (6)   The request is from another governmental unit or agency;
      (7)   Whether the request conflicts with another fee generating request.
(Prior by-law § 17) (Amended 12-5-2014) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.15 IMPEDING PUBLIC PASSAGE OF AN EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly obstruct any
highway, street, sidewalk, or any other public passage in such a manner as to
render the highway, street, sidewalk, or passage impassable without
unreasonable inconvenience or hazard if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The obstruction prevents an emergency vehicle from accessing a
highway or street, prevents an emergency service responder from responding to
an emergency, or prevents an emergency vehicle or an emergency service
responder from having access to an exit from an emergency.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a request or order from an emergency service
responder to remove or cease the obstruction, the person refuses to remove or
cease the obstruction.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not limit or affect the application
of R.C. § 2921.31 or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code. Any conduct
that is a violation of division (A) of this section and that also is a
violation of R.C. § 2921.31 or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code may
be prosecuted under this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code,
or both sections.
   (C)   As used in this section, EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
(R.C. § 2917.14) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 133: SEX OFFENSES
Section
   
133.01   Definitions
   
133.02   Sexual imposition
   
133.03   [Reserved]
   
133.04   Voyeurism
   
133.05   Public indecency
   
133.06   Procuring; engagement in sexual activity for hire
   
133.07   Soliciting
   
133.071   Loitering to engage in solicitation
   
133.08   Prostitution
   
133.09   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles
§ 133.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   HARMFUL TO JUVENILES. That quality of any material or performance describing
or representing nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-masochistic
abuse in any form to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, appeals to
the prurient interest of juveniles in sex;
      (2)   The material or performance is patently offensive to prevailing
standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable
for juveniles;
      (3)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, lacks
serious literary, artistic, political, and scientific value for juveniles.
   JUVENILE. Any unmarried person under 18 years of age.
   MATERIAL. Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print, picture,
figure, image, description, motion picture film, video cassette, laser disc,
phonograph record, cassette tape, compact disc, or other tangible thing capable
of arousing interest through sight, sound, or touch and includes an image or
text appearing on a computer monitor, television screen, liquid crystal
display, or similar display device or an image or text recorded on a computer
hard disk, computer floppy disk, compact disk, magnetic tape, or similar data
storage device.
   MENTAL HEALTH CLIENT OR PATIENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.51.
   MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.115.
   MINOR. A person under the age of 18.
   NUDITY. The showing, representation, or depiction of human male or female
genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full, opaque covering, or of
a female breast with less than a full, opaque covering of any portion thereof
below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state.
   OBSCENE. When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to ordinary
adults or, if it is designed for sexual deviates or other specially susceptible
group, judged with reference to that group, any material or performance is
“obscene” if any of the following apply:
      (1)   Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest;
      (2)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, or nudity in a way that tends
to represent human beings as mere objects of sexual appetite;
      (3)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality;
      (4)   Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological interest by
displaying or depicting human bodily functions of elimination in a way that
inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary sensibilities, without
serving any genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or artistic
purpose;
      (5)   It contains a series of displays or descriptions of sexual
activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme or
bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality, or human bodily functions of
elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal to
prurient or scatological interest, when the appeal to such an interest is
primarily for its own sake or for commercial exploitation, rather than
primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or
artistic purpose.
   PERFORMANCE. Any motion picture, preview, trailer, play, show, skit, dance,
or other exhibition performed before an audience.
   PLACE WHERE A PERSON HAS A REASONABLE EXPECTATION OF PRIVACY. A place where
a reasonable person would believe that the person could fully disrobe in
private.
   PRIVATE AREA. The genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or female breast below the
top of the areola, where nude or covered by an undergarment.
   PROSTITUTE. A male or female who promiscuously engages in sexual activity
for hire, regardless of whether the hire is paid to the prostitute or to
another.
   SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person or the
condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained.
   SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both.
   SEXUAL CONDUCT. Vaginal intercourse between a male and female; anal
intercourse, fellatio, and cunnilingus between persons regardless of sex; and,
without privilege to do so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of the
body or any instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal or anal
opening of another. Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to complete
vaginal or anal intercourse.
   SEXUAL CONTACT. Any touching of an erogenous zone of another, including
without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if the
person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually arousing or
gratifying either person.
   SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when in a
state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   SPOUSE. A person married to an offender at the time of an alleged offense,
except that such person shall not be considered the spouse when any of the
following apply:
      (1)   When the parties have entered into a written separation agreement
pursuant to R.C. § 3103.06;
      (2)   When an action is pending between the parties for annulment,
divorce, dissolution of marriage, or legal separation;
      (3)   In the case of an action for legal separation, after the effective
date of the judgment for legal separation.
(R.C. § 2907.01)
§ 133.02 SEXUAL IMPOSITION.
   (A)   No person shall have sexual contact with another, not the spouse of
the offender; cause another, not the spouse of the offender, to have sexual
contact with the offender; or cause two or more other persons to have sexual
contact when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The offender knows that the sexual contact is offensive to the
other person, or one of the other persons, or is reckless in that regard;
      (2)   The offender knows that the other person’s, or one of the other
person’s ability to appraise the nature of or control the offender’s or
touching person’s conduct is substantially impaired;
      (3)   The offender knows that the other person, or one of the other
persons, submits because of being unaware of the sexual contact;
      (4)   The other person, or one of the other persons, is 13 years of age
or older but less than 16 years of age, whether or not the offender knows the
age of the person, and the offender is at least 18 years of age and four or
more years older than the other person;
      (5)   The offender is a mental health professional, the other person or
one of the other persons is a mental health client or patient of the offender,
and the offender induces the other person who is the client or patient to
submit by falsely representing to the other person who is the client or patient
that the sexual contact is necessary for mental health treatment purposes.
   (B)   No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section solely
upon the victim’s testimony unsupported by other evidence.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of sexual imposition.
(R.C. § 2907.06) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.03 [RESERVED].
Editor’s note:
   This section, formerly based on R.C. § 2907.07, was repealed because the
underlying misdemeanor offense (importuning – solicitation of a person of the
same sex to engage in sexual activity with the offender, when the offender
knows the solicitation is offensive to the other person, or is reckless in that
regard) was held unconstitutional in State v. Thompson, 767 N.E.2d 251 (Ohio
2002) (holding that the statute imposed an unconstitutional content-based
restriction on speech). For felony provisions, see R.C. § 2907.07(A), (C), (D)
and (E).
§ 133.04 VOYEURISM.
   (A)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself
or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the
privacy of another, to spy or eavesdrop upon another.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly commit trespass or otherwise secretly or
surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, broadcast, stream, or otherwise
record another person, in a place where a person has a reasonable expectation
of privacy, for the purpose of viewing the private areas of that person.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly commit trespass or otherwise secretly or
surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, broadcast, stream, or otherwise
record a minor, in a place where a person has a reasonable expectation of
privacy, for the purpose of viewing the private areas of the minor.
   (D)   No person shall secretly or surreptitiously videotape, film,
photograph, or otherwise record another person above, under, or through the
clothing being worn by that other person for the purpose of viewing the body
of, or the undergarments worn by, that other person.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of voyeurism. A violation of
division (C) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2907.08) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.05 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (A)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following, under
circumstances in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and
affront others who are in the person’s physical proximity and who are not
members of the person’s household:
      (1)   Expose the persons’s private parts;
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct or masturbation;
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following, under circumstances
in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and affront another
person who is in the person’s physical proximity, who is a minor, and who is
not the spouse of the offender:
      (1)   Engage in masturbation;
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct;
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation;
      (4)   Expose the person’s private parts with the purpose of personal
sexual arousal or gratification or to lure the minor into sexual activity.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public indecency and
shall be punished as provided in this section.
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to three or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent state
law, or if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the offender’s
conduct was a minor, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)    If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent state
law, a violation of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this
section, or if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the
offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (4)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent state
law, a violation of division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to any violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law, a
violation of division (B)(4) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.09)
   (D)   (1)   If either of the following applies, the court may determine at
the time of sentencing whether to classify the offender as a tier I sex
offender/child-victim offender for a violation of division (B)(4) of this
section:
         (a)   The offender is less than ten years older than the other person.
         (b)   The offender is ten or more years older than the other person
and the offender has not previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any
violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance.
      (2)   If the offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (B)(4) of this section, is ten or more years older than the other
person, and previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation
of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the court shall issue an order at the time of sentencing that
classifies the offender as a tier I sex offender/child-victim offender subject
to registration under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05, and 2950.06.
(R.C. § 2907.09)
   (E)   A mother is entitled to breast-feed her baby in any location of a
place of public accommodation, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, wherein the mother
otherwise is permitted.
(R.C. § 3781.55) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.06 PROCURING; ENGAGEMENT IN SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE.
   (A)   Procuring.
      (1)   No person, knowingly and for gain, shall do either of the
following:
         (a)   Entice or solicit another to patronize a prostitute or brothel;
         (b)   Procure a prostitute for another to patronize, or take or direct
another at the other’s request to any place for the purpose of patronizing a
prostitute.
      (2)   No person, having authority or responsibility over the use of
premises, shall knowingly permit the premises to be used for the purpose of
engaging in sexual activity for hire.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) of this section is
guilty of procuring. If the prostitute who is procured, patronized, or
otherwise involved in a violation of division (A)(1)(b) of this section is
under 18 years of age at the time of the violation, regardless of whether the
offender who violates division (A)(1)(b) of this section knows the prostitute’s
age, or if a prostitute who engages in sexual activity for hire in premises
used in violation of division (A)(2) of this section is under 18 years of age
at the time of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who violates
division (A)(2) of this section knows the prostitute’s age, procuring is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.23)
   (B)   Engagement in sexual activity for hire.
      (1)   As used in this division (B):
         PERSON WITH A DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2905.32.
         SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE. An implicit or explicit agreement to provide
sexual activity in exchange for anything of value paid to the person engaging
in such sexual activity, to any person trafficking that person, or to any
person associated with either such person.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly induce, entice, or procure another to
engage in sexual activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything
of value to the other person.
      (3)   No person shall recklessly induce, entice, or procure another to
engage in sexual activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything
of value to the other person if the other person is a person with a
developmental disability and the offender knows or has reasonable cause to
believe that the other person is a person with a developmental disability.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section is guilty of
engaging in prostitution with a person with a developmental disability, a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In sentencing the offender
under this division, the court shall require the offender to attend an
education or treatment program aimed at preventing persons from inducing,
enticing, or procuring another to engage in sexual activity for hire in
exchange for the person giving anything of value to the other person and,
notwithstanding the fine specified in R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a) for a misdemeanor
of the first degree, the court may impose upon the offender a fine of not more
than $1,500.
(R.C. § 2907.231) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.07 SOLICITING.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly solicit another to engage in sexual activity
for hire in exchange for the person receiving anything of value from the other
person.
   (B)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in conduct in violation of division (A) of this section.
   (C)   As used in division (A) of this section, SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE
means an implicit or explicit agreement to provide sexual activity in exchange
for anything of value paid to the person engaging in such sexual activity, to
any person trafficking that person, or to any person associated with either
such person.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
soliciting.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of engaging
in solicitation after a positive HIV test, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.24) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.071 LOITERING TO ENGAGE IN SOLICITATION.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to solicit another to engage in sexual
activity for hire and while in or near a public place, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Beckon to, stop or attempt to stop another;
      (2)   Engage or attempt to engage another in conversation;
      (3)   Stop or attempt to stop the operator of a vehicle or approach a
stationary vehicle;
      (4)   If the offender is the operator of or a passenger in a vehicle,
stop, attempt to stop, beckon to, attempt to beckon to, or entice another to
approach or enter the vehicle of which the offender is the operator or in which
the offender is the passenger;
      (5)   Interfere with the free passage of another.
   (B)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in conduct in violation of division (A) of this section.
   (C)   As used in division (A) of this section:
      PUBLIC PLACE. Means any of the following:
         (a)   A street, road, highway, thoroughfare, bikeway, walkway,
sidewalk, bridge, alley, alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot or
transportation facility;
         (b)   A doorway or entrance way to a building that fronts on a place
described in division (a) of this definition;
         (c)   A place not described in division (a) or (b) of this definition
that is open to the public.
      VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
loitering to engage in solicitation.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
loitering to engage in solicitation after a positive HIV test, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.241) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.08 PROSTITUTION.
   (A)   No person shall engage in sexual activity for hire.
   (B)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in sexual activity for hire.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
prostitution.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of engaging
in prostitution after a positive HIV test, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.25) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.09 DISSEMINATING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (A)   No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall
recklessly do any of following:
      (1)   Directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit,
rent, or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles;
      (2)   Directly offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate,
provide, exhibit, rent, or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement
officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or
harmful to juveniles;
      (3)   While in the physical proximity of the juvenile or law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, allow any juvenile or law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile to review or peruse any material or view any live
performance that is harmful to juveniles.
   (B)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section
that involves material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles but not
obscene:
      (1)   The defendant is the parent, guardian, or spouse of the juvenile
involved;
      (2)   The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in question, was
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian who, with knowledge of its
character, consented to the material or performance being furnished or
presented to the juvenile;
      (3)   The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or his or her agent or
employee a draft card, driver’s license, birth record, marriage license, or
other official or apparently official document purporting to show that the
juvenile was 18 years of age or over or married, and the person to whom the
document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe that
the juvenile was under the age of 18 and unmarried.
   (C)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section,
involving material or a performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles,
that the material or performance was furnished or presented for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial, or other proper
purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher,
librarian, clergy, prosecutor, judge, or other proper person.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section, mistake of
age is not a defense to a charge under this section.
   (D)   (1)   A person directly sells, delivers, furnishes, disseminates,
provides, exhibits, rents, or presents or directly offers or agrees to sell,
deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present material or a
performance to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section by means of an electronic method of
remotely transmitting information if the person knows or has reason to believe
that the person receiving the information is a juvenile or the group of persons
receiving the information are juveniles.
      (2)   A person remotely transmitting information by means of a method of
mass distribution does not directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate,
provide, exhibit, rent, or present or directly offer or agree to sell, deliver,
furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present the material or
performance in question to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section if either of the following applies:
         (a)   The person has inadequate information to know or have reason to
believe that a particular recipient of the information or offer is a juvenile;
         (b)   The method of mass distribution does not provide the person the
ability to prevent a particular recipient from receiving the information.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disseminating matter
harmful to juveniles. If the material or performance involved is obscene,
violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
(R.C. § 2907.31) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 134: GAMBLING
Section
   
134.01   Definitions
   
134.02   Public gaming
   
134.03   Cheating
   
134.04   Regulations concerning operation of licensed bingo game
   
134.05   Electronic instant bingo; prohibited conduct
§ 134.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BET. The hazarding of anything of value upon the result of an event,
undertaking, or contingency, but does not include a bona fide business risk.
   BINGO. Either of the following:
      (1)   A game with all of the following characteristics:
         (a)   The participants use bingo cards or sheets, including paper
formats and electronic representation or image formats, that are divided into
25 spaces arranged in five horizontal and five vertical rows of spaces, with
each space, except the central space, being designated by a combination of a
letter and a number and with the central space being designated as a free
space;
         (b)   The participants cover the spaces on the bingo cards or sheets
that correspond to combinations of letters and numbers that are announced by a
bingo game operator;
         (c)   A bingo game operator announces combinations of letters and
numbers that appear on objects that a bingo game operator selects by chance,
either manually or mechanically, from a receptacle that contains 75 objects at
the beginning of each game, each object marked by a different combination of a
letter and a number that corresponds to one of the 75 possible combinations of
a letter and a number that can appear on the bingo cards or sheets;
         (d)   The winner of the bingo game includes any participant who
properly announces during the interval between the announcements of letters and
numbers, as described in division (1)(c) of this definition, that a
predetermined and pre-announced pattern of spaces has been covered on a bingo
card or sheet being used by the participant.
      (2)   Instant bingo, electronic instant bingo, and raffles.
   BINGO GAME OPERATOR. Any person, except security personnel, who performs
work or labor at the site of bingo including but not limited to collecting
money from participants, handing out bingo cards or sheets or objects to cover
spaces on bingo cards or sheets, selecting from a receptacle the objects that
contain the combination of letters and numbers that appear on bingo cards or
sheets, calling out the combinations of letters and numbers, distributing
prizes, selling or redeeming instant bingo tickets or cards, selling or
redeeming electronic instant bingo tickets, credits, or vouchers, accessing an
electronic instant bingo system other than as a participant, supervising the
operation of a punch board, selling raffle tickets, selecting raffle tickets
from a receptacle and announcing the winning numbers in a raffle, and
preparing, selling, and serving food or beverages. “Bingo game operator” does
not include a person who is installing, maintaining, updating, or repairing an
electronic instant bingo system.
   BINGO SESSION. A period that includes both of the following:
      (1)   Not to exceed five continuous hours for the conduct of one or more
games described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in this section,
instant bingo, and electronic instant bingo;
      (2)   A period for the conduct of instant bingo and electronic instant
bingo for not more than two hours before and not more than two hours after the
period described in division (1) of this definition.
   BINGO SUPPLIES. Bingo cards or sheets; instant bingo tickets or cards;
electronic bingo aids; raffle tickets; punch boards; seal cards; instant bingo
ticket dispensers; electronic instant bingo systems; and devices for selecting
or displaying the combination of bingo letters and numbers or raffle tickets.
Items that are “bingo supplies” are not gambling devices if sold or otherwise
provided, and used, in accordance with this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915. For
purposes of this chapter, “bingo supplies” are not to be considered equipment
used to conduct a bingo game.
   BOOKMAKING. The business of receiving or paying off bets.
   CHAMBER OF COMMERCE. Any organization of individuals, professionals, and
businesses that has the purpose to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial, and civic interests of the community and that is, and has received
from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that currently is in
effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(6).
   CHARITABLE BINGO GAME. Any bingo game described in divisions (1) or (2) of
the definition of “bingo” in this section that is conducted by a charitable
organization that has obtained a license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08 and the
proceeds of which are used for a charitable purpose.
   CHARITABLE INSTANT BINGO ORGANIZATION. An organization that is exempt from
federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3) and
is a charitable organization as defined in this section. The term does not
include a charitable organization that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3) and that is created by a
veteran’s organization, a fraternal organization, or a sporting organization in
regards to bingo conducted or assisted by a veteran’s organization, a fraternal
organization, or a sporting organization pursuant to R.C. § 2915.13.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, “charitable
organization” means either of the following:
         (a)   An organization that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
         (b)   A volunteer rescue service organization, volunteer firefighter’s
organization, veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §§ 501(c)
(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19).
      (2)   To qualify as a charitable organization, an organization shall have
been in continuous existence as such in this state for a period of two years
immediately preceding either the making of an application for a bingo license
under R.C. § 2915.08 or the conducting of any game of chance as provided in
R.C. § 2915.02(D).
   CHARITABLE PURPOSE. Means that the net profit of bingo, other than instant
bingo or electronic instant bingo, is used by, or is given, donated, or
otherwise transferred to, any of the following:
      (1)   Any organization that is described in IRC §§ 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2),
or 509(a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization that is tax
exempt under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
      (2)   A veteran’s organization that is a post, chapter, or organization
of veterans, or an auxiliary unit or society of, or a trust or foundation for,
any such post, chapter, or organization organized in the United States or any
of its possessions, at least 75% of the members of which are veterans and
substantially all of the other members of which are individuals who are
spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, or such individuals, provided that no
part of the net earnings of such post, chapter, or organization inures to the
benefit of any private shareholder or individual, and further provided that the
net profit is used by the post, chapter, or organization for the charitable
purposes set forth in R.C. § 5739.02(B)(12), is used for awarding scholarships
to or for attendance at an institution mentioned in that division of the Ohio
Revised Code, is donated to a governmental agency, or is used for nonprofit
youth activities, the purchase of United States or Ohio flags that are donated
to schools, youth groups, or other bona fide nonprofit organizations, promotion
of patriotism, or disaster relief;
      (3)   A fraternal organization that has been in continuous existence in
this state for 15 years and that uses the net profit exclusively for religious,
charitable, scientific, literary, or educational purposes, or for the
prevention of cruelty to children or animals, if contributions for such use
would qualify as a deductible charitable contribution under IRC § 170;
      (4)   A volunteer firefighter’s organization that uses the net profit for
the purposes set forth in the definition of “volunteer firefighter’s
organization” in this section.
   COMMUNITY ACTION AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 122.66.
   CONDUCT. To back, promote, organize, manage, carry on, sponsor, or prepare
for the operation of bingo or a game of chance, a scheme of chance, or a
sweepstakes.
   DEAL. A single game of instant bingo tickets, or a single game of electronic
instant bingo tickets, all with the same serial number.
   DISTRIBUTOR. Any person who purchases or obtains bingo supplies and who does
either of the following:
      (1)   Sells, offers for sale, or otherwise provides or offers to provide
the bingo supplies to another person for use in this state;
      (2)   Modifies, converts, adds to, or removes parts from the bingo
supplies to further their promotion or sale for use in this state.
   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID.
      (1)   An electronic device used by a participant to monitor bingo cards
or sheets purchased at the time and place of a bingo session and that does all
of the following:
         (a)   It provides a means for a participant to input numbers and
letters announced by a bingo caller;
         (b)   It compares the numbers and letters entered by the participant
to the bingo faces previously stored in the memory of the device;
         (c)   It identifies a winning bingo pattern.
      (2)   The term does not include any device into which a coin, currency,
token, or an equivalent is inserted to activate play.
   ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO.
      (1)   A form of bingo that consists of an electronic or digital
representation of instant bingo in which a participant wins a prize if the
participant’s electronic instant bingo ticket contains a combination of numbers
or symbols that was designated in advance as a winning combination, and to
which all of the following apply:
         (a)   Each deal has a predetermined, finite number of winning and
losing tickets and a predetermined prize amount and deal structure, provided
that there may be multiple winning combinations in each deal and multiple
winning tickets.
         (b)   Each electronic instant bingo ticket within a deal has a unique
serial number that is not regenerated.
         (c)   Each electronic instant bingo ticket within a deal is sold for
the same price.
         (d)   After a participant purchases an electronic instant bingo
ticket, the combination of numbers or symbols on the ticket is revealed to the
participant.
         (e)   The reveal of numbers or symbols on the ticket may incorporate
an entertainment or bonus theme, provided that the reveal does not include
spinning reels that resemble a slot machine.
         (f)   The reveal theme, if any, does not require additional
consideration or award any prize other than any predetermined prize associated
with the electronic instant bingo ticket.
      (2)   The term shall not include any of the following:
         (a)   Any game, entertainment, or bonus theme that replicates or
simulates any of the following:
            1.   The gambling games of keno, blackjack, roulette, poker, craps,
other casino-style table games;
            2.   Horse racing;
            3.   Gambling games offered in this state on slot machines or video
lottery terminals. As used in this division, “video lottery terminal” has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 3770.21.
         (b)   Any device operated by dropping one or more coins or tokens into
a slot and pulling a handle or pushing a button or touchpoint on a touchscreen
to activate one to three or more rotating reels marked into horizontal segments
by varying symbols, where the predetermined prize amount depends on how and how
many of the symbols line up when the rotating reels come to a rest;
         (c)   Any device that includes a coin or token slot, tray, or hopper
and the ability to dispense coins, cash, tokens, or anything of value other
than a credit ticket voucher.
   ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO SYSTEM. Means both of the following:
      (1)   A mechanical, electronic, digital, or video device and associated
software to which all of the following apply:
         (a)   It is used by not more than one player at a time to play
electronic instant bingo on a single screen that is physically connected to the
device;
         (b)   It is located on the premises of the principal place of business
of a veteran’s or fraternal organization that holds a type II or type III bingo
license to conduct electronic instant bingo at that location issued under R.C.
§ 2915.08.
      (2)   Any associated equipment or software used to manage, monitor, or
document any aspect of electronic instant bingo.
   EXPENSES. The reasonable amount of gross profit actually expended for all of
the following:
      (1)   The purchase or lease of bingo supplies;
      (2)   The annual license fee required under R.C. § 2915.08;
      (3)   Bank fees and service charges for a bingo session or game account
described in R.C. § 2915.10;
      (4)   Audits and accounting services;
      (5)   Safes;
      (6)   Cash registers;
      (7)   Hiring security personnel;
      (8)   Advertising bingo;
      (9)   Renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session;
      (10)   Tables and chairs;
      (11)   Expenses for maintaining and operating a charitable organization’s
facilities, including but not limited to a post home, club house, lounge,
tavern, or canteen and any grounds attached to the post home, club house,
lounge, tavern, or canteen;
      (12)   Payment of real property taxes and assessments that are levied on
a premises on which bingo is conducted;
      (13)   Any other product or service directly related to the conduct of
bingo that is authorized in rules adopted by the Attorney General under R.C. §
2915.08(F)(1).
   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. Any society, order, state headquarters, or
association within this state, except a college or high school fraternity, that
is not organized for profit, that is a branch, lodge, or chapter of a national
or state organization, that exists exclusively for the common business or
sodality of its members.
   GAMBLING DEVICE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A book, totalizer, or other equipment used for recording bets;
      (2)   A ticket, token, or other device representing a chance, share, or
interest in a scheme of chance or evidencing a bet;
      (3)   A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel, slot machine,
or other apparatus designed for use in connection with a game of chance;
      (4)   Any equipment, device, apparatus, or paraphernalia specially
designed for gambling purposes;
      (5)   Bingo supplies sold or otherwise provided, or used, in violation of
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
   GAMBLING OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. Chapter 2915;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 or a violation of R.C. § 2915.06
as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing law of this or any other state or of
the United States, of which gambling is an element;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   GAME FLARE. The board or placard, or electronic representation of a board or
placard, that accompanies each deal of instant bingo or electronic instant
bingo tickets and that includes the following information for the game:
      (1)   The name of the game;
      (2)   The manufacturer’s name or distinctive logo;
      (3)   The form number;
      (4)   The ticket count;
      (5)   The prize structure, including the number of winning tickets by
denomination and the respective winning symbol or number combinations for the
winning tickets;
      (6)   The cost per play;
      (7)   The serial number of the game.
   GAME OF CHANCE. Poker, craps, roulette, or other game in which a player
gives anything of value in the hope of gain, the outcome of which is determined
largely by chance, but does not include bingo.
   GAME OF CHANCE CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. Any game of chance designed to produce
income for the person who conducts or operates the game of chance, but does not
include bingo.
   GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES. The annual gross receipts derived from the conduct of
bingo described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in this section
plus the annual net profit derived from the conduct of bingo described in
division (2) of the definition of “bingo” in this section.
   GROSS PROFIT. Gross receipts minus the amount actually expended for the
payment of prize awards.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. All money or assets, including admission fees, that a person
receives from bingo without the deduction of any amounts for prizes paid out or
for the expenses of conducting bingo. The term does not include any money
directly taken in from the sale of food or beverages by a charitable
organization conducting bingo, or by a bona fide auxiliary unit or society of a
charitable organization conducting bingo, provided all of the following apply:
      (1)   The auxiliary unit or society has been in existence as a bona fide
auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization for at least two years
prior to conducting bingo;
      (2)   The person who purchases the food or beverage receives nothing of
value except the food or beverage and items customarily received with the
purchase of that food or beverage;
      (3)   The food and beverages are sold at customary and reasonable prices.
   HISTORIC RAILROAD. All or a portion of the tracks and right-of-way of a
railroad that was owned and operated by a for profit common carrier in this
state at any time prior to January 1, 1950.
   INSTANT BINGO. A form of bingo that shall use folded or banded tickets or
paper cards with perforated break-open tabs, a face of which is covered or
otherwise hidden from view to conceal a number, letter, or symbol, or set of
numbers, letters, or symbols, some of which have been designated in advance as
prize winners, and may also include games in which some winners are determined
by the random selection of one or more bingo numbers by the use of a seal card
or bingo blower. “Instant bingo” also includes a punch board game. In all
“instant bingo” the prize amount and structure shall be predetermined. The term
does not include electronic instant bingo or any device that is activated by
the insertion of a coin, currency, token, or an equivalent, and that contains
as one of its components a video display monitor that is capable of displaying
numbers, letters, symbols, or characters in winning or losing combinations.
   INSTANT BINGO TICKET DISPENSER. A mechanical device that dispenses an
instant bingo ticket or card as the sole item of value dispensed and that has
the following characteristics:
      (1)   It is activated upon the insertion of United States currency;
      (2)   It performs no gaming functions;
      (3)   It does not contain a video display monitor or generate noise;
      (4)   It is not capable of displaying any numbers, letters, symbols, or
characters in winning or losing combinations;
      (5)   It does not simulate or display rolling or spinning reels;
      (6)   It is incapable of determining whether a dispensed bingo ticket or
card is a winning or non-winning ticket or card and requires a winning ticket
or card to be paid by a bingo game operator;
      (7)   It may provide accounting and security features to aid in
accounting for the instant bingo tickets or cards it dispenses;
      (8)   It is not part of an electronic network and is not interactive.
   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE (IRC). The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 100 Stat.
2085, 26 U.S.C. §§ 1 et seq., as now or hereafter amended.
   MANUFACTURER. Any person who assembles completed bingo supplies from raw
materials, other items, or subparts or who modifies, converts, adds to, or
removes parts from bingo supplies to further their promotion or sale.
   MERCHANDISE PRIZE. Any item of value, but shall not include any of the
following:
      (1)   Cash, gift cards, or any equivalent thereof;
      (2)   Plays on games of chance, state lottery tickets, or bingo;
      (3)   Firearms, tobacco, or alcoholic beverages;
      (4)   A redeemable voucher that is redeemable for any of the items listed
in division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   NET PROFIT. Gross profit minus expenses.
   NET PROFIT FROM THE PROCEEDS OF THE SALE OF INSTANT BINGO OR ELECTRONIC
INSTANT BINGO. Gross profit minus the ordinary, necessary, and reasonable
expense expended for the purchase of bingo supplies for the purpose of
conducting instant bingo or electronic instant bingo, and, in the case of
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conducted by a veteran’s, fraternal,
or sporting organization, minus the payment by that organization of real
property taxes and assessments levied on a premises on which instant bingo or
electronic instant bingo is conducted.
   PARTICIPANT. Any person who plays bingo.
   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.59 and includes any firm or any
other legal entity, however organized.
   POOL NOT CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. A scheme in which a participant gives a
valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize and the total amount of
consideration wagered is distributed to a participant or participants.
   PUNCH BOARD. A form of instant bingo that uses a board containing a number
of holes or receptacles of uniform size in which are placed, mechanically and
randomly, serially numbered slips of paper that may be punched or drawn from
the hole or receptacle. A player may punch or draw the numbered slips of paper
from the holes or receptacles and obtain the prize established for the game if
the number drawn corresponds to a winning number or, if the punch board
includes the use of a seal card, a potential winning number.
   RAFFLE. A form of bingo in which the one or more prizes are won by one or
more persons who have purchased a raffle ticket. The one or more winners of the
raffle are determined by drawing a ticket stub or other detachable section from
a receptacle containing ticket stubs or detachable sections corresponding to
all tickets sold for the raffle. The term does not include the drawing of a
ticket stub or other detachable section of a ticket purchased to attend a
professional sporting event if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The ticket stub or other detachable section is used to select the
winner of a free prize given away at the professional sporting event;
      (2)   The cost of the ticket is the same as the cost of a ticket to the
professional sporting event on days when no free prize is given away.
   REDEEMABLE VOUCHER. Any ticket, token, coupon, receipt, or other noncash
representation of value.
   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION. Any church, body of communicants, or group that is
not organized or operated for profit and that gathers in common membership for
regular worship and religious observances.
   REVOKE. To void permanently all rights and privileges of the holder of a
license issued under R.C. § 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a charitable
gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   SCHEME OF CHANCE.
      (1)   A slot machine unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3772, lottery
unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770, numbers game, pool conducted for
profit, or other scheme in which a participant gives a valuable consideration
for a chance to win a prize, but does not include bingo, a skill-based
amusement machine, or a pool not conducted for profit. “Scheme of chance”
includes the use of an electronic device to reveal the results of a game entry
if valuable consideration is paid, directly or indirectly, for a chance to win
a prize. Valuable consideration is deemed to be paid for a chance to win a
prize in the following instances:
         (a)   Less than 50% of the goods or services sold by a scheme of
chance operator in exchange for game entries are used or redeemed by
participants at any one location;
         (b)   Less than 50% of participants who purchase goods or services at
any one location do not accept, use, or redeem the goods or services sold or
purportedly sold;
         (c)   More than 50% of prizes at any one location are revealed to
participants through an electronic device simulating a game of chance or a
“casino game” as defined in R.C. § 3772.01;
         (d)   The good or service sold by a scheme of chance operator in
exchange for a game entry cannot be used or redeemed in the manner advertised;
         (e)   A participant pays more than fair market value for goods or
services offered by a scheme of chance operator in order to receive one or more
game entries;
         (f)   A participant may use the electronic device to purchase
additional game entries;
         (g)   A participant may purchase additional game entries by using
points or credits won as prizes while using the electronic device;
         (h)   A scheme of chance operator pays out in prize money more than
20% of the gross revenue received at one location;
         (i)   A participant makes a purchase or exchange in order to obtain
any good or service that may be used to facilitate play on the electronic
device.
      (2)   As used in this division (2), “electronic device” means a
mechanical, video, digital, or electronic machine or device that is capable of
displaying information on a screen or other mechanism and that is owned,
leased, or otherwise possessed by any person conducting a scheme of chance, or
by that person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or contractors.
“Electronic device” does not include an electronic instant bingo system.
   SEAL CARD. A form of instant bingo that uses instant bingo tickets in
conjunction with a board or placard that contains one or more seals that, when
removed or opened, reveal predesignated winning numbers, letters, or symbols.
   SECURITY PERSONNEL. Includes any person who either is a sheriff, deputy
sheriff, marshal, deputy marshal, township constable, or member of an organized
police department of a municipal corporation or has successfully completed a
peace officer’s training course pursuant to R.C. §§ 109.71 through 109.79 and
who is hired to provide security for the premises on which bingo is conducted.
   SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINE.
      (1)   (a)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic device that
rewards the player or players, if at all, only with merchandise prizes or with
redeemable vouchers redeemable only for merchandise prizes, provided that with
respect to rewards for playing the game all of the following apply:
            1.   The wholesale value of a merchandise prize awarded as a result
of the single play of a machine does not exceed $10;
            2.   Redeemable vouchers awarded for any single play of a machine
are not redeemable for a merchandise prize with a wholesale value of more than
$10;
            3.   Redeemable vouchers are not redeemable for a merchandise prize
that has a wholesale value of more than $10 times the fewest number of single
plays necessary to accrue the redeemable vouchers required to obtain that
prize;
            4.   Any redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes are distributed
at the site of the skill-based amusement machine at the time of play.
         (b)   A card for the purchase of gasoline is a redeemable voucher for
purposes of division (1) of this definition even if the skill-based amusement
machine for the play of which the card is awarded is located at a place where
gasoline may not be legally distributed to the public or the card is not
redeemable at the location of, or at the time of playing, the skill-based
amusement machine.
      (2)   A device shall not be considered a skill-based amusement machine
and shall be considered a slot machine if it pays cash or one or more of the
following apply:
         (a)   The ability of a player to succeed at the game is impacted by
the number or ratio of prior wins to prior losses of players playing the game;
         (b)   Any reward of redeemable vouchers is not based solely on the
player achieving the object of the game or the player’s score;
         (c)   The outcome of the game, or the value of the redeemable voucher
or merchandise prize awarded for winning the game, can be controlled by a
source other than any player playing the game;
         (d)   The success of any player is or may be determined by a chance
event that cannot be altered by player actions;
         (e)   The ability of any player to succeed at the game is determined
by game features not visible or known to the player;
         (f)   The ability of the player to succeed at the game is impacted by
the exercise of a skill that no reasonable player could exercise.
      (3)   All of the following apply to any machine that is operated as
described in division (1) of this definition:
         (a)   As used in this definition of “skill-based amusement machine”,
GAME and PLAY mean one event from the initial activation of the machine until
the results of play are determined without payment of additional consideration.
An individual utilizing a machine that involves a single game, play, contest,
competition, or tournament may be awarded redeemable vouchers or merchandise
prizes based on the results of play;
         (b)   Advance play for a single game, play, contest, competition, or
tournament participation may be purchased. The cost of the contest,
competition, or tournament participation may be greater than a single non-
contest, competition, or tournament play;
         (c)   To the extent that the machine is used in a contest,
competition, or tournament, that contest, competition, or tournament has a
defined starting and ending date and is open to participants in competition for
scoring and ranking results toward the awarding of redeemable vouchers or
merchandise prizes that are stated prior to the start of the contest,
competition, or tournament.
      (4)   For purposes of division (1) of this definition, the mere presence
of a device, such as a pin-setting, ball-releasing, or scoring mechanism, that
does not contribute to or affect the outcome of the play of the game does not
make the device a skill-based amusement machine.
   SLOT MACHINE.
      (1)   Either of the following:
         (a)   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player who gives the thing of value in the hope of gain;
         (b)   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player to conduct bingo or a scheme or game of chance.
      (2)   The term does not include a skill-based amusement machine, an
instant bingo ticket dispenser, or an electronic instant bingo system.
   SPORTING ORGANIZATION. A hunting, fishing, or trapping organization, other
than a college or high school fraternity or sorority, that is not organized for
profit, that is affiliated with a state or national sporting organization,
including but not limited to the League of Ohio Sportsmen, and that has been in
continuous existence in this state for a period of three years.
   SUSPEND. To interrupt temporarily all rights and privileges of the holder of
a license issued under R.C. § 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a charitable
gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   SWEEPSTAKES. Any game, contest, advertising scheme or plan, or other
promotion where consideration is not required for a person to enter to win or
become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is based upon
chance. “Sweepstakes” does not include bingo as authorized under
R.C. Chapter 2915, pari-mutuel wagering as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3769,
lotteries conducted by the State Lottery Commission as authorized by R.C.
Chapter 3770, and casino gaming as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3772.
   SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE.
      (1)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic machine or device that
is owned, leased, or otherwise possessed by any person conducting a
sweepstakes, or by that person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or
contractors, that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes participant, and that
is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism. A device
is a sweepstakes terminal device if any of the following apply:
         (a)   The device uses a simulated game terminal as a representation of
the prizes associated with the results of the sweepstakes entries;
         (b)   The device utilizes software such that the simulated game
influences or determines the winning of or value of the prize;
         (c)   The device selects prizes from a predetermined finite pool of
entries;
         (d)   The device utilizes a mechanism that reveals the content of a
predetermined sweepstakes entry;
         (e)   The device predetermines the prize results and stores those
results for delivery at the time the sweepstakes entry results are revealed;
         (f)   The device utilizes software to create a game result;
         (g)   The device reveals the prize incrementally, even though the
device does not influence the awarding of the prize or the value of any prize
awarded;
         (h)   The device determines and associates the prize with an entry or
entries at the time the sweepstakes is entered.
      (2)   As used in this definition and in §
134.02:
         (a)   ENTER. The act by which a person becomes eligible to receive any
prize offered in a sweepstakes.
         (b)   ENTRY. One event from the initial activation of the sweepstakes
terminal device until all the sweepstakes prize results from that activation
are revealed.
         (c)   PRIZE. Any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit, reward,
or any other thing of value that may be transferred to a person, whether
possession of the prize is actually transferred, or placed on an account or
other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize.
         (d)   SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE FACILITY. Any location in this state
where a sweepstakes terminal device is provided to a sweepstakes participant,
except as provided in §
134.02(G) and R.C. § 2915.02(G).
   VETERAN’S ORGANIZATION. Any individual post or state headquarters of a
national veteran’s association or an auxiliary unit of any individual post of a
national veteran’s association, which post, state headquarters, or auxiliary
unit is incorporated as a nonprofit corporation and either has received a
letter from the state headquarters of the national veteran’s association
indicating that the individual post or auxiliary unit is in good standing with
the national veteran’s association or has received a letter from the national
veteran’s association indicating that the state headquarters is in good
standing with the national veteran’s association. As used in this definition,
NATIONAL VETERAN’S ASSOCIATION means any veteran’s association that has been in
continuous existence as such for a period of at least five years and either is
incorporated by an act of the United States Congress or has a national dues-
paying membership of at least 5,000 persons.
   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER’S ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteer
firefighters, as defined in R.C. § 146.01, that is organized and operated
exclusively to provide financial support for a volunteer fire department or a
volunteer fire company and that is recognized or ratified by a county,
municipal corporation, or township.
   VOLUNTEER RESCUE SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteers
organized to function as an emergency medical service organization, as defined
in R.C. § 4765.01.
   YOUTH ATHLETIC ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for profit,
that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial support to, or
to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 21 years of age or younger
by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating, or contributing to the support
of an athletic team, club, league, or association.
   YOUTH ATHLETIC PARK ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for
profit, that satisfies both of the following:
      (1)   It owns, operates, and maintains playing fields that satisfy both
of the following:
         (a)   The playing fields are used for athletic activities by one or
more organizations, not organized for profit, each of which is organized and
operated exclusively to provide financial support to, or to operate, athletic
activities for persons who are 18 years of age or younger by means of
sponsoring, organizing, operating, or contributing to the support of an
athletic team, club, league, or association.
         (b)   The playing fields are not used for any profit-making activity
at any time during the year;
      (2)   It uses the proceeds of bingo it conducts exclusively for the
operation, maintenance, and improvement of its playing fields of the type
described in division (1) of this definition.
(R.C. § 2915.01)
§ 134.02 PUBLIC GAMING.
   (A)   No person within the park district shall make a bet or play any game
of chance or scheme of chance.
   (B)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control, or
supervision of a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other place
of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall recklessly permit
those premises to be used or occupied in violation of division (A) of this
section.
   (C)   Divisions (A) and (B) of this section do not prohibit conduct in
connection with gambling expressly permitted by law.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming.
   (E)   Premises used or occupied in violation of division (B) of this section
constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2915.04) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 134.03 CHEATING.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome
of any of the following:
      (1)   The subject of a bet;
      (2)   A contest of knowledge, skill, or endurance that is not an athletic
or sporting event;
      (3)   A scheme or game of chance;
      (4)   Bingo.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Offer, give, solicit, or accept anything of value to corrupt the
outcome of an athletic or sporting event;
      (2)   Engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome of an athletic or
sporting event.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
cheating. If the potential gain from the cheating is $1,000 or more or if the
offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense or of any theft
offense as defined in R.C. § 2913.01, cheating is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
corrupting sports. Corrupting sports is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.05) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 134.04 REGULATIONS CONCERNING OPERATION OF LICENSED BINGO GAME.
   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo shall fail to do any of
the following:
      (1)   Own all of the equipment used to conduct bingo or lease that
equipment from a charitable organization that is licensed to conduct bingo, or
from the landlord of a premises where bingo is conducted, for a rental rate
that is not more than is customary and reasonable for that equipment;
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(3) of this section,
use all of the gross receipts from bingo for paying prizes, for reimbursement
of expenses for or for renting premises in which to conduct bingo, for
reimbursement of expenses for or for purchasing or leasing bingo supplies used
in conducting bingo, for reimbursement of expenses for or for hiring security
personnel, for reimbursement of expenses for or for advertising bingo, or for
reimbursement of other expenses or for other expenses listed in the definition
for “expenses” in R.C. § 2915.01, provided that the amount of the receipts so
spent is not more than is customary and reasonable for a similar purchase,
lease, hiring, advertising, or expense. If the building in which bingo is
conducted is owned by the charitable organization conducting bingo and the
bingo conducted includes a form of bingo described in division (1) of the
definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01, the charitable organization may deduct
from the total amount of the gross receipts from each session a sum equal to
the lesser of $600 or 45% of the gross receipts from the bingo described in
that division as consideration for the use of the premises;
      (3)   Use, or give, donate, or otherwise transfer, all of the net profit
derived from bingo described in R.C. § 2915.01(O)(1) for a charitable purpose
listed in its license application and described in R.C. § 2915.01(V), or
distribute all of the net profit from the proceeds of the sale of instant bingo
or electronic instant bingo as stated in its license application and in
accordance with R.C. § 2915.101, as applicable.
   (B)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall fail to do
any of the following:
      (1)   Conduct the bingo game on premises that are owned by the charitable
organization, on premises that are owned by another charitable organization and
leased from that charitable organization for a rental rate not in excess of the
lesser of $650 per bingo session or 45% of the gross receipts of the bingo
session, on premises that are leased from a person other than a charitable
organization for a rental rate that is not more than is customary and
reasonable for premises that are similar in location, size, and quality but not
in excess of $450 per bingo session, or on premises that are owned by a person
other than a charitable organization, that are leased from that person by
another charitable organization, and that are subleased from that other
charitable organization by the charitable organization for a rental rate not in
excess of $450 per bingo session. No charitable organization is required to pay
property taxes or assessments on premises that the charitable organization
leases from another person to conduct bingo sessions. If the charitable
organization leases from a person other than a charitable organization the
premises on which it conducts bingo sessions, the lessor of the premises shall
provide only the premises to the organization and shall not provide the
organization with bingo game operators, security personnel, concessions or
concession operators, bingo supplies, or any other type of service. A
charitable organization shall not lease or sublease premises that it owns or
leases to more than three other charitable organizations per calendar week for
conducting bingo sessions on the premises. A person that is not a charitable
organization shall not lease premises that it owns, leases, or otherwise is
empowered to lease to more than three charitable organizations per calendar
week for conducting bingo sessions on the premises. In no case shall more than
nine bingo sessions be conducted on any premises in any calendar week;
      (2)   Display its license conspicuously at the premises where the bingo
session is conducted;
      (3)   Conduct the bingo session in accordance with division (1) of the
definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01.
   (C)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for operating a bingo
session that is conducted by the charitable organization or for preparing,
selling, or serving food or beverages at the site of the bingo session, permit
any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to pay
compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food or
beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable organization, or
permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to prepare,
sell, or serve food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable
organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the
bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or serve the food or beverages;
      (2)   Pay consulting fees to any person for any services performed in
relation to the bingo session;
      (3)   Pay concession fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in the bingo session;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(4) of this section,
conduct more than three bingo sessions in any seven-day period. A volunteer
firefighter’s organization or a volunteer rescue service organization that
conducts not more than five bingo sessions in a calendar year may conduct more
than three bingo sessions in a seven-day period after notifying the Attorney
General when it will conduct the sessions;
      (5)   Pay out more than $6,000 in prizes for bingo games described in
R.C. § 2915.01(S)(1) during any bingo session that is conducted by the
charitable organization. “Prizes” does not include awards from the conduct of
instant bingo;
      (6)   Conduct a bingo session at any time during the eight-hour period
between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., at any time during, or within ten hours of, a
bingo game conducted for amusement only pursuant to R.C. § 2915.12, at any
premises not specified on its license, or on any day of the week or during any
time period not specified on its license. This division (C)(6) does not
prohibit the sale of instant bingo tickets beginning at 9:00 a.m. for a bingo
session that begins at 10:00 a.m. If circumstances make it impractical for the
charitable organization to conduct a bingo session at the premises, or on the
day of the week or at the time specified on its license or if a charitable
organization wants to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time
other than the day or time specified on its license, the charitable
organization may apply in writing to the Attorney General for an amended
license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08(J). A charitable organization may apply
twice in each calendar year for an amended license to conduct bingo sessions on
a day of the week or at a time other than the day or time specified on its
license. If the amended license is granted, the organization may conduct bingo
sessions at the premises, on the day of the week, and at the time specified on
its amended license;
      (7)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, is under the age of 18 to work as a bingo game operator;
      (8)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any
jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator;
      (9)   Permit the lessor of the premises on which the bingo session is
conducted, if the lessor is not a charitable organization, to provide the
charitable organization with bingo game operators, security personnel,
concessions, bingo supplies, or any other type of service;
      (10)   Purchase or lease bingo supplies from any person except a
distributor issued a license under R.C. § 2915.081;
      (11)   (a)   Use or permit the use of electronic bingo aids except under
the following circumstances:
            1.   For any single participant, not more than 90 bingo faces can
be played using an electronic bingo aid or aids;
            2.   The charitable organization shall provide a participant using
an electronic bingo aid with corresponding paper bingo cards or sheets;
            3.   The total price of bingo faces played with an electronic bingo
aid shall be equal to the total price of the same number of bingo faces played
with a paper bingo card or sheet sold at the same bingo session but without an
electronic bingo aid;
            4.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be part of an electronic
network other than a network that includes only bingo aids and devices that are
located on the premises at which the bingo is being conducted or be interactive
with any device not located on the premises at which the bingo is being
conducted;
            5.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to participate in bingo
that is conducted at a location other than the location at which the bingo
session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used;
            6.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to provide for the
input of numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller other than the bingo
caller who physically calls the numbers and letters at the location at which
the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
         (b)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 119 that govern the use of electronic bingo aids. The rules may include
a requirement that an electronic bingo aid be capable of being audited by the
Attorney General to verify the number of bingo cards or sheets played during
each bingo session.
      (12)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, to be under 18 years of age to play bingo described in division (1)
of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01.
   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this section,
no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator, and no bingo
game operator shall receive or accept, any commission, wage, salary, reward,
tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly,
regardless of the source, for conducting bingo or providing other work or labor
at the site of bingo during a bingo session.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this section, no
charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator any commission,
wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation,
directly or indirectly regardless of the source, for conducting instant bingo,
electronic instant bingo, or both other than at a bingo session at the site of
instant bingo, electronic instant bingo, or both other than at a bingo session.
      (3)   Nothing in this division (D) of this section prohibits an employee
of a fraternal organization, veteran’s organization, or sporting organization
from selling instant bingo tickets or cards to the organization’s members or
invited guests, as long as no portion of the employee’s compensation is paid
from any receipts of bingo.
   (E)   Notwithstanding division (B)(1) of this section, a charitable
organization that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written
agreements for the lease of premises it owns to another charitable organization
or other charitable organizations for the conducting of bingo sessions so that
more than two bingo sessions are conducted per calendar week on the premises,
and a person that is not a charitable organization and that, prior to December
6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease of premises it owns
to charitable organizations for the conducting of more than two bingo sessions
per calendar week on the premises, may continue to lease the premises to those
charitable organizations, provided that no more than four sessions are
conducted per calendar week, that the lessor organization or person has
notified the Attorney General in writing of the organizations that will conduct
the sessions and the days of the week and the times of the day on which the
sessions will be conducted, that the initial lease entered into with each
organization that will conduct the sessions was filed with the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977, and that each organization that will conduct the
sessions was issued a license to conduct bingo games by the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977.
   (F)   This section does not prohibit a bingo licensed charitable
organization or a game operator from giving any person an instant bingo ticket
as a prize.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of
illegally conducting a bingo game, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. Except as otherwise provided in this division (G), whoever violates
division (A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) through (C)(12), or (D)
of this section is guilty of an offense. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (C)(12) of this section, a violation of
division (C)(12) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2915.09) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 134.05 ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   No charitable organization shall conduct electronic instant bingo
unless all of the following are true:
      (1)   The organization is a veteran’s organization described in R.C. §
2915.01(J), or is a fraternal organization described in R.C. § 2915.01(L), and
the organization qualified as a veteran’s organization or fraternal
organization, as applicable, on or before June 30, 2021.
      (2)   The organization is a veteran’s organization described in IRC § 501
(c)(4) or is, and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a
determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the organization
is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a), and is described in
IRC § 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or 501(c)(19).
      (3)   The organization has not conducted a raffle in violation of R.C. §
2915.092(B) using an electronic raffle machine, as described in Ohio Veterans
and Fraternal Charitable Coalition v. DeWine, Case No. 13-CV-13610 (C.P.
Franklin Co. February 23, 2018), at any time on or after January 1, 2022.
   (B)   No charitable organization that conducts electronic instant bingo
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Possess an electronic instant bingo system that was not obtained in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 2915 or with any rule adopted under R.C. Chapter
2915;
      (2)   Conduct electronic instant bingo on any day, at any time, or on any
premises not specified on the organization’s type II or type III license issued
under R.C. § 2915.08;
      (3)   Hold more than one valid license to conduct electronic instant
bingo at any one time;
      (4)   Conduct electronic instant bingo on more than one premises or on
any premises other than the charitable organization’s principal place of
business;
      (5)   Operate more than ten electronic bingo systems at the premises on
which the charitable organization conducts electronic instant bingo under its
license;
      (6)   Fail to display both of the following conspicuously at the premises
on which the charitable organization conducts electronic instant bingo:
         (a)   The charitable organization’s bingo license;
         (b)   The serial number of each deal of electronic instant bingo
tickets being sold.
      (7)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should have
known, to be under 18 years of age to play electronic instant bingo;
      (8)   Sell or provide to any person an electronic instant bingo ticket
for a price different from the price displayed on the game flare for that deal,
except that the charitable organization may give a participant who wins an
electronic instant bingo game an electronic instant bingo ticket as a prize in
place of a cash prize;
      (9)   Fail, once an electronic instant bingo deal is begun, to continue
to sell tickets in that deal until all prizes have been awarded;
      (10)   Permit any person whom the organization knows, or should have
known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction
to be a bingo game operator in the conduct of electronic instant bingo;
      (11)   Permit a bingo game operator to play electronic instant bingo;
      (12)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(12)(b) of this
section, pay compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting electronic
instant bingo.
         (b)   Division (B)(12)(a) of this section does not prohibit an
employee of a veteran’s organization or fraternal organization from redeeming
electronic instant bingo tickets or vouchers for the organization’s members or
invited guests, so long as no portion of the employee’s compensation is paid
from any bingo receipts.
      (13)   Pay consulting fees to any person in relation to electronic
instant bingo.
   (C)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or otherwise provide or offer to
provide an electronic instant bingo system to any person for use in this
municipality unless the electronic instant bingo system has been approved under
R.C. § 2915.15.
   (D)   Whoever knowingly violates division (A), (B), or (C) of this section
or a rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.14(D) is guilty of illegal electronic
instant bingo conduct. If the offender previously has been convicted of a
violation of division (A) or (B) of this section, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or state law, or of a rule adopted under R.C. §
2915.14(D), illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.14) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 135: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
Section
   
135.01   Assault
   
135.02   Negligent assault
   
135.03   Menacing
   
135.04   Coercion
   
135.05   [Reserved]
   
135.06   Contributing to unruliness or delinquency of a child
   
135.07   Telecommunications harassment
   
135.08   Placing harmful objects in food or confection
   
135.09   Nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images
§ 135.01 ASSAULT.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to
another or to another’s unborn.
   (B)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to another or
to another’s unborn.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of
assault.
   (D)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to assault when it
is a misdemeanor also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification as
described in R.C. § 2941.1423 (victim of the offense was a woman whom the
defendant knew was pregnant at the time of the offense) that was included in
the indictment, count in the indictment, or information charging the offense,
the court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory jail term as provided in
R.C. § 2929.24(F).
   (E)   A prosecution for a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section
does not preclude a prosecution of a violation of any other section of the Ohio
Revised Code. One or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that
can be prosecuted under division (A) or (B) of this section or any other
section of the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under division (A) or (B) of
this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code, or both sections.
However, if an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (A) or (B) of this section and also is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a violation of R.C. § 2903.22, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, based on the same conduct involving the same victim that was the
basis of the violation of division (A) or (B) of this section, the offenses are
allied offenses of similar import under R.C. § 2941.25.
(R.C. § 2903.13) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.02 NEGLIGENT ASSAULT.
   (A)   No person shall negligently, by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, cause physical harm to another or to
another’s unborn.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent assault.
(R.C. § 2903.14) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.03 MENACING.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the
offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s immediate
family. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that the
offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s immediate
family, the other person’s belief may be based on words or conduct of the
offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or other
organization that employs the other person or to which the other person
belongs.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly place or attempt to place another in
reasonable fear of physical harm or death by displaying a deadly weapon,
regardless of whether the deadly weapon displayed is operable or inoperable, if
either of the following applies:
         (a)   The other person is an emergency service responder, the person
knows or reasonably should know that the other person is an emergency service
responder, and it is the person’s specific purpose to engage in the specified
conduct against an emergency service responder.
         (b)   The other person is a family or household member or co-worker of
an emergency service responder, the person knows or reasonably should know that
the other person is a family or household member or co-worker of an emergency
service responder, and it is the person’s specific purpose to engage in the
specified conduct against a family or household member or co-worker of an
emergency service responder.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing. If the victim of
the offense is an officer or employee of a public children services agency or a
private child placing agency and the offense relates to the officer’s or
employee’s performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities
or duties or if the victim of the offense is an emergency service responder in
the performance of the responder’s official duties, menacing is one of the
following:
      (1)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or
employee of a public children services agency or private child placing agency
or an emergency service responder, and that prior offense related to the
officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance of official
responsibilities or duties or to the responder’s performance of the responder’s
official duties, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   A prosecution for a violation of division (A) of this section does not
preclude a prosecution of a violation of any other section of the Ohio Revised
Code. One or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that can be
prosecuted under division (A) of this section or any other section of the Ohio
Revised Code may be prosecuted under division (A) of this section, the other
section of the Ohio Revised Code, or both sections. However, if an offender is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (A) of this section
and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2903.13, or
any substantially similar municipal ordinance, based on the same conduct
involving the same victim that was the basis of the violation of division (A)
of this section, the offenses are allied offenses of similar import under R.C.
§ 2941.25.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      CO-WORKER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 2903.13.
      EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 2903.13.
      FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2903.13.
      ORGANIZATION. Includes an entity that is a governmental employer.
(R.C. § 2903.22) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.04 COERCION.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to coerce another into taking or refraining
from action concerning which he or she has a legal freedom of choice, shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Threaten to commit any offense;
      (2)   Utter or threaten any slander against any person;
      (3)   Expose or threaten to expose any matter tending to subject any
person to hatred, contempt, or ridicule, or to damage his or her personal or
business repute, or to impair his or her credit;
      (4)   Institute or threaten criminal proceedings against any person;
      (5)   Take or withhold, or threaten to take or withhold official action,
or cause or threaten to cause official action to be taken or withheld.
   (B)   Divisions (A)(4) and (A)(5) of this section shall not be construed to
prohibit a prosecutor or court from doing any of the following in good faith
and in the interests of justice:
      (1)   Offering or agreeing to grant, or granting immunity from
prosecution pursuant to R.C. § 2945.44;
      (2)   In return for a plea of guilty to one or more offenses charged or
to one or more other or lesser offenses, or in return for the testimony of the
accused in a case to which he or she is not a party, offering or agreeing to
dismiss, or dismissing one or more charges pending against an accused, or
offering or agreeing to impose, or imposing a certain sentence or modification
of sentence;
      (3)   Imposing probation on certain conditions, including without
limitation requiring the offender to make restitution or redress to the victim
of his or her offense.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3), (A)
(4), or (A)(5) of this section that the actor’s conduct was a reasonable
response to the circumstances which occasioned it, and that his or her purpose
was limited to:
      (1)   Compelling another to refrain from misconduct or to desist from
further misconduct;
      (2)   Preventing or redressing a wrong or injustice;
      (3)   Preventing another from taking action for which the actor
reasonably believed the other person to be disqualified;
      (4)   Compelling another to take action which the actor reasonably
believed the other person to be under a duty to take.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of coercion.
   (E)   As used in this section, THREAT includes a direct threat and a threat
by innuendo.
(R.C. § 2905.12) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.05 [RESERVED].
§ 135.06 CONTRIBUTING TO UNRULINESS OR DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      DELINQUENT CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
      UNRULY CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.022.
   (B)   No person, including a parent, guardian, or other custodian of a
child, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to a child or a
ward of the juvenile court becoming an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (2)   Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the juvenile
court to become an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (3)   Act in a way that contributes to an adjudication of the child as a
delinquent child based on the child's violation of a court order adjudicating
the child an unruly child for being an habitual truant;
      (4)   If the person is the parent, guardian, or custodian of a child who
has the duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950 to register, register a new
residence address, and periodically verify a residence address, and, if
applicable, to send a notice of intent to reside, and if the child is not
emancipated, as defined in R.C. § 2919.121, fail to ensure that the child
complies with those duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the
unruliness or delinquency of a child. Each day of a violation of this section
is a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2919.24) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.07 TELECOMMUNICATIONS HARASSMENT.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a
telecommunication, or knowingly permit a telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person’s control, to another, if the caller
does any of the following:
      (1)   Makes the telecommunication with purpose to harass, intimidate, or
abuse any person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made,
whether or not actual communication takes place between the caller and a
recipient;
      (2)   Describes, suggests, requests, or proposes that the caller, the
recipient of the telecommunication, or any other person engage in sexual
activity, and the recipient or another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made has requested, in a previous telecommunication or in
the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a telecommunication
to the recipient or to the premises to which the telecommunication is made;
      (3)   During the telecommunication, violates R.C. § 2903.21;
      (4)   Knowingly states to the recipient of the telecommunication that the
caller intends to cause damage to or destroy public or private property, and
the recipient, any member of the recipient’s family, or any other person who
resides at the premises to which the telecommunication is made owns, leases,
resides, or works in, will at the time of the destruction or damaging be near
or in, has the responsibility of protecting, or insures the property that will
be destroyed or damaged;
      (5)   Knowingly makes the telecommunication to the recipient of the
telecommunication, to another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the recipient or another
person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a
telecommunication to those premises or to any persons at those premises.
      (6)   Knowingly makes any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal to
the recipient of the telecommunication that is threatening, intimidating,
menacing, coercive, or obscene with the intent to abuse, threaten, or harass
the recipient;
      (7)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly interrupts the
telecommunication service of any person;
      (8)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly transmits to any
person, regardless of whether the telecommunication is heard in its entirety,
any file, document, or other communication that prevents that person from using
the person’s telephone service or electronic communication device;
      (9)   Knowingly makes any false statement concerning the death, injury,
illness, disfigurement, reputation, indecent conduct, or criminal conduct of
the recipient of the telecommunication or family or household member of the
recipient with purpose to abuse, threaten, intimidate, or harass the recipient;
      (10)   Knowingly incites another person through a telecommunication or
other means to harass or participate in the harassment of a person;
      (11)   Knowingly alarms the recipient by making a telecommunication
without a lawful purpose at an hour or hours known to be inconvenient to the
recipient and in an offensive or repetitive manner.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall make or cause to be made a telecommunication or
permit a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under
the person’s control, with purpose to abuse, threaten, or harass another
person.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly post a text or audio statement or an
image on an internet web site or web page for the purpose of abusing,
threatening, or harassing another person.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of telecommunications
harassment.
      (2)   A violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(5), (A)(6), (A)
(7), (A)(8), (A)(9), (A)(10), or (A)(11) or (B) of this section is an offense,
and a felony on each subsequent offense, which shall be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(3), a violation
of division (A)(4) of this section is an offense, and a felony on each
subsequent offense, to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If a
violation of division (A)(4) of this section results in economic harm of $1,000
or more, telecommunications harassment is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (D)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person solely because the
person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control, including
having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or
connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that the person believes
is, or will be sent, in violation of this section.
      (2)   Division (D)(1) of this section does not create an affirmative duty
for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method
of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control to block
the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it
believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section except as otherwise
provided by law.
      (3)   Division (D)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of this section or who knowingly
advertises the availability of material of that nature.
      (4)   A provider or user of an interactive computer service, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. § 230, shall neither be treated as the publisher or speaker of any
information provided by another information content provider, as defined in 47
U.S.C. § 230, nor held civilly or criminally liable for the creation or
development of information provided by another information content provider, as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230. Nothing in this division shall be construed to
protect a person from liability to the extent that the person developed or
created any content in violation of this section.
   (E)   Divisions (A)(5) to (A)(11) and (B)(2) of this section do not apply to
a person who, while employed or contracted by a newspaper, magazine, press
association, news agency, news wire service, cable channel or cable operator,
or radio or television station, is gathering, processing, transmitting,
compiling, editing, or disseminating information for the general public within
the scope of the person’s employment in that capacity or the person’s
contractual authority in that capacity.
   (F)   As used in divisions (A) through (C) of this section:
      CABLE OPERATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
      CALLER. Means the person described in division (A) of this section who
makes or causes to be made a telecommunication or who permits a
telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under that
person’s control.
      ECONOMIC HARM. Means all direct, incidental, and consequential pecuniary
harm suffered by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. The term
includes but is not limited to all of the following:
         (a)   All wages, salaries, or other compensation lost as a result of
the criminal conduct;
         (b)   The cost of all wages, salaries, or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
         (c)   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is
shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;
         (d)   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
      FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division
(A)(9) of this section is committed:
            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse of
the recipient;
            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the recipient, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the recipient;
            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the recipient, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
recipient.
         (b)   The natural parent of any child of whom the recipient of the
telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division (A)(9) of this
section is committed is the other natural parent or is the putative other
natural parent.
      PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has lived with
the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in
division (A)(9) of this section is committed in a common law marital
relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with the recipient, or who otherwise
has cohabited with the recipient within five years prior to the date of the
alleged commission of the act in question.
      SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
      TELECOMMUNICATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   (G)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person from making a
telecommunication to a debtor that is in compliance with the “Fair Debt
Collection Practices Act”, 15 U.S.C. § 1692, as amended, or the “Telephone
Consumer Protection Act”, 47 U.S.C. § 227, as amended.
(R.C. § 2917.21) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.08 PLACING HARMFUL OBJECTS IN FOOD OR CONFECTION.
   No person shall do either of the following, knowing or having reasonable
cause to believe that any person may suffer physical harm or be seriously
inconvenienced or annoyed thereby:
   (A)   Place a pin, razor blade, glass, laxative, drug of abuse, or other
harmful or hazardous object or substance in any food or confection;
   (B)   Furnish to any person any food or confection which has been
adulterated in violation of division (A) of this section.
(R.C. § 3716.11) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.09 NONCONSENSUAL DISSEMINATION OF PRIVATE SEXUAL IMAGES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      CABLE SERVICE PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.01.
      DIRECT-TO-HOME SATELLITE SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. §
303, as amended.
      DISSEMINATE. Means to post, distribute, or publish on a computer device,
computer network, web site, or other electronic device or medium of
communication.
      IMAGE. Means a photograph, film, videotape, digital recording, or other
depiction or portrayal of a person.
      INTERACTIVE COMPUTER SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in the
“Telecommunications Act of 1996”, 47 U.S.C. § 230, as amended.
      INTERNET PROVIDER. Means a provider of internet service, including all of
the following:
         (a)   Broadband service, however defined or classified by the Federal
Communications Commission;
         (b)   Information service or telecommunications service, both as
defined in the “Telecommunications Act of 1996”, 47 U.S.C. § 153, as amended;
         (c)   Internet protocol-enabled services, as defined in R.C. §
4927.01.
      MOBILE SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153, as amended.
      SEXUAL ACT. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Sexual activity;
         (b)   Masturbation;
         (c)   An act involving a bodily substance that is performed for the
purpose of sexual arousal or gratification;
         (d)   Sado-masochistic abuse.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153,
as amended.
      VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly disseminate an image of another person if
all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person in the image is 18 years of age or older.
      (2)   The person in the image can be identified from the image itself or
from information displayed in connection with the image and the offender
supplied the identifying information.
      (3)   The person in the image is in a state of nudity or is engaged in a
sexual act.
      (4)   The image is disseminated without consent from the person in the
image.
      (5)   The image is disseminated with intent to harm the person in the
image.
   (C)   This section does not prohibit the dissemination of an image if any of
the following apply:
      (1)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of a criminal
investigation that is otherwise lawful.
      (2)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of, or in connection
with, the reporting of unlawful conduct.
      (3)   The image is part of a news report or commentary or an artistic or
expressive work, such as a performance, work of art, literary work, theatrical
work, musical work, motion picture, film, or audiovisual work.
      (4)   The image is disseminated by a law enforcement officer, or a
corrections officer or guard in a detention facility, acting within the scope
of the person’s official duties.
      (5)   The image is disseminated for another lawful public purpose.
      (6)   The person in the image is knowingly and willingly in a state of
nudity or engaged in a sexual act and is knowingly and willingly in a location
in which the person does not have a reasonable expectation of privacy.
      (7)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of medical treatment or
examination.
   (D)   The following entities are not liable for a violation of this section
solely as a result of an image or other information provided by another person:
      (1)   A provider of interactive computer service;
      (2)   A mobile service;
      (3)   A telecommunications carrier;
      (4)   An internet provider;
      (5)   A cable service provider;
      (6)   A direct-to-home satellite service;
      (7)   A video service provider.
   (E)   Any conduct that is a violation of this section and any other section
of this Code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, the
other section, or both sections.
   (F)   A victim of a violation of this section may commence a civil cause of
action against the offender, as described in R.C. § 2307.66.
(R.C. § 2917.211)
CHAPTER 136: OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
136.01   Falsification
   
136.02   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer
   
136.03   Obstructing official business
   
136.04   Obstructing justice
   
136.05   Resisting arrest
   
136.06   Personating an officer
   
136.07   Impersonating a peace officer
   
136.08   Assaulting police dog or horse, or service dog
   
136.09   Failure to disclose personal information
§ 136.01 FALSIFICATION.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly swear
or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, when any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The statement is made in any official proceeding;
      (2)   The statement is made with purpose to incriminate another;
      (3)   The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public official in
performing his or her official function;
      (4)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment of
unemployment compensation; Ohio Works First; prevention, retention, and
contingency benefits and services; disability financial assistance; retirement
benefits or health care coverage from a state retirement system; economic
development assistance as defined in R.C. § 9.66; or other benefits
administered by a governmental agency or paid out of a public treasury;
      (5)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the issuance by a
governmental agency of a license, permit, authorization, certificate,
registration, release, or provider agreement;
      (6)   The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary public or
another person empowered to administer oaths;
      (7)   The statement is in writing on or in connection with a report or
return that is required or authorized by law;
      (8)   The statement is in writing, and is made with purpose to induce
another to extend credit to or employ the offender, or to confer any degree,
diploma, certificate of attainment, award of excellence, or honor on the
offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable
benefit or distinction, when the person to whom the statement is directed
relies upon it to his or her detriment;
      (9)   The statement is made with purpose to commit or facilitate the
commission of a theft offense;
      (10)   The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in connection
with any action, proceeding, or other matter within its jurisdiction, either
orally or in a written document, including but not limited to an application,
petition, complaint, or other pleading, or an inventory, account, or report;
      (11)   The statement is made on an account, form, record, stamp, label,
or other writing that is required by law;
      (12)   The statement is made in connection with the purchase of a
firearm, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, and in conjunction with the furnishing
to the seller of the firearm of a fictitious or altered driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit, a fictitious or altered identification card, or any
other document that contains false information about the purchaser’s identity;
      (13)   The statement is made in a document or instrument of writing that
purports to be a judgment, lien, or claim of indebtedness and is filed or
recorded with the Secretary of State, a county recorder, or the clerk of a
court of record;
      (14)   The statement is made in an application filed with a county
sheriff pursuant to R.C. § 2923.125 in order to obtain or renew a concealed
handgun license or is made in an affidavit submitted to a county sheriff to
obtain a concealed handgun license on a temporary emergency basis under R.C. §
2923.1213;
      (15)   The statement is required under R.C. § 5743.71 in connection with
the person’s purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products in a delivery sale.
   (B)   No person, in connection with the purchase of a firearm as defined in
R.C. § 2923.11, shall knowingly furnish to the seller of the firearm a
fictitious or altered driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, a
fictitious or altered identification card, or any other document that contains
false information about the purchaser’s identity.
   (C)   No person, in an attempt to obtain a concealed handgun license under
R.C. § 2923.125, shall knowingly present to a sheriff a fictitious or altered
document that purports to be certification of the person’s competence in
handling a handgun as described in R.C. § 2923.125(B)(3).
   (D)   It is no defense to a charge under division (A)(6) of this section
that the oath or affirmation was administered or taken in an irregular manner.
   (E)   If contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made by the
offender within the period of the statute of limitations for falsification, it
is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which statement was false, but
only that one or the other was false.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)
(5), (A)(6), (A)(7), (A)(8), (A)(10), (A)(11), (A)(13) or (A)(15) of this
section is guilty of falsification.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(9) of this section is guilty of
falsification in a theft offense. If the value of the property or services
stolen is $1,000 or more, falsification in a theft offense is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(12) or (B) of this section is guilty
of falsification to purchase a firearm, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (A)(14) or (C) of this section is guilty
of falsification to obtain a concealed handgun license, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section in removal
proceedings under R.C. § 319.26, 321.37, 507.13 or 733.78 is guilty of
falsification regarding a removal proceeding, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.13) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 136.02 FAILURE TO AID A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law enforcement
officer, when called upon for assistance in preventing or halting the
commission of an offense, or in apprehending or detaining an offender, when the
aid can be given without a substantial risk of physical harm to the person
giving it.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to aid a law
enforcement officer.
(R.C. § 2921.23) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 136.03 OBSTRUCTING OFFICIAL BUSINESS.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to prevent,
obstruct, or delay the performance by a public official of any authorized act
within the public official’s official capacity, shall do any act that hampers
or impedes a public official in the performance of the public official’s lawful
duties.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing official
business. If a violation of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any
person, obstructing official business is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.31) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 136.04 OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension,
prosecution, conviction, or punishment of another for crime, or to assist
another to benefit from the commission of a crime, and no person, with purpose
to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, adjudication as a
delinquent child, or disposition of a child for an act that if committed by an
adult would be a crime or to assist a child to benefit from the commission of
an act that if committed by an adult would be a crime, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Harbor or conceal the other person or child;
      (2)   Provide the other person or child with money, transportation, a
weapon, a disguise, or other means of avoiding discovery or apprehension;
      (3)   Warn the other person or child of impending discovery or
apprehension;
      (4)   Destroy or conceal physical evidence of the crime or act, or induce
any person to withhold testimony or information or to elude legal process
summoning him or her to testify or supply evidence;
      (5)   Communicate false information to any person;
      (6)   Prevent or obstruct any person, by means of force, intimidation, or
deception, from performing any act to aid in the discovery, apprehension, or
prosecution of the other person or child.
   (B)   A person may be prosecuted for, and may be convicted of or adjudicated
a delinquent child for committing, a violation of division (A) of this section
regardless of whether the person or child aided ultimately is apprehended for,
is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is adjudicated a
delinquent child for committing the crime or act the person or child aided
committed. The crime or act the person or child aided committed shall be used
under division (C) of this section in determining the penalty for violation of
division (A) of this section, regardless of whether the person or child aided
ultimately is apprehended for, is charge with, is convicted of, pleads guilty
to, or is adjudicated a delinquent child for committing the crime or act the
person or child aided committed.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing justice. If the
crime committed by the person aided is a felony or if the act committed by the
child aided would be a felony if committed by an adult, or if the crime or act
committed by the person or child aided is an act of terrorism, obstructing
justice is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      ACT OF TERRORISM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.21.
      ADULT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.
      CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.
      DELINQUENT CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
(R.C. § 2921.32) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 136.05 RESISTING ARREST.
   (A)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of himself, herself or another.
   (B)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person and, during the course of or as a
result of the resistance or interference, cause physical harm to a law
enforcement officer.
   (C)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person if either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The offender, during the course of or as a result of the resistance
or interference, recklessly causes physical harm to a law enforcement officer
by means of a deadly weapon;
      (2)   The offender, during the course of the resistance or interference,
brandishes a deadly weapon.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest. A
violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (E)   As used in this section, DEADLY WEAPON has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2923.11.
(R.C. § 2921.33) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 136.06 PERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is
facilitating a fraud, or with purpose to induce another to purchase property or
services, shall personate a law enforcement officer, or an inspector,
investigator, or agent of any governmental agency.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of personating an officer.
(R.C. § 2913.44) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 136.07 IMPERSONATING A PEACE OFFICER.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Means an employee of the United States
who serves in a position the duties of which are primarily the investigation,
apprehension, or detention of individuals suspected or convicted of offenses
under the criminal laws of the United States.
      IMPERSONATE. Means to act the part of, assume the identity of, wear the
uniform or any part of the uniform of, or display the identification of a
particular person or of a member of a class of persons with purpose to make
another person believe that the actor is that particular person or is a member
of that class of persons.
      INVESTIGATOR OF THE BUREAU OF CRIMINAL IDENTIFICATION AND INVESTIGATION.
Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.11.
      PEACE OFFICER. A sheriff, deputy sheriff, marshal, deputy marshal, member
of the organized police department of a municipal corporation, or township
constable, who is employed by a political subdivision of this state; a member
of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under R.C. §
3735.31(D); a member of a police force employed by a regional transit authority
under R.C. § 306.35(Y); a state university law enforcement officer appointed
under R.C. § 3345.04; a veterans’ home police officer appointed under R.C. §
5907.02; a special police officer employed by a port authority under R.C. §
4582.04 or 4582.28; an officer, agent, or employee of the state or any of its
agencies, instrumentalities, or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute,
a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and
the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within limits of that statutory
duty and authority; or a state highway patrol trooper whose primary duties are
to preserve the peace, to protect life and property, and to enforce the laws,
ordinances, or rules of the state or any of its political subdivisions.
      PRIVATE POLICE OFFICER. Means any security guard, special police officer,
private detective, or other person who is privately employed in a police
capacity.
   (B)   No person shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation, or
federal law enforcement officer.
   (C)   No person, by impersonating a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation, or
federal law enforcement officer, shall arrest or detain any person, search any
person, or search the property of any person.
   (D)   No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of an
offense, shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer, federal law
enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the park district or the
state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation.
   (E)   No person shall commit a felony while impersonating a peace officer,
private police officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or
employee of the park district or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation.
   (F)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B) of this
section that the impersonation of the peace officer, private police officer,
federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the park
district or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation was for a lawful purpose.
   (G)   If the purpose of a violation of division (D) of this section is to
commit or facilitate the commission of a felony, a violation of division (D) is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Whoever violates
division (E) of this section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.51)
§ 136.08 ASSAULTING POLICE DOG OR HORSE, OR SERVICE DOG.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
a police dog or horse in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in
the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical harm
is caused or attempted;
      (2)   The police dog or horse is not assisting a law enforcement officer
in the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical
harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog
or horse is a police dog or horse.
   (B)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike a police dog or horse;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at a police dog or horse;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct a police dog or horse, or interfere with
or obstruct a law enforcement officer who is being assisted by a police dog or
horse, in a manner that does any of the following:
         (a)   Inhibits or restricts the law enforcement officer’s control of
the police dog or horse;
         (b)   Deprives the law enforcement officer of control of the police
dog or horse;
         (c)   Releases the police dog or horse from its area of control;
         (d)   Enters the area of control of the police dog or horse without
the consent of the law enforcement officer, including placing food or any other
object or substance into that area;
         (e)   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the police dog or horse to
assist a law enforcement officer.
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to a police dog or horse;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger a police dog or horse that at the time of the conduct, the
police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance
of the officer’s duties or that the person knows is a police dog or horse.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
an assistance dog in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The dog, at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, is
assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment.
      (2)   The dog, at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, is
not assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment, but the offender has actual knowledge that
the dog is an assistance dog.
   (D)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike an assistance dog;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at an assistance dog;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct an assistance dog, or interfere with or
obstruct a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a person with a
mobility impairment who is being assisted or served by an assistance dog, in a
manner that does any of the following:
         (a)   Inhibits or restricts the assisted or served person’s control of
the dog;
         (b)   Deprives the assisted or served person of control of the dog;
         (c)   Releases the dog from its area of control;
         (d)   Enters the area of control of the dog without the consent of the
assisted or served person, including placing food or any other object or
substance into that area;
         (e)   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the dog to assist the
assisted or served person;
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to an assistance dog;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger an assistance dog that at the time of the conduct is
assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment or that the person knows is an assistance
dog.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
assaulting a police dog or horse. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death, assaulting a police
dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
harassing a police dog or horse. If the violation results in serous physical
harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death, harassing a police dog
or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
assaulting an assistance dog. If the violation results in serious physical harm
to the assistance dog or results in its death, assaulting an assistance dog is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of
harassing an assistance dog. If the violation results in serious physical harm
to the assistance dog or results in its death, harassing an assistance dog is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   In addition to any other sanctions or penalty imposed for the
offense under this section, R.C. Chapter 2929 or any other provision of the
Ohio Revised Code or this code, whoever violates division (A), (B), (C), or (D)
of this section is responsible for the payment of all of the following:
         (a)   Any veterinary bill or bill for medication incurred as a result
of the violation by the police department regarding a violation of division (A)
or (B) of this section or by the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired
or the person with a mobility impairment assisted or served by the assistance
dog regarding a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section;
         (b)   The cost of any damaged equipment that results from the
violation;
         (c)   If the violation did not result in the death of the police dog
or horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation and if, as
a result of that dog or horse being the subject of the violation, the dog or
horse needs further training or retraining to be able to continue in the
capacity of a police dog or horse or an assistance dog, the cost of any further
training or retraining of that dog or horse by a law enforcement officer or by
the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or the person with a
mobility impairment assisted or served by the assistance dog;
         (d)   If the violation resulted in the death of the assistance dog
that was the subject of the violation or resulted in serious physical harm to
the police dog or horse or the assistance dog or horse that was the subject of
the violation to the extent that the dog or horse needs to be replaced on
either a temporary or a permanent basis, the cost of replacing that dog or
horse and of any further training of a new police dog or horse or a new
assistance dog by a law enforcement officer or by the person who is blind,
deaf, or hearing impaired or the person with a mobility impairment assisted or
served by the assistance dog, which replacement or training is required because
of the death of or the serious physical harm to the dog or horse that was the
subject of the violation.
   (F)   This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian whose conduct
is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4741.
   (G)   This section only applies to an offender who knows or should know at
the time of the violation that the police dog or horse or assistance dog that
is the subject of a violation under this section is a police dog or horse or an
assistance dog.
   (H)   As used in this section:
      ASSISTANCE DOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
      BLIND. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
      PERSON WITH A MOBILITY IMPAIRMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
955.011.
      PHYSICAL HARM. Means any injury, illness, or other psychological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
      POLICE DOG OR HORSE. Means a dog or horse that has been trained and may
be used to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their official
duties.
      SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
         (b)   Any physical harm that causes permanent maiming or that involves
some temporary, substantial maiming;
         (c)   Any physical harm that causes acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering.
(R.C. § 2921.321) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 136.09 FAILURE TO DISCLOSE PERSONAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   No person who is in a public place shall refuse to disclose the
person’s name, address, or date of birth, when requested by a law enforcement
officer who reasonably suspects either of the following:
      (1)   The person is committing, has committed, or is about to commit a
criminal offense.
      (2)   The person witnessed any of the following:
         (a)   An offense of violence that would constitute a felony under the
laws of this state;
         (b)   A felony offense that causes or results in, or creates a
substantial risk of, serious physical harm to another person or property;
         (c)   Any attempt or conspiracy to commit, or complicity in
committing, any offenses identified in division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of this
section;
         (d)   Any conduct reasonably indicating that any offense identified in
division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of this section or any attempt, conspiracy, or
complicity described in division (A)(2)(c) of this section has been, is being,
or is about to be committed.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of failure to
disclose one’s personal information.
   (C)   Nothing in division (A) of this section requires a person to answer
any questions beyond that person’s name, address, or date of birth. Nothing in
division (A) of this section authorizes a law enforcement officer to arrest a
person for not providing any information beyond the person’s name, address, or
date of birth or for refusing to describe the offense observed.
   (D)   It is not a violation of division (A) of this section to refuse to
answer a question that would reveal a person’s age or date of birth if age is
an element of the crime that the person is suspected of committing.
(R.C. § 2921.29) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 137: THEFT AND FRAUD
Section
   
137.01   Theft
   
137.02   Unauthorized use of a vehicle
   
137.03   Unauthorized use of property
   
137.04   Passing bad checks
   
137.05   Misuse of credit cards
   
137.06   Making or using slugs
   
137.07   Prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud
   
137.08   Receiving stolen property
   
137.09   Unlawful display of law enforcement emblem
   
137.10   Payment of fees
   
137.11   Value of district permits
§ 137.01 THEFT.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to deprive the owner of property or services,
shall knowingly obtain or exert control over either the property or services in
any of the following ways:
      (1)   Without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give
consent;
      (2)   Beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent;
      (3)   By deception;
      (4)   By threat;
      (5)   By intimidation.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of theft. If any of the
following criteria are met, then a violation of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law:
      (1)   If the value of the property or services is $1,000 or more;
      (2)   If the property stolen is any of the property listed in R.C. §
2913.71;
      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person, disabled adult,
active duty service member, or spouse of an active duty service member;
      (4)   If the property stolen is a firearm or dangerous ordnance;
      (5)   If the property stolen is a motor vehicle;
      (6)   If the property stolen is any dangerous drug, or if the offender
previously has been convicted of a felony drug abuse offense;
      (7)   If the property stolen is a police dog or horse or an assistance
dog and the offender knows or should know that the property stolen is a police
dog or horse or an assistance dog;
      (8)   If the property stolen is anhydrous ammonia;
      (9)    If the property stolen is a special purchase article as defined in
R.C. § 4737.04 or is a bulk merchandise container as defined in R.C. §
4737.012.
(R.C. § 2913.02) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 137.02 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF A VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorcycle, motorboat, or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of
the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorboat, or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent, and either remove it from this state, or
keep possession of it for more than 48 hours.
   (C)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section:
      (1)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor, though mistaken,
reasonably believed that he or she was authorized to use or operate the
property;
      (2)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor reasonably believed
that the owner or person empowered to give consent would authorize the actor to
use or operate the property.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized use of a
vehicle.
      (1)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult
and if the victim incurs a loss as a result of the violation, a violation of
division (A) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.03) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 137.03 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly use or operate the property of another
without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (B)   No person, in any manner and by any means, including but not limited
to computer hacking, shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
or cause access to be gained to any computer, computer system, computer
network, cable service, cable system, telecommunications device,
telecommunications service, or information service without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the owner of the
computer, computer system, computer network, cable service, cable system,
telecommunications device, telecommunications service, or information service
or other person authorized to give consent.
   (C)   Except as permitted under R.C. § 5503.101, no person shall knowingly
gain access to, attempt to gain access to, cause access to be granted to, or
disseminate information gained from access to the law enforcement automated
database system created pursuant to R.C. § 5503.10 without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the chair of the Law
Enforcement Automated Data System Steering Committee.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
cause access to be granted to, or disseminate information gained from access to
the Ohio law enforcement gateway established and operated pursuant to R.C. §
109.57(C)(1) without the consent of, or beyond the scope of the express or
implied consent of, the Superintendent of the Bureau of Criminal Identification
and Investigation.
   (E)   The affirmative defenses contained in R.C. § 2913.03(C) are
affirmative defenses to a charge under this section.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of property.
      (1)   If unauthorized use of property is committed for the purpose of
devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to obtain property or services,
and if the value of the property or services or the loss to the victim is
$1,000 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, unauthorized use of property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of computer, cable, or telecommunication property, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (H)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the law enforcement automated database system, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (I)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the Ohio law enforcement gateway, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
   (J)   As used in this section:
      CABLE OPERATOR. Means any person or group of persons that does either of
the following:
         (a)   Provides cable service over a cable system and directly through
one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system;
         (b)   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of a cable system.
      CABLE SERVICE. Means any of the following:
         (a)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
of information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers
generally;
         (b)   Subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the
selection or use of video programming or of information that a cable operator
makes available to all subscribers generally, both as described in division (a)
of this definition;
         (c)   Any cable television service.
      CABLE SYSTEM. Means any facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video
programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community.
The term does not include any of the following:
         (a)   Any facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations;
         (b)   Any facility that serves subscribers without using any public
right-of-way;
         (c)   Any facility of a common carrier that, under 47 U.S.C. § 522(7)
(c), is excluded from the term “cable system” as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7);
         (d)   Any open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. § 573;
         (e)   Any facility of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility system.
(R.C. § 2913.04) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 137.04 PASSING BAD CHECKS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      CHECK. Includes any form of debit from a demand deposit account,
including but not limited to any of the following:
         (a)   A check, bill of exchange, draft, order of withdrawal, or
similar negotiable or non-negotiable instrument;
         (b)   An electronic check, electronic transaction, debit card
transaction, check card transaction, substitute check, web check, or any form
of automated clearing house transaction.
      ISSUE A CHECK. Means causing any form of debit from a demand deposit
account.
   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall issue or transfer or cause
to be issued or transferred a check or other negotiable instrument, knowing
that it will be dishonored or knowing that a person has ordered or will order
stop payment on the check or other negotiable instrument.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a check
or other negotiable instrument is presumed to know that it will be dishonored
if either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The drawer has no account with the drawee at the time of issue or
the stated date, whichever is later;
      (2)   The check or other negotiable instrument was properly refused
payment for insufficient funds upon presentment within 30 days after issue or
the stated date, whichever is later, and the liability of the drawer, indorser,
or any party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by payment or
satisfaction within ten days after receiving notice of dishonor.
   (D)   In determining the value of the payment for purposes of division(E) of
this section, the court may aggregate all checks and other negotiable
instruments that the offender issued or transferred or caused to be issued or
transferred in violation of division (B) of this section within a period of 180
consecutive days.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of passing bad checks. If the
check or checks or other negotiable instrument or instruments are issued or
transferred to a single vendor or single other person for the payment of $1,000
or more, or if the check or checks or other negotiable instrument or
instruments are issued or transferred to multiple vendors or persons for the
payment of $1,500 or more, passing bad checks is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.11) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 137.05 MISUSE OF CREDIT CARDS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Practice deception for the purpose of procuring the issuance of a
credit card, when a credit card is issued in actual reliance thereon;
      (2)   Knowingly buy or sell a credit card from or to a person other than
the issuer;
      (3)   As an officer, employee, or appointee of a political subdivision or
as a public servant as defined under R.C. § 2921.01, knowingly misuse a credit
card account held by a political subdivision.
   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Obtain control over a credit card as security for a debt;
      (2)   Obtain property or services by the use of a credit card, in one or
more transactions, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the card
has expired or been revoked, or was obtained, is retained, or is being used in
violation of law;
      (3)   Furnish property or services upon presentation of a credit card,
knowing that the card is being used in violation of law;
      (4)   Represent or cause to be represented to the issuer of a credit card
that property or services have been furnished, knowing that the representation
is false.
   (C)   No person, with purpose to violate this section, shall receive,
possess, control, or dispose of a credit card.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misuse of credit cards.
      (1)   If the cumulative retail value of the property and services
involved in one or more violations of division (B)(2), (B)(3), or (B)(4) of
this section which violations involve one or more credit card accounts and
occur within a period of 90 consecutive days commencing on the date of the
first violation, is $1,000 or more, misuse of credit cards is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, and if the offense involves a violation of division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of
this section, misuse of credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.21) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 137.06 MAKING OR USING SLUGS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Insert or deposit a slug in a coin machine, with purpose to
defraud;
      (2)   Make, possess, or dispose of a slug, with purpose of enabling
another to defraud by inserting or depositing it in a coin machine.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or using slugs.
(R.C. § 2913.33) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 137.07 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF PURPOSE TO DEFRAUD.
   In a prosecution of a person for a theft offense that alleges that the
person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she was facilitating a
fraud, hired or rented an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, kept
or operated any of the same that has been hired or rented, or engaged
accommodations at a hotel, motel, inn, campground, or other hostelry, it is
prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud if the person did any of the
following:
   (A)   Used deception to induce the rental agency to furnish the person with
the aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat, camper, trailer,
horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, or used deception to induce the
hostelry to furnish the person with accommodations;
   (B)   Hired or rented any aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, or
engaged accommodations, knowing that he or she is without sufficient means to
pay the hire or rental;
   (C)   Absconded without paying the hire or rental;
   (D)   Knowingly failed to pay the hire or rental as required by the contract
of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure;
   (E)   Knowingly failed to return hired or rented property as required by the
contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure.
(R.C. § 2913.41) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 137.08 RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall receive, retain, or dispose of property of another
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the property has been
obtained through commission of a theft offense.
   (B)   It is not a defense to a charge of receiving stolen property in
violation of this section that the property was obtained by means other than
through the commission of a theft offense if the property was explicitly
represented to the accused person as being obtained through the commission of a
theft offense.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of receiving stolen property.
If any of the following criteria are met, then a violation of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law:
      (1)   The value of the property involved is $1,000 or more;
      (2)   The property involved is any of the property listed in R.C. §
2913.71;
      (3)   The property involved is a firearm or dangerous ordnance, as
defined in R.C. § 2923.11;
      (4)   The property involved is a motor vehicle as defined in R.C. §
4501.01;
      (5)   The property involved is any dangerous drug, as defined in R.C. §
4729.01;
      (6)   The property involved in violation of this section is a special
purchase article as defined in R.C. § 4737.04 or a bulk merchandise container
as defined in R.C. § 4737.012.
(R.C. § 2913.51) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 137.09 UNLAWFUL DISPLAY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT EMBLEM.
   (A)   No person who is not entitled to do so shall knowingly display on a
motor vehicle the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law
enforcement officers.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of the unlawful display of the
emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law enforcement
officers.
(R.C. § 2913.441) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 137.10 PAYMENT OF FEES.
   All persons who take part in any specialized activities for which there is a
fee, rental, or admission charge must abide by the posted regulations adopted
by the Board for those specialized activities. No person shall be allowed
within the confines of those specialized activities unless they have first paid
the fee, rental, or admission charge.
(Prior by-law § 7C) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 137.11 VALUE OF DISTRICT PERMITS.
   For purposes of establishing the fair market value of certain stolen
property, the value set for the annual, daily and replacement motor vehicle
permits is equal to the selling price established by the Board for each
category of motor vehicle permits that year.
(Amended 7- -2005)
Cross-reference:
   Permit required, see §
72.75
CHAPTER 138: DRUG OFFENSES
Section
   
138.01   Definitions
   
138.02   Drug abuse
   
138.03   Possessing drug abuse instruments
   
138.04   Permitting drug abuse
   
138.05   Abusing harmful intoxicants
   
138.06   Counterfeit controlled substances
   
138.07   Use, possession, or sale of drug paraphernalia
   
138.08   Sale of pure caffeine product
   
138.09   Sale of dextromethorphan
§ 138.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words,
terms and phrases and their derivatives used in this chapter which are not
defined in this section shall have the meanings given to them in the Ohio
Revised Code.
   ADMINISTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   ADULTERATE. To cause a drug to be adulterated as described in R.C. §
3715.63.
   ALCOHOL AND DRUG ADDICTION SERVICES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5119.01.
   BULK AMOUNT. Of a controlled substance means any of the following:
      (1)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in
Schedule I, Schedule II, or Schedule III, with the exception of any controlled
substance analog, marihuana, cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, any fentanyl-related
compound, and hashish and except as provided in division (2), (5), or (6) of
this definition, whichever of the following is applicable:
         (a)   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams or 25 unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule I opiate or opium derivative;
         (b)   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams of a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of raw or gum
opium;
         (c)   An amount equal to or exceeding 30 grams or ten unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule I hallucinogen other than tetrahydrocannabinol or lysergic acid
amide, or a Schedule I stimulant or depressant;
         (d)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II opiate or opium
derivative;
         (e)   An amount equal to or exceeding five grams or ten unit doses of
a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount
of phencyclidine;
         (f)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II stimulant that is in
a final dosage form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal
drug abuse control laws, as defined in this section, that is or contains any
amount of a Schedule II depressant substance or a Schedule II hallucinogenic
substance;
         (g)   An amount equal to or exceeding three grams of a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule
II stimulant, or any of its salts or isomers, that is not in a final dosage
form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal drug abuse
control laws.
      (2)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III or IV substance other than an anabolic
steroid or a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (3)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (4)   An amount equal to or exceeding 250 milliliters or 250 grams of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule V substance;
      (5)   An amount equal to or exceeding 200 solid dosage units, 16 grams,
or 16 milliliters of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III anabolic steroid;
      (6)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is a
combination of a fentanyl-related compound and any other compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V,
if the defendant is charged with a violation of R.C. § 2925.11 and the
sentencing provisions set forth in R.C. § 2925.11(C)(10)(b) and (C)(11) will
not apply regarding the defendant and the violation, the bulk amount of the
controlled substance for purposes of the violation is the amount specified in
division (1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) of this definition for the other Schedule
III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance that is combined with the
fentanyl-related compound.
   CERTIFIED GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE. A duly constituted and organized committee of
the Ohio State Bar Association or of one or more local bar associations of the
state that complies with the criteria set forth in Rule V, Section 6 of the
Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   COCAINE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A cocaine salt, isomer, or derivative, a salt of a cocaine isomer
or derivative, or the base form of cocaine;
      (2)   Coca leaves or a salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of coca
leaves, including ecgonine, a salt, isomer, or derivative of ecgonine, or a
salt of an isomer or derivative of ecgonine;
      (3)   A salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of a substance
identified in division (1) or (2) of this definition that is chemically
equivalent to or identical with any of those substances, except that the
substances shall not include decocainized coca leaves or extraction of coca
leaves if the extractions do not contain cocaine or ecgonine.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A JUVENILE. An offense is “committed in the
vicinity of a juvenile” if the offender commits the offense within 100 feet of
a juvenile or within the view of a juvenile, regardless of whether the offender
knows the age of the juvenile, whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed within 100 feet of or within view of the juvenile, or whether the
juvenile actually views the commission of the offense.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. An offense is “committed in the
vicinity of a school” if the offender commits the offense on school premises,
in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of any school
premises, regardless of whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed on school premises, in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the
boundaries of any school premises.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER OR A
RECOVERING ADDICT. An offense is “committed in the vicinity of a substance
addiction services provider or a recovering addict” if either of the following
apply:
      (1)   The offender commits the offense on the premises of a substance
addiction services provider’s facility, including a facility licensed prior to
June 29, 2019, under R.C. § 5119.391 to provide methadone treatment or an
opioid treatment program licensed on or after that date under R.C. § 5119.37,
or within 500 feet of the premises of a substance addiction services provider’s
facility and the offender knows or should know that the offense is being
committed within the vicinity of the substance addiction services provider’s
facility.
      (2)   The offender sells, offers to sell, delivers, or distributes the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog to a person who is
receiving treatment at the time of the commission of the offense, or received
treatment within 30 days prior to the commission of the offense, from a
substance addiction services provider and the offender knows that the person is
receiving or received that treatment.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any drug that bears, or whose container or label bears, a
trademark, trade name, or other identifying mark used without authorization of
the owner of rights to the trademark, trade name, or identifying mark;
      (2)   Any unmarked or unlabeled substance that is represented to be a
controlled substance manufactured, processed, packed, or distributed by a
person other than the person that manufactured, processed, packed, or
distributed it;
      (3)   Any substance that is represented to be a controlled substance but
is not a controlled substance or is a different controlled substance;
      (4)   Any substance other than a controlled substance that a reasonable
person would believe to be a controlled substance because of its similarity in
shape, size, and color, or its markings, labeling, packaging, distribution, or
the price for which it is sold or offered for sale.
   CULTIVATE. Includes planting, watering, fertilizing, or tilling.
   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   DECEPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL. The disciplinary counsel appointed by the Board of
Commissioners on Grievances and Discipline of the Ohio Supreme Court under the
Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   DISPENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   DISTRIBUTE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2913.02(A) that constitutes theft of drugs,
or any violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, 2925.04, 2925.041, 2925.05,
2925.06, 2925.11, 2925.12, 2925.13, 2925.22, 2925.23, 2925.24, 2925.31,
2925.32, 2925.36, or 2925.37;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former law of a municipality, state
or any other state or of the United States, that is substantially equivalent to
any section listed in division (1) of this definition;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former law of a municipality, state
or any other state, or of the United States, of which planting, cultivating,
harvesting, processing, making, manufacturing, producing, shipping,
transporting, delivering, acquiring, possessing, storing, distributing,
dispensing, selling, inducing another to use, administering to another, using,
or otherwise dealing with a controlled substance is an element;
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing or attempting to commit, any offense under division (1), (2), or (3)
of this definition.
   DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
   FELONY DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any drug abuse offense that would constitute a
felony under the laws of this state, any other state, or the United States.
   FENTANYL-RELATED COMPOUND. Any of the following:
      (1)   Fentanyl;
      (2)   Alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1-(alpha-methyl-beta-phenyl)ethyl-4-
piperidyl] propionanilide; 1-(1-methyl-2-phenylethyl)-4-(N-propanilido)
piperidine);
      (3)   Alpha-methylthiofentanyl (N-[1-methyl-2-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylpropanamide);
      (4)   Beta-hydroxyfentanyl (N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-phenethyl-4-piperidinyl]-N-
phenylpropanamide);
      (5)   Beta-hydroxy-3-methylfentanyl (other name: N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-
phenethyl)-3- methyl-4-piperidinyl]-N-phenylpropanamide);
      (6)   3-methylfentanyl (N-[3-methyl-1-(2-phenylethyl)-4-piperidyl]-N-
phenylpropanamide);
      (7)   3-methylthiofentanyl (N-[3-methyl-1-[2-(thienyl)ethyl]-4-
piperidinyl]-– phenylpropanamide);
      (8)   Para-fluorofentanyl (N-(4-fluorophenyl)-N-[1-(2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]propanamide;
      (9)   Thiofentanyl (N-phenyl-N-[1-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-piperidinyl]-
propanamide;
      (10)   Alfentanil;
      (11)   Carfentanil;
      (12)   Remifentanil;
      (13)   Sufentanil;
      (14)   Acetyl-alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1-(1-methyl-2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylacetamide); and
      (15)   Any compound that meets all of the following fentanyl
pharmacophore requirements to bind at the mu receptor, as identified by a
report from an established forensic laboratory, including acetylfentanyl,
furanylfentanyl, valerylfentanyl, butyrylfentanyl, isobutyrylfentanyl, 4-
methoxybutyrylfentanyl, para-fluorobutyrylfentanyl, acrylfentanyl, and ortho-
fluorofentanyl:
         (a)   A chemical scaffold consisting of both of the following:
            1.   A five, six, or seven member ring structure containing a
nitrogen, whether or not further substituted;
            2.   An attached nitrogen to the ring, whether or not that nitrogen
is enclosed in a ring structure, including an attached aromatic ring or other
lipophilic group to that nitrogen.
         (b)   A polar functional group attached to the chemical scaffold,
including but not limited to a hydroxyl, ketone, amide, or ester;
         (c)   An alkyl or aryl substitution off the ring nitrogen of the
chemical scaffold; and
         (d)   The compound has not been approved for medical use by the United
States food and drug administration.
   HARMFUL INTOXICANT. Does not include beer or intoxicating liquor, but means
any of the following:
      (1)   Any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance the gas, fumes, or
vapor of which when inhaled can induce intoxication, excitement, giddiness,
irrational behavior, depression, stupefaction, paralysis, unconsciousness,
asphyxiation, or other harmful physiological effects, and includes but is not
limited to any of the following:
         (a)   Any volatile organic solvent, plastic cement, model cement,
fingernail polish remover, lacquer thinner, cleaning fluid, gasoline, or other
preparation containing a volatile organic solvent;
         (b)   Any aerosol propellant;
         (c)   Any fluorocarbon refrigerant;
         (d)   Any anesthetic gas.
      (2)   Gamma Butyrolactone;
      (3)   1,4 Butanediol.
   HASHISH.
      (1)   A resin or a preparation of a resin to which both of the following
apply:
         (a)   It is contained in or derived from any part of the plant of the
genus cannabis, whether in solid form or in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract, or liquid distillate form.
         (b)   It has a delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of more than
0.3%.
      (2)   The term does not include a hemp byproduct in the possession of a
licensed hemp processor under R.C. Chapter 928, provided that the hemp
byproduct is being produced, stored, and disposed of in accordance with rules
adopted under R.C. § 928.03.
   HYPODERMIC. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   JUVENILE. A person under 18 years of age.
   LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   L.S.D. Lysergic acid diethylamide.
   MAJOR DRUG OFFENDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   MANUFACTURE. To plant, cultivate, harvest, process, make, prepare, or
otherwise engage in any part of the production of a drug, by propagation,
extraction, chemical synthesis, or compounding, or any combination of the same,
and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling, and other activities incident to
production.
   MANUFACTURER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   MARIHUANA. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01, except that it does
not include hashish.
   METHAMPHETAMINE. Methamphetamine, any salt, isomer, or salt of an isomer of
methamphetamine, or any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance containing
methamphetamine or any salt, isomer, or salt of an isomer of methamphetamine.
   MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE. Either of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996.
      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it exists on and after July 1,
1996, that is a misdemeanor or a felony of the fifth degree.
   OFFICIAL WRITTEN ORDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   PERSON WITH A DRUG DEPENDENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
   PHARMACIST. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   PHARMACY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   POSSESS or POSSESSION. Having control over a thing or substance but may not
be inferred solely from mere access to the thing or substance through ownership
or occupation of the premises upon which the thing or substance is found.
   PREMISES OF A SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER'S FACILITY. Means the
parcel of real property on which any substance addiction service provider’s
facility is situated.
   PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   PRESUMPTION FOR A PRISON TERM or PRESUMPTION THAT A PRISON TERM SHALL BE
IMPOSED. A presumption as described in R.C. § 2929.13(D) that a prison term is
a necessary sanction for a felony in order to comply with the purposes and
principles of sentencing under R.C. § 2929.11.
   PROFESSIONAL LICENSE. Any license, permit, certificate, registration,
qualification, admission, temporary license, temporary permit, temporary
certificate, or temporary registration that is described in R.C. § 2925.01(W)
(1) through (W)(37) and that qualifies a person as a professionally licensed
person.
   PROFESSIONALLY LICENSED PERSON. Any of the following:
      (1)   A person who has received a certificate or temporary certificate as
a certified public accountant or who has registered as a public accountant
under R.C. Chapter 4701 and who holds an Ohio permit issued under that chapter;
      (2)   A person who holds a certificate of qualification to practice
architecture issued or renewed and registered under R.C. Chapter 4703;
      (3)   A person who is registered as a landscape architect under R.C.
Chapter 4703 or who holds a permit as a landscape architect issued under that
chapter;
      (4)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4707;
      (5)   A person who has been issued a certificate of registration as a
registered barber under R.C. Chapter 4709;
      (6)   A person licensed and regulated to engage in the business of a debt
pooling company by a legislative authority, under authority of R.C. Chapter
4710;
      (7)   A person who has been issued a cosmetologist’s license, hair
designer’s license, manicurist’s license, esthetician’s license, natural hair
stylist’s license, advanced cosmetologist’s license, advanced hair designer’s
license, advanced manicurist’s license, advanced esthetician’s license,
advanced natural hair stylist’s license, cosmetology instructor’s license, hair
design instructor’s license, manicurist instructor’s license, esthetics
instructor’s license, natural hair style instructor’s license, independent
contractor’s license, or tanning facility permit under R.C. Chapter 4713;
      (8)   A person who has been issued a license to practice dentistry, a
general anesthesia permit, a conscious sedation permit, a limited resident’s
license, a limited teaching license, a dental hygienist’s license, or a dental
hygienist’s teacher’s certificate under R.C. Chapter 4715;
      (9)   A person who has been issued an embalmer’s license, a funeral
director’s license, a funeral home license, or a crematory license, or who has
been registered for an embalmer’s or funeral director’s apprenticeship under
R.C. Chapter 4717;
      (10)   A person who has been licensed as a registered nurse or practical
nurse, or who has been issued a certificate for the practice of nurse-midwifery
under R.C. Chapter 4723;
      (11)   A person who has been licensed to practice optometry or to engage
in optical dispensing under R.C. Chapter 4725;
      (12)   A person licensed to act as a pawnbroker under R.C. Chapter 4727;
      (13)   A person licensed to act as a precious metals dealer under R.C.
Chapter 4728;
      (14)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a pharmacist or
pharmacy intern or registered under that chapter as a registered pharmacy
technician, certified pharmacy technician, or pharmacy technician trainee;
      (15)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a manufacturer of
dangerous drugs, outsourcing facility, third-party logistics provider,
repackager of dangerous drugs, wholesale distributor of dangerous drugs, or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
      (16)   A person who is authorized to practice as a physician assistant
under R.C. Chapter 4730;
      (17)   A person who has been issued a license to practice medicine and
surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric medicine and surgery
under R.C. Chapter 4731 or has been issued a certificate to practice a limited
branch of medicine under that chapter;
      (18)   A person licensed as a psychologist, independent school
psychologist, or school psychologist under R.C. Chapter 4732;
      (19)   A person registered to practice the profession of engineering or
surveying under R.C. Chapter 4733;
      (20)   A person who has been issued a license to practice chiropractic
under R.C. Chapter 4734;
      (21)   A person licensed to act as a real estate broker or real estate
salesperson under R.C. Chapter 4735;
      (22)   A person registered as a registered environmental health
specialist under R.C. Chapter 4736;
      (23)   A person licensed to operate or maintain a junkyard under R.C.
Chapter 4737;
      (24)   A person who has been issued a motor vehicle salvage dealer’s
license under R.C. Chapter 4738;
      (25)   A person who has been licensed to act as a steam engineer under
R.C. Chapter 4739;
      (26)   A person who has been issued a license or temporary permit to
practice veterinary medicine or any of its branches, or who is registered as a
graduate animal technician under R.C. Chapter 4741;
      (27)   A person who has been issued a hearing aid dealer’s or fitter’s
license or trainee permit under R.C. Chapter 4747;
      (28)   A person who has been issued a class A, class B, or class C
license or who has been registered as an investigator or security guard
employee under R.C. Chapter 4749;
      (29)   A person licensed to practice as a nursing home administrator
under R.C. Chapter 4751;
      (30)   A person licensed to practice as a speech-language pathologist or
audiologist under R.C. Chapter 4753;
      (31)   A person issued a license as an occupational therapist or physical
therapist under R.C. Chapter 4755;
      (32)   A person who is licensed as a licensed professional clinical
counselor, licensed professional counselor, social worker, independent social
worker, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage and family
therapist, or registered as a social work assistant under R.C. Chapter 4757;
      (33)   A person issued a license to practice dietetics under R.C. Chapter
4759;
      (34)   A person who has been issued a license or limited permit to
practice respiratory therapy under R.C. Chapter 4761;
      (35)   A person who has been issued a real estate appraiser certificate
under R.C. Chapter 4763;
      (36)   A person who has been issued a home inspector license under R.C.
Chapter 4764;
      (37)   A person who has been admitted to the bar by order of the Ohio
Supreme Court in compliance with its prescribed and published rules.
   PUBLIC PREMISES. Any hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other
place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort.
   SALE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   SAMPLE DRUG. A drug or pharmaceutical preparation that would be hazardous to
health or safety if used without the supervision of a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs, or a drug of abuse, and that, at
one time, had been placed in a container plainly marked as a sample by a
manufacturer.
   SCHEDULE I, SCHEDULE II, SCHEDULE III, SCHEDULE IV or SCHEDULE V. Have the
same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   SCHOOL. Any school operated by a board of education, any community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or any nonpublic school for which the
State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted at the time a criminal offense is
committed.
   SCHOOL BUILDING. Any building in which any of the instruction,
extracurricular activities, or training provided by a school is conducted,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
   SCHOOL PREMISES. Either of the following:
      (1)   The parcel of real property on which any school is situated,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted on the premises at the time a
criminal offense is committed;
      (2)   Any other parcel of real property that is owned or leased by a
board of education of a school, the governing authority of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or the governing body of a nonpublic
school for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards
under R.C. § 3301.07 and on which some of the instruction, extracurricular
activities, or training of the school is conducted, whether or not any
instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the school is
being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a criminal offense
is committed.
   STANDARD PHARMACEUTICAL REFERENCE MANUAL. The current edition, with
cumulative changes if any, of references that are approved by the State Board
of Pharmacy.
   SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Means an agency, association,
corporation or other legal entity, individual, or program that provides one or
more of the following at a facility:
      (1)   Either alcohol addiction services, or drug addiction services, or
both such services that are certified by the Ohio Director of Mental Health and
Addiction Services under R.C. § 5119.36;
      (2)   Recovery supports that are related to either alcohol addiction
services, or drug addiction services, or both such services and paid for with
federal, state, or local funds administered by the Ohio Department of Mental
Health and Addiction Services or a board of alcohol, drug addiction, and mental
health services.
   UNIT DOSE. An amount or unit or a compound, mixture, or preparation
containing a controlled substance that is separately identifiable and in a form
that indicates that it is the amount or unit by which the controlled substance
is separately administered to or taken by an individual.
   WHOLESALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
(R.C.§ 2925.01)
§ 138.02 DRUG ABUSE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly obtain, possess, or use a controlled
substance or a controlled substance analog.
   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
and 4741;
         (b)   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is
conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an
anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration;
         (c)   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses, or
administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is
expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other
nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the Federal Food, Drug,
and Cosmetic Act, and is sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed, or
administered for that purpose in accordance with that Act;
         (d)   Any person who obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs if the prescription was issued for a legitimate medical purpose and not
altered, forged, or obtained through deception or commission of a theft
offense. As used in this division (B)(1)(d), “deception” and “theft offense”
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (2)   (a)   As used in division (B)(2) of this section:
            COMMUNITY ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 5119.01.
            COMMUNITY CONTROL SANCTION. Has the same meanings as in R.C. §
2929.01
            DRUG TREATMENT PROGRAM. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 2929.01.
            HEALTH CARE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2919.16.
            MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE. A violation of this section or R.C.
§ 2925.11 that is an offense or a felony of the fifth degree.
            PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
            POST-RELEASE CONTROL SANCTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2967.28.
            PUBLIC AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2930.01.
            QUALIFIED INDIVIDUAL. A person who is acting in good faith who
seeks or obtains medical assistance for another person who is experiencing a
drug overdose, a person who experiences a drug overdose and who seeks medical
assistance for that overdose, or a person who is the subject of another person
seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that overdose as described in
division (B)(2)(b) of this section.
            SEEK OR OBTAIN MEDICAL ASSISTANCE. Includes, but is not limited to
making a 9-1-1 call, contacting in person or by telephone call an on-duty peace
officer, or transporting or presenting a person to a health care facility.
         (b)   Subject to division (B)(2)(e) of this section, a qualified
individual shall not be arrested, charged, prosecuted, convicted, or penalized
pursuant to this chapter for a minor drug possession offense or a violation of
R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141 if all of the
following apply:
            1.   The evidence of the obtaining, possession, or use of the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog, drug abuse instruments, or
drug paraphernalia that would be the basis of the offense was obtained as a
result of the qualified individual seeking the medical assistance or
experiencing an overdose and needing medical assistance.
            2.   Subject to division (B)(2)(f) of this section, within 30 days
after seeking or obtaining the medical assistance, the qualified individual
seeks and obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment from a
community addiction services provider or a properly credentialed addiction
treatment professional.
            3.   Subject to division (B)(2)(f) of this section, the qualified
individual who obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment under
division (B)(2)(b)2. of this section, upon the request of any prosecuting
attorney, submits documentation to the prosecuting attorney that verifies that
the qualified individual satisfied the requirements of that division. The
documentation shall be limited to the date and time of the screening obtained
and referral received.
         (c)   If a person who is serving a community control sanction or is
under a sanction on post-release control acts pursuant to division (B)(2)(b) of
this section, then R.C. § 2929.141(B), R.C. § 2929.15(B)(2), R.C. § 2929.25(D)
(3), or R.C. § 2967.28(F)(3) applies to the person with respect to any
violation of the sanction or post-release control sanction based on a minor
drug possession offense, as defined in R.C. § 2925.11, or a violation of R.C. §
2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141.
         (d)   Nothing in division (B)(2)(b) of this section shall be construed
to do any of the following:
            1.   Limit the admissibility of any evidence in connection with the
investigation or prosecution of a crime with regards to a defendant who does
not qualify for the protections of division (B)(2)(b) of this section or with
regards to any crime other than a minor drug possession offense or a violation
of R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141 committed by a
person who qualifies for protection pursuant to division (B)(2)(b) of this
section;
            2.   Limit any seizure of evidence or contraband otherwise
permitted by law;
            3.   Limit or abridge the authority of a peace officer to detain or
take into custody a person in the course of an investigation or to effectuate
an arrest for any offense except as provided in that division;
            4.   Limit, modify, or remove any immunity from liability available
pursuant to law in effect prior to September 13, 2016 to any public agency or
to an employee of any public agency.
         (e)   Division (B)(2)(b) of this section does not apply to any person
who twice previously has been granted an immunity under division (B)(2)(b) of
this section. No person shall be granted an immunity under division (B)(2)(b)
of this section more than two times.
         (f)   Nothing in this section shall compel any qualified individual to
disclose protected health information in a way that conflicts with the
requirements of the “Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996”, 104 Pub. L. No. 191, 110 Stat. 2021, 42 U.S.C. §§ 1320d et seq., as
amended, and regulations promulgated by the United States Department of Health
and Human Services to implement the act or the requirements of 42 C.F.R. Part
2.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of one of the
following:
      (1)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II, with the
exception of marihuana or hashish, whoever violates division (A) of this
section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V,
whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of drugs.
The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2)(b) of this
section, possession of drugs is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the
offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds the bulk
amount, possession of drugs is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is marihuana or a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance containing marihuana other than hashish,
whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of
marihuana. If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
possession of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (4)   If the drug involved in the violation is hashish or a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance containing hashish, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of hashish. If the amount
of the drug involved equals or exceeds ten grams of hashish in a solid form or
equals or exceeds two grams of hashish in a liquid concentrate, liquid extract,
or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (5)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and marihuana, one of the following applies:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(5)(b) of this
section, the offender is guilty of possession of marihuana and shall be
punished as provided in division (C)(3) of this section. Except as otherwise
provided in division (C)(5)(b) of this section, the offender is not guilty of
possession of a fentanyl-related compound under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) and shall
not be charged with, convicted of, or punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) for
possession of a fentanyl-related compound.
         (b)   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11).
      (6)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and any Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance that is
not a fentanyl-related compound, one of the following applies:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(6)(b) of this
section, the offender is guilty of possession of drugs and shall be punished as
provided in division (C)(2) of this section. Except as otherwise provided in
division (C)(6)(b) of this section, the offender is not guilty of possession of
a fentanyl-related compound under R.C. §
2925.11(C)(11) and shall not be charged with, convicted of, or punished under
R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) for possession of a fentanyl-related compound.
         (b)   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11).
   (D)   Arrest or conviction for a minor violation of this section does not
constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so arrested
or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal record,
including any inquiries contained in any application for employment, license,
or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s appearance
as a witness.
   (E)   (1)   In addition to any prison term or jail term authorized or
required by division (C) of this section and R.C. §§ 2929.13, 2929.14, 2929.22,
2929.24, and 2929.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and
in addition to any other sanction that is imposed for the offense under this
section, R.C. §§ 2929.11 through 2929.18, or R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28,
the court that sentences an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of division (A) of this section may suspend the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. However,
if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years.
      (2)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
   (F)   (1)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
      (2)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (F) of this section, the
sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.11) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 138.03 POSSESSING DRUG ABUSE INSTRUMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make, obtain, possess, or use any
instrument, article, or thing the customary and primary purpose of which is for
the administration or use of a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, when the
instrument involved is a hypodermic or syringe, whether or not of crude or
extemporized manufacture or assembly, and the instrument, article, or thing
involved has been used by the offender to unlawfully administer or use a
dangerous drug, other than marihuana, or to prepare a dangerous drug, other
than marihuana, for unlawful administration or use.
   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies,
and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719,
4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741.
      (2)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of this section when a person seeks or obtains medical assistance for
another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a person experiences a drug
overdose and seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or a person is the
subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that
overdose.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing drug abuse
instruments.
   (D)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if
the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a
professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a
violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C. §
2925.38.
      (2)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (D)(2) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.12) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 138.04 PERMITTING DRUG ABUSE.
   (A)   No person who is the owner, operator, or person in charge of a
locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, shall knowingly permit the vehicle to be used for the commission of a
felony drug abuse offense.
   (B)   No person, who is the owner, lessee, or occupant, or who has custody,
control, or supervision of premises, or real estate, including vacant land,
shall knowingly permit his or her premises, or real estate, including vacant
land, to be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse offense by another
person.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting drug abuse.
Permitting drug abuse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law
if the felony drug abuse offense in question is a violation of R.C. § 2925.02,
2925.03, or 2925.04, or if the felony drug abuse offense in question is a
violation of R.C. § 2925.041 and the offender had actual knowledge, at the time
the offender permitted the vehicle, premises, or real estate to be used as
described in division (A) or (B) of this section, that the person who assembled
or possessed the chemicals in question in violation of R.C. § 2925.041 had
assembled or possessed them with the intent to manufacture a controlled
substance in Schedule I or Schedule II in violation of R.C. § 2925.04.
   (D)   Any premises or real estate that is permitted to be used in violation
of division (B) of this section constitutes a nuisance subject to abatement
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2925.13(A) - (C), (F)) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 138.05 ABUSING HARMFUL INTOXICANTS.
   (A)   Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental, or veterinary
purposes, no person, with purpose to induce intoxication or similar
physiological effects, shall obtain, possess, or use a harmful intoxicant.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abusing harmful
intoxicants. If the offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse
offense, abusing harmful intoxicants is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (C)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if
the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a
professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a
violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C. §
2925.38.
      (2)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to the September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (C)(2) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.31) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 138.06 COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly possess any counterfeit controlled
substance.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be guilty of
possession of counterfeit controlled substances.
(R.C. § 2925.37(A), (G)) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 138.07 USE, POSSESSION, OR SALE OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   As used in this section, DRUG PARAPHERNALIA means any equipment,
product, or material of any kind that is used by the offender, intended by the
offender for use, or designed for use, in propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the
human body, a controlled substance in violation of this chapter. The term
includes but is not limited to any of the following equipment, products, or
materials that are used by the offender, intended by the offender for use, or
designed by the offender for use, in any of the following manners:
      (1)   A kit for propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting any
species of a plant that is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived;
      (2)   A kit for manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, or preparing a controlled substance;
      (3)   Any object, instrument, or device for manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, or preparing methamphetamine;
      (4)   An isomerization device for increasing the potency of any species
of a plant that is a controlled substance;
      (5)   Testing equipment for identifying, or analyzing the strength,
effectiveness, or purity of, a controlled substance, except for those exempted
in division (D)(4) of this section;
      (6)   A scale or balance for weighing or measuring a controlled
substance;
      (7)   A diluent or adulterant, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose, or lactose, for cutting a controlled substance;
      (8)   A separation gin or sifter for removing twigs and seeds from, or
otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana;
      (9)   A blender, bowl, container, spoon, or mixing device for compounding
a controlled substance;
      (10)   A capsule, balloon, envelope, or container for packaging small
quantities of a controlled substance;
      (11)   A container or device for storing or concealing a controlled
substance;
      (12)   A hypodermic syringe, needle, or instrument for parenterally
injecting a controlled substance into the human body;
      (13)   An object, instrument, or device for ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing into the human body, marihuana, cocaine, hashish, or
hashish oil, such as a metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or
ceramic pipe, with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or
punctured metal bowl; water pipe; carburetion tube or device; smoking or
carburetion mask; roach clip or similar object used to hold burning material,
such as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be
held in the hand; miniature cocaine spoon, or cocaine vial; chamber pipe;
carburetor pipe; electric pipe; air driver pipe; chillum; bong; or ice pipe or
chiller.
   (B)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, the following:
      (1)   Any statement by the owner or by anyone in control of the
equipment, product, or material, concerning its use;
      (2)   The proximity in time or space of the equipment, product, or
material, or of the act relating to the equipment, product, or material, to a
violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2925;
      (3)   The proximity of the equipment, product, or material to any
controlled substance;
      (4)   The existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the
equipment, product, or material;
      (5)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of
anyone in control, of the equipment, product, or material, to deliver it to any
person whom he or she knows intends to use the equipment, product, or material
to facilitate a violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter
2925. A finding that the owner or anyone in control of the equipment, product,
or material is not guilty of a violation of any other provision of this chapter
or R.C. Chapter 2925 does not prevent a finding that the equipment, product, or
material was intended or designed by the offender for use as drug
paraphernalia;
      (6)   Any oral or written instruction provided with the equipment,
product, or material concerning its use;
      (7)   Any descriptive material accompanying the equipment, product, or
material and explaining or depicting its use;
      (8)   National or local advertising concerning the use of the equipment,
product, or material;
      (9)   The manner and circumstances in which the equipment, product, or
material is displayed for sale;
      (10)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of the sales of the
equipment, product, or material to the total sales of the business enterprise;
      (11)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the equipment,
product, or material in the community;
      (12)   Expert testimony concerning the use of the equipment, product, or
material.
   (C)   (1)   Subject to divisions (D)(2), (D)(3), and (D)(4) of this section,
no person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, drug
paraphernalia.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly sell, or possess or manufacture with
purpose to sell, drug paraphernalia, if he or she knows or reasonably should
know that the equipment, product, or material will be used as drug
paraphernalia.
      (3)   No person shall place an advertisement in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill, or other publication that is published and printed and circulates
primarily within this state, if he or she knows that the purpose of the
advertisement is to promote the illegal sale in this municipality or in this
state of the equipment, product, or material that the offender intended or
designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
   (D)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies,
and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741. This section shall not be construed to
prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C. §
3719.172.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a person’s use,
or possession with purpose to use, any drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a
product, or material of any kind that is used by the person, intended by the
person for use, or designed for use in storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body
marihuana.
      (3)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of division (C)(1) of this section when a person seeks or obtains
medical assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a
person experiences a drug overdose and seeks medical assistance for that
overdose, or a person is the subject of another person seeking or obtaining
medical assistance for that overdose.
      (4)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a person’s use,
or possession with purpose to use, any drug testing strips to determine the
presence of fentanyl or a fentanyl-related compound.
   (E)   Notwithstanding R.C. Chapter 2981, any drug paraphernalia that was
used, possessed, sold, or manufactured in violation of this section shall be
seized, after a conviction for that violation, shall be forfeited, and upon
forfeiture shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 2981.12(B).
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (C)(1) of this section is guilty of
illegal use or possession of drug paraphernalia.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C)(2) of this section is guilty of
dealing in drug paraphernalia.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C)(2) of this section by selling drug
paraphernalia to a juvenile is guilty of selling drug paraphernalia to
juveniles.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (C)(3) of this section is guilty of
illegal advertising of drug paraphernalia.
   (G)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if
the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a
professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a
violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C. §
2925.38.
      (2)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (G)(2) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.14) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 138.08 SALE OF PURE CAFFEINE PRODUCT.
   (A)   As used in this section, PURE CAFFEINE PRODUCT means:
      (1)   Subject to division (A)(2) of this section, a product that consists
solely or primarily of caffeine and is manufactured into a crystalline, liquid,
or powdered form.
      (2)   The phrase does not include any of the following that contains
caffeine and is formulated, manufactured, and labeled in accordance with the
laws and regulations enforced by the United States Food and Drug
Administration:
         (a)   Coffee, tea, any soft drink, any energy drink, or any other
caffeine-containing beverage;
         (b)   Any energy product.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, no person shall
knowingly sell or offer for sale a pure caffeine product.
   (C)   Division (B) of this section does not prohibit a person from selling
or offering for sale any product manufactured in a unit-dose form such as a
pill, tablet, or caplet, but only if each unit dose of the product contains not
more than 250 milligrams of caffeine.
   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits either of the following:
      (1)   Possession of a product described in division (C) of this section;
      (2)   Possession of a pure caffeine product by any of the following:
         (a)   A food processing establishment, as defined in R.C. § 3715.021;
         (b)   A manufacturer of a drug that is available without a
prescription;
         (c)   A laboratory that holds a current, valid category III terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs license issued by the state board of pharmacy
under R.C. § 4729.54;
         (d)   A laboratory of any agency or department of this state that
performs testing, analysis, and other laboratory services on behalf of the
state;
         (e)   A postal or delivery service that transports or delivers a pure
caffeine product to an entity specified in divisions (D)(2)(a) to (D)(2)(d) of
this section.
(R.C. § 2925.34) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 138.09 SALE OF DEXTROMETHORPHAN.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      DEXTROMETHORPHAN. Means the dextrorotatory isomer of 3-methoxy-N-
methylmorphinan, including its salts, but not including its racemic or
levorotatory forms.
      EVIDENCE OF MAJORITY AND IDENTITY. Means a document issued by the federal
government or a state, county, or municipal government, or a subdivision or
agency of any of the foregoing, including a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, an identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52, a
military identification card, or any other form of identification that bears
the name, date of birth, description, and picture of the person identified.
      RETAILER. Means a place of business that offers consumer products for
sale to the general public, including a terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
that is licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 and operated as a pharmacy.
   (B)   No retailer or employee of a retailer shall knowingly supply, deliver,
give, or otherwise provide a drug, material, compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance containing any quantity of dextromethorphan through the sale of any
product to a person under 18 years of age, unless the person has been issued a
prescription for the product being purchased.
   (C)   For purposes of division (B) of this section, the person making the
sale of a product containing dextromethorphan shall require and obtain evidence
of majority and identity from the purchaser, unless from the purchaser’s
outward appearance the person making the sale would reasonably presume the
purchaser to be 25 years of age or older. Proof that the person making the sale
demanded, was shown, and acted in reasonable reliance on the purchaser’s
evidence of majority and identity is a defense to any charge of a violation of
division (B) of this section.
   (D)   A retailer or employee of a retailer is not liable for damages in a
civil action for injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly
arises from an act or omission associated with a failure to prevent the sale of
a product containing dextromethorphan to a person under 18 years of age, unless
the act or omission constitutes willful or wanton misconduct.
(R.C. § 2925.62) Penalty, see §
130.99 
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   (This title is reserved for by-laws dealing with zoning, subdivisions and
the like.)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Ohio Revised Code
References to By-Laws
References to Amendments
REFERENCES TO OHIO REVISED CODE
R.C. Section By-Laws Section
R.C. Section               By-Laws Section
1.01                       10.01
1.02(A)                    10.02
1.02(B)                    10.02
1.02(C)                    10.02
1.02(D)                    10.02
1.02(E)                    10.02
1.02(F)                    10.02
1.02(G)                    10.02
1.05                       10.02
1.14                       10.03
1.15                       10.03
1.23                       10.05
1.42                       10.03
1.43                       10.03
1.44                       10.02
1.45                       10.03
1.46                       10.03
1.50                       10.07
1.54                       10.04
1.55                       10.05
1.56                       10.05
1.57                       10.04
1.58                       10.04
1.59                       10.02
1.59(C)                    10.02
701.01                     10.02
701.01(B)                  10.02
701.01(D)                  10.02
701.01(E)                  10.02
1531.02                    90.06
1533.161                   90.05
1533.32                    90.07
Ch. 1545                   Ch. 31, App. A
1545.05                    30.02
1545.07                    30.03,
                           30.05
1545.09                    30.04
1545.11                    31.02
1545.13                    30.06
1545.131                   30.07
1545.132                   30.08
                           10.99,
                           70.99,
                           90.99,
1545.99                    91.99,
                           92.99,
                           110.99,
                           130.99
1546.01                    131.01
2152.02                    135.06
2152.022                   135.06
Ch. 2744                   30.08
2901.01                    130.01
2903.13                    135.01
2903.14                    135.02
2903.22                    135.03
2903.34                    130.01
2905.12                    135.04
2907.01                    133.01
2907.06                    133.02
2907.08                    133.04
2907.09                    133.05
2907.23                    133.06
2907.231                   133.06
2907.24(A)                 133.07
2907.24(C)(1)              133.07
2907.24(D)                 133.07
2907.24(E)                 133.07
2907.241                   133.071
2907.25                    133.071
2907.31                    133.09
2909.06                    131.01
2909.07                    131.02
2909.09                    131.01
2911.21                    131.03
2911.32                    131.04
2913.02                    137.01
2913.03                    137.02
2913.04                    137.03
2913.11                    137.04
2913.21                    137.05
2913.33                    137.06
2913.41                    137.07
2913.44                    136.06
2913.441                   137.09
2913.51                    137.08
2915.01                    134.01
2915.04                    134.02
2915.05                    134.03
2915.09                    134.04
2915.14                    134.05
2917.03                    132.01
2917.031                   132.01
2917.04                    132.02
2917.11                    132.03
2917.12                    132.04
2917.13                    132.05
2917.14                    132.15
2917.21                    135.07
2917.211                   133.20
2917.31                    132.06
2917.32                    132.07
2919.24                    135.06
2921.01                    137.05
2921.13                    136.01
2921.23                    136.02
2921.29                    136.09
2921.31                    136.03
2921.32                    136.04
2921.321                   136.08
2921.33                    136.05
2921.331                   72.18
2921.51                    136.07
2923.02                    130.02
2923.03                    130.03
2923.11                    92.07
2923.12                    92.01
2923.15                    92.02
2923.16                    92.03
2923.211                   92.04
2925.01                    138.01
2925.11                    138.02
2925.12                    138.03
2925.13                    138.04
2925.14                    138.07
2925.31                    138.05
2925.34                    138.08
2925.37                    138.06
2925.61                    138.01
2925.62                    138.09
2927.11                    131.05
2935.36(E)                 130.01
3716.11                    135.08
3743.65                    92.10
3767.32                    131.07
3767.99(C)                 131.07
3781.55                    133.05
4301.01                    91.01
4301.244                   91.01
4301.58                    91.02
4301.631                   91.041
4301.633                   91.03
4301.634                   91.03
4301.638                   91.09
4301.64                    91.05
4301.69                    91.09
4301.99(E)                 91.041
4503.11(A)                 71.10
4503.11(D)                 71.10
4503.21(A)                 71.01
4507.30                    71.05
4507.31                    71.05
4507.35                    71.08
4507.36                    71.09
4509.74                    72.53
4511.01                    70.01
4511.03                    72.04
4511.05                    72.27
4511.12                    72.05
4511.13                    72.06,
                           72.07
4511.17                    72.08
4511.20                    72.45
4511.201                   72.46
4511.202                   72.47
4511.203                   71.07
4511.204                   72.70
4511.205                   72.71
4511.22                    72.61
4511.25                    72.01
4511.251                   72.65
4511.26                    72.03
4511.32                    72.09
4511.33                    72.10
4511.34                    72.11
4511.36                    72.13
4511.37                    72.14
4511.38                    72.15
4511.39                    72.16
4511.40                    72.17
4511.41                    72.20
4511.42                    72.21
4511.43                    72.22
4511.431                   72.23
4511.44                    72.24
4511.441                   72.25
4511.45                    72.26
4511.452                   72.28
4511.46                    72.29
4511.47                    72.30
4511.48                    72.31
4511.481                   72.32
4511.49                    72.35
4511.50                    72.36
4511.51                    72.37
4511.512                   72.38
4511.513                   72.39
4511.514                   72.40
4511.52                    75.01
4511.521                   75.02
4511.522                   75.07
4511.53                    75.03
4511.54                    75.04
4511.55                    75.05
4511.56                    75.06
4511.60                    72.66
4511.66                    73.01
4511.661                   73.02
4511.67                    73.06
4511.69                    73.03
4511.70                    72.55
4511.701                   72.56
4511.712                   72.59
4511.72                    72.60
4511.74                    72.62
4511.81(A) - (H), (K), (L) 72.63
4511.82                    131.07
4511.84                    72.69
4513.02(A)                 74.01
4513.021                   74.02
4513.03                    74.03
4513.04                    74.04
4513.05                    74.05
4513.06                    74.06
4513.071                   74.08
4513.09                    74.09
4513.10                    74.10
4513.11                    74.11
4513.111                   74.11
4513.112                   74.11
4513.113                   74.11
4513.114                   74.11
4513.115                   74.11
4513.12                    74.12
4513.13                    74.13
4513.14                    74.14
4513.15                    74.15
4513.17                    74.16
4513.171                   74.16
4513.171(B)                74.16
4513.19                    74.17
4513.20                    74.18
4513.21                    74.19
4513.22                    74.20
4513.23                    74.21
4513.24                    74.22
4513.241(C) - (J)          74.24
4513.241(K)                74.24
4513.263                   72.64
4513.30                    74.40
4513.31                    74.41
4513.36                    72.19
4549.02                    72.50
4549.021                   72.51
4549.03                    72.52
4549.05                    73.07
4549.08                    71.11
4549.11                    71.12
4549.12                    71.13
5577.11                    138.01
5577.11                    74.23
5577.99(E)                 74.23
5589.081                   74.07
5589.99(B)                 74.07
                           
 
REFERENCES TO BY-LAWS
Prior By-Law Section By-Law Section
Prior By-Law Section By-Law Section
1                    131.06
2                    131.07
3                    90.01
4                    92.20
5                    92.06,
                     92.11
6                    131.08
7B                   132.08
7C                   137.10
7D                   132.09
7E                   132.10
7F                   131.09
8                    72.68
8C                   72.57
8E                   72.58
8F                   72.02
8H                   72.75
                     30.03,
8-05                 30.05,
                     72.38,
                     75.01
9                    91.06
9B                   91.09
9C                   91.07
9D                   91.08
12                   132.12
13                   110.01
14                   132.13
15                   90.02
15A                  90.03
16                   31.02
17                   132.14
18                   10.02
19                   10.99
86                   72.27
                     
 
REFERENCES TO AMENDMENTS
No. Date Amended By-Law Section
No.    Date Amended By-Law Section
--     10- -2004    72.75
--     7- -2005     137.11
--     8- -2005     90.01,
                    90.08
--     8- -2005     110.01
--     12-5-2014    110.01
--     12-5-2014    132.13,
                    132.14
132.15 3-19-2015    132.11
                   
 
