CITY OF GREEN, OHIO
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-3 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance No. 2025-08, passed 7-22-2025
State legislation current through June 5, 2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CHARTER
Summit County, Ohio
EFFECTIVE: November 3, 1992
AMENDED: November 5, 2019
AMENDMENTS
The Charter of the City of Green, Ohio, was proposed on August 13, 1992, was
approved by voters on November 3, 1992, and became effective on January 1,
1993.
Following a review of the Charter during 1998, various amendments were
considered by voters on November 3, 1998.
Amendments relating to elected officials’ qualifications and the process to be
used when filling a permanent vacancy in the office of the Mayor, were adopted
by voters on November 2, 1999.
Following a review of the Charter during 2005, various amendments were
considered by voters on November 8, 2005.
An amendment relating to the appointment of an alternate member to the Planning
and Zoning Commission was adopted by voters on November 2, 2010.
Following a review of the Charter during 2012, various amendments were
considered by voters on November 6, 2012.
Non-substantive changes were adopted by City Council via legislation on
February 25, 2014. See Resolution 2014-R02.
Changes were considered by the voters in Issue 14 at the 2018 General Election.
Non-substantive changes were adopted by City Council via legislation on August
27, 2019. See Resolution 2019-R52.
Following a review of the Charter during 2019, various amendments were
considered by voters on November 5, 2019.
The sections of the Charter that have been amended as a result of voter
approval are followed by the date that voters approved the amendment.
PREAMBLE
   We the people of the City of Green, in the County of Summit, and State of
Ohio, in order to secure for ourselves and our successors the maximum benefits
of municipal home rule and local self-government under the Constitution and
laws of the State of Ohio, do hereby ordain and adopt this Charter.
ARTICLE I. NAME AND BOUNDARIES
   The municipality now existing and known as the City of Green, in the County
of Summit, and State of Ohio, shall continue, within the same boundaries, to be
a body politic and corporate, under the name of the City of Green, hereinafter
referred to as the City.
ARTICLE II. POWERS OF THE CITY
§ 2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   The City shall have all powers possible for a City to have under the
Constitution of the State of Ohio and laws of the State of Ohio as fully and
completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter.
§ 2.2 RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The powers of the City under this Charter shall be construed liberally in
favor of the City, and the specific mention in this Charter of particular
powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power granted
in this Article.
§ 2.3 INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS.
   The City may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions and
may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by
contract or otherwise, with any one (1) state of the United States or any state
civil division or agency, or the United States or any of its agencies.
(Amended November 3, 1998)
§ 2.4 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The municipal government provided for the City by this Charter shall be
known as “Mayor-Council” form of government.
ARTICLE III. THE MAYOR
§ 3.1 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The term of the Mayor shall be four (4) years, beginning January 1 next
following their election, and the Mayor shall hold office until their successor
is elected and qualified.
   The Mayor may serve for two (2) successive four (4) year terms, after which
the Mayor shall be ineligible for re-election as Mayor until a period of not
less than four (4) years shall have elapsed. Any partial term to fill a vacancy
lasting more than two (2) years shall count as a four (4) year term, and
against the limit.
(Amended November 5, 2019)
§ 3.2 QUALIFICATIONS.
   Immediately prior to their election or appointment, the Mayor shall be a
qualified elector of the City of Green, and, for at least two (2) continuous
years immediately prior to the Mayor’s election or appointment, the Mayor shall
be a resident of the City of Green. (Amended November 5, 2019) During their
term, the Mayor shall remain a resident and qualified elector of the City.
   The Mayor shall not be otherwise employed by the City and shall hold no
other public office than that of Notary Public or member of the Ohio National
Guard or Reserve Corps of the United States. The Mayor shall have an office in
the administration building of the City and shall be considered a full-time
elected official to properly conduct the business of the City. (Amended
November 3, 1998; November 2, 1999) The Mayor shall devote their entire time
and effort during regular business hours and all other times as are necessary
to properly conduct the business of the City.
(Amended November 6, 2012)
§ 3.3 POWERS OF THE MAYOR.
   A.   Judicial. The Mayor shall have full judicial powers pursuant to the
Constitution of the State of Ohio, the statutes of the State of Ohio, and the
ordinances of the City of Green, Ohio.
   B.   Legislative. The Mayor shall be entitled to a seat in, but not on,
Council and shall attend or be represented at all meetings of Council. He shall
have the right to recommend ordinances, resolutions, and motions, and the right
to participate in the discussion of all matters coming before Council but shall
not vote in Council.
   At the request of the Mayor, the heads of the respective departments shall
be given an opportunity to participate in the deliberations of Council on
legislation pertaining to their departments but shall have no vote.
   Every ordinance or resolution passed by Council shall be signed by the Clerk
of Council and shall be presented to the Mayor by the Clerk of Council. If the
Mayor approves such ordinance or resolution, the Mayor shall sign it and file
it with the Clerk of Council. If the Mayor disapproves any ordinance or
resolution, the Mayor shall return it, unsigned, to the Clerk of Council within
ten (10) days after its passage. In case the Mayor disapproves any emergency
ordinance or resolution, the Mayor shall return it, unsigned, to the Clerk of
Council within twenty-four (24) hours of its passage. Whenever the Mayor shall
return an ordinance or resolution, unsigned, to the Clerk of Council, the Mayor
shall document their objections to the said ordinance or resolution in writing.
The Mayor’s objections shall be entered in full on the journal of Council.
   The Mayor may approve or disapprove the whole, or any part, of any ordinance
appropriating money, but otherwise their approval or disapproval shall be
addressed to the entire ordinance or resolution.
   If the Mayor, within the time specified after its passage, does not sign or
disapprove an ordinance or resolution so presented to the Mayor, such ordinance
or resolution shall take effect in the same manner as if the Mayor had signed
it within the time specified. When the Mayor has disapproved an ordinance or
resolution or an item of it as herein provided, the Council may, but not later
than its next regular meeting, reconsider the ordinance or resolution or part
thereof disapproved by the Mayor. If, upon such reconsideration, the ordinance,
resolution, or item is approved by an affirmative vote of a two-thirds (2/3)
vote of the members of Council, such ordinance or resolution shall take effect,
notwithstanding the disapproval of the Mayor.
   C.   Executive. The Mayor shall be chief executive officer of the City,
responsible for carrying out and fulfilling the intent and purpose of any and
all legislation duly passed by Council. The Mayor shall supervise the
administration of all the affairs of the City and the conduct and
administration of all departments and divisions thereof, except the Council and
as otherwise provided in this Charter.
   The Mayor shall be the chief conservator of the peace within the City and
shall see that all laws, resolutions, and ordinances are enforced therein.
   The Mayor shall be the contracting officer of the City and shall award and
execute all contracts on behalf of the City (except as otherwise provided in
this Charter and except that Council may also authorize contracts). When
awarding contracts, the Mayor shall follow the procedures established by
Council by ordinance or resolution, which procedures may include but shall not
be limited to matters pertaining to competitive bidding. The Mayor shall follow
the procedures established by the general laws of the State of Ohio until
Council shall provide for such procedures by ordinance or resolution.
   The Mayor shall, unless otherwise provided by ordinance, or other provisions
of this Charter, execute on behalf of the City all authorized conveyances,
evidences of indebtedness, and all other instruments to which the City is a
party and shall, where required, attach thereto the official seal of this
office, which shall be the Seal of the City.
   The Mayor shall keep the Council advised of the condition and needs of the
City and shall recommend to the Council such measures as they may deem
necessary or expedient for the safety and welfare of the City. During the month
of January of each year, the Mayor shall prepare and present to Council, a
State of the City report, summarizing the accomplishments of the preceding
year, together with proposed programs for succeeding years.
   The Mayor shall, except for the individual elected or appointed as the
Director of Law, and except where this Charter provides that others shall
perform such function, appoint and remove all directors of city departments and
all subordinate officers and employees in the city departments, subject to the
provisions of paragraph D below, and the civil service provisions of this
Charter.
   The Mayor shall be the official and ceremonial head of the City.
   The Mayor shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this
Charter or required of them by Council.
   Pursuant to the general laws of the State of Ohio, the Mayor shall submit,
and Council shall adopt, with or without revision, the tax budget and annual
and other appropriation measures at the times fixed by the general laws.
   The operating and capital needs of the City shall be considered in the
budget and appropriation measures. The Mayor shall cause such other reports to
be prepared as the Mayor shall determine to be necessary or as requested by
Council.
   D.   Appointment: Confirmation of Directors and Other Employees. Except as
set forth in Section 6.4 of this Charter, the Mayor shall appoint, or engage
pursuant to contract, persons who shall serve as Directors of the city
administrative departments. Such persons shall be subject to confirmation by a
majority vote of the members of Council and shall serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor and Council. Such Directors may be removed by the Mayor upon approval of
a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members of Council.
   Subject to the general and Civil Service provisions of this Charter, the
Mayor shall appoint all employees of the City unless this Charter denies the
appointing power to the Mayor or grants the appointing power to another office
or body.
   E.   Appointment of Members of Boards, Commissions and Other Bodies. Unless
otherwise provided and subject to the provisions of this Charter, the Mayor
shall appoint all members of City Boards, Commissions, and other bodies.
(Amended October 13, 2020)
§ 3.4 VACANCY IN THE OFFICE OF MAYOR.
   A.   Temporary Vacancy. When the Mayor is temporarily absent from the City
or is temporarily unable for any reason to perform the duties of the office,
the President of Council shall act as Mayor, with all the duties, rights and
powers of the Mayor during the period of the Mayor’s absence or inability to
perform the Mayor’s duties. If both the Mayor and the President of Council are
temporarily absent or unable to perform their duties, the Vice President of
Council shall act as Mayor. When the President or Vice President of Council
shall become acting mayor, in accordance with the provisions of this section,
the acting mayor shall not cease to be a Council member.
   B.   Permanent Vacancy. In the event of the death, disqualification, recall,
removal, or resignation of the Mayor, the President of Council shall thereupon
become Mayor and shall serve until a successor is elected and qualified. In the
event the President of Council shall decline the office of Mayor, the President
of Council shall remain as President of Council. The Council shall then appoint
a Council member to fill the vacancy in the office of Mayor. Such appointment
shall be made by an affirmative vote of a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members
of Council. In this event the President of Council or another Council member
shall become Mayor, in accordance with the provisions of this section shall not
cease to be a Council member and shall retain full voting privileges.
   C.   Election to Fill Permanent Vacancy. In the event of a permanent vacancy
in the office of Mayor as set forth in Section 3.4 B., Council shall schedule a
special election to fill the vacancy, provided that such election shall occur
more than ninety (90) days subsequent to the vacancy and at least ninety (90)
days prior to the next regular Municipal election following the vacancy.
Council shall establish filing deadlines at the time of setting the date for
the election which shall provide candidates no less than thirty (30) days to
prepare and file petitions of candidacy.
   D.   Primary Election to Fill Permanent Vacancy. In the event that four (4)
or more persons file petitions of candidacy to fill the vacancy, Council shall
schedule a special primary election at least thirty (30) days prior to the date
of election scheduled pursuant to Section 3.4 C. The two persons receiving the
highest vote totals in the special primary election shall be designated
candidates for such office.
   E.   Term of Office. The person newly elected Mayor pursuant to Section 3.4
C. and D. shall assume office immediately upon certification of the results of
the election by the Summit County Board of Elections and shall serve as Mayor
for the unexpired term of the Mayor in whose office the vacancy occurred.
   F.   Miscellaneous. The full-time requirement for the Mayor set forth in
Section 3.2 shall not apply to the Council member who temporarily fills the
office of Mayor pursuant to Section 3.4 A. or Section 3.4 B.
   The Council member who temporarily fills the office of Mayor pursuant to
Section 3.4 A. or Section 3.4 B. shall not be entitled to receive the current
salary of the Mayor but shall continue to be compensated in accordance with the
current rate for that person’s position on Council.
(Amended November 2, 1999)
ARTICLE IV. COUNCIL
§ 4.1 COMPOSITION AND TERMS OF OFFICE.
   Council shall be composed of seven (7) members. One (1) member shall be
elected by the electors of each of four (4) wards herein provided and three (3)
members shall be elected by the electors of the City at-large. The members
elected from wards shall be known as Ward Councilmembers. The members elected
from the City at large shall be known as Councilmembers At Large.
   All Members of Council shall have the same rights, powers, and
responsibilities, subject to the provisions of Section
4.13 of this Charter.
   The term of a Council member shall be four (4) years, beginning January 1
next following a Council member’s election, and a Council member shall hold
office until their successor is elected and qualified.
   Council terms shall be staggered. Ward Council members shall be elected
every four (4) years beginning with the regular Municipal election occurring in
November 1993. Council members At Large shall be elected every four (4) years
beginning with the regular Municipal election occurring in November 1995.
   A Council member may serve for two (2) successive four (4) year terms, after
which they shall be ineligible for re-election or reappointment as a Council
member until a period of not less than four (4) years shall have elapsed. Any
partial term to fill a vacancy lasting more than two (2) years shall count as a
four (4) year term, and against the limit.
(Amended November 5, 2019)
§ 4.2 WARDS.
   The City shall be divided into four (4) wards, which shall be as nearly
equal in population as is practicable. In the absence of more restrictive case
law to the contrary, the population in the largest and the smallest among the
wards shall not vary by more than twenty percent (20%) of the population of the
smallest ward. Each ward shall be composed of contiguous and compact territory
bounded by streets, roads, streams, railroads, and/or census block lines.
   Council shall have the power to change ward boundaries but shall not have
the power to change the number of wards. After each recurring United States
census, but more often if Council finds it necessary because of population
changes, Council shall re-draw the boundaries of the four (4) wards subject to
the population requirement of this section.
§ 4.3 QUALIFICATIONS.
   Immediately prior to their election or appointment, each Council member
shall be a qualified elector of the City of Green, and, for at least two (2)
continuous years immediately prior to each Council member’s election or
appointment, a resident of the City of Green. (Amended November 5, 2019) During
a Council member’s term, the Council member shall remain a resident and
qualified elector of the City if elected at-large, or of the ward from which
the Council member was elected, if elected from a single ward.
   A Council member shall not be otherwise employed by the City and shall hold
no other public office than that of Notary Public or member of the Ohio
National Guard or Reserve Corps of the United States.
(Amended November 3, 1998; November 2, 1999)
§ 4.4 POWERS.
   All legislative powers of the City and other powers granted to Council under
this Charter, together with all such powers conferred upon municipalities by
the Constitution and laws of the State of Ohio, shall be vested in Council.
§ 4.5 OFFICERS.
   At the organizational meeting of Council in January of each year as provided
by this Charter, Council shall by simple majority vote, elect from among its
members a President of Council, and a Vice President of Council, each to serve
for a term of one (1) year.
   Any Council member so elected may serve for two (2) consecutive one (1) year
terms, after which they shall be ineligible for reelection to either of these
Council offices until a period of not less than one (1) year has elapsed.
   The President of Council, or, in their absence, the Vice President of
Council, shall preside at all meetings of Council. The President and Vice
President of Council, by virtue of holding these offices, shall not be deprived
of their powers and rights or be relieved of any of their duties or obligations
as members of Council.
§ 4.6 VACANCIES.
   Whenever the office of a Council member shall become vacant for any reason,
whether occurring by death, disqualification, recall, removal, or resignation,
such vacancy shall be filled by a majority vote of the remaining members of
Council from among qualified electors making application in accordance with the
provisions set forth below. Except as provided below, Council shall fill the
vacancy not less than thirty (30) days, nor more than forty-five (45) days
after it occurs. If the Council shall fail to fill the vacancy within forty-
five (45) days after it has occurred, the power of Council to do so shall
lapse, and the Mayor shall make an appointment to fill the vacancy, from among
qualified electors making application in accordance with the provisions set
forth below. (Amended November 6, 2012) Such appointee shall have
qualifications as specified in Section
4.3 for a candidate for election to the office that has become vacant. Such
appointee shall hold office for the balance of the unexpired term of the member
in whose office the vacancy has occurred, or until the beginning of the term of
a successor duly elected for the unexpired term at the next regular Municipal
election held following the vacancy in said office, further provided that said
election shall occur more than ninety (90) days subsequent to the vacancy in
said office. The Council member newly elected pursuant to this provision shall
assume office on January 1 following the Council member’s election and shall
serve for the unexpired term of the Council member in whose office the vacancy
occurred.
   In the event a vacancy shall occur in the office of a Council member between
a November General Election and December 31 of that year, the above time
periods to fill the vacancy shall be tolled and, therefore, not begin to run,
until January 1 of the following year. (Amended November 5, 2019)
   Applicants for a Ward Council member vacancy shall submit a letter of
qualifications together with petitions signed by fifty (50) electors of the
ward in which the vacancy occurred. A person applying for a Council member At
Large vacancy shall submit a letter of qualifications together with petitions
signed by seventy-five (75) electors of the City at-large. The date of
petition, and the dates of all signatures on such petitions, shall be after the
date of vacancy in the office for which the petitions are being submitted.
   Any vacancy in the office of President of Council, whether occurring by
death, disqualification, recall, removal, resignation, or by succession to the
office of Mayor, shall be filled by the Vice President of Council for the
remainder of the unexpired term of President of Council. The vacancy so created
in the office of Vice President of Council shall be filled by a Council member
elected by the majority of the remaining members of Council, without first
appointing a replacement Council member. The successor shall hold office for
the balance of the unexpired term of Vice President of Council. If the vacancy
created by the accession of Vice President of Council shall not be filled by
the Council within thirty (30) days from the date such vacancy occurs, the
power of Council to do so shall lapse, and the Mayor shall appoint one (1) of
the remaining members of Council to fill this vacancy.
§ 4.7 ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING.
   Within the first seven (7) days of January of each year, Council shall meet
for the purpose of organization. The Mayor, or a person appointed by the Mayor,
shall call this meeting and shall preside as temporary chairman only until the
President of Council shall be elected.
§ 4.8 REGULAR AND SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   After the organizational meeting, Council shall meet at such times as may be
prescribed by its rules, regulations, by-laws, or by resolution or ordinance,
except that it shall hold regularly scheduled meetings at least once during
each calendar month. Such Council meetings shall be known as regular meetings.
All other Council meetings shall be known as special meetings.
   Special meetings of the Council may be called as provided by its rules,
regulations, by-laws, or by resolution or ordinance. In the absence of any such
provisions, special meetings may be called by a vote of Council taken at any
regular or special meeting thereof or shall be called by the Clerk of Council
upon the written request of the Mayor or the President of Council, or by any
three (3) members of Council. Notice in writing of each special meeting called
at the request of the Mayor or the President of Council, or by three (3)
members of Council, shall state the date and time of the meeting and subject or
subjects to be considered at such meeting. No subject or subjects, other than
those listed in this written notice shall be considered at such special
meetings. The written notice required by this section shall be served by the
Clerk of Council upon the Mayor and each Council member, either personally or
by leaving a copy thereof at their usual place of residence, not less than
twenty-four (24) hours proceeding the time for the meeting. In the event that a
special meeting is called by a vote of Council taken at any regular or special
meeting from which any Council member was absent, written notice of such
special meeting shall be given such absentee in the manner provided here.
   Service of such notice may be waived by an instrument in writing signed
prior to the hour of such meeting, and the Mayor and any Council member shall
be deemed conclusively to have waived such notice by their attendance at any
such meeting.
   All regular and special meetings of Council shall be held at the City
administration building or at such other places in the City as Council may
direct, providing that notice of the change in location shall be posted at the
administration building no later than one (1) hour prior to the meeting.
§ 4.9 LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURES.
   A.   Quorum and Rules. A majority of Council shall constitute a quorum to
conduct business, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time and compel
the attendance of absent members in such manner and under such penalties as may
be prescribed by resolution or ordinance.
   Council shall adopt, and publish in written form, its own rules,
regulations, or by-laws and shall keep minutes of all its proceedings. The
rules, regulations, by-laws, and journal shall be open for public inspection at
all reasonable times. The vote on any ordinance or resolution shall be by roll
call, and the vote of each Council member shall be recorded upon the journal of
Council.
   B.   Resolutions and Ordinances. All legislative action of Council shall be
by resolution or ordinance introduced in written form whether electronic or
printed. Each proposed resolution or ordinance shall contain no more than one
subject, which subject shall be clearly expressed in its title. This rule shall
not apply to appropriation measures that contain the various subjects and
accounts for which moneys are to be appropriated and codification or re-
codification of ordinances and resolutions.
   No resolution or ordinance shall be revised or amended unless the resolution
or ordinance superseding it contains the entire resolution or ordinance as
revised or amended, or the section or sections so revised or amended. The
original resolution or ordinance, or section or sections thereof, shall be
considered to be repealed.
   An affirmative vote of a simple majority of the members of Council shall be
required for the enactment of every resolution or ordinance, unless a larger
number be required by the provisions of this Charter. Every resolution and
every ordinance shall be read at three (3) different regular Council meetings,
unless any or all readings are dispensed with by a three-fourths (3/4) vote of
the members of Council. Ordinances and resolutions shall be deemed to have been
read if a written or printed copy of the ordinance or resolution shall have
been furnished to each Council member prior to its introduction and if the
title thereof is fully read, provided that such ordinance or resolution shall
be read in full if so directed by motion approved by affirmative vote of a
simple majority of Council.
   Each resolution or ordinance providing for:
      1.   The appropriation of money; or
      2.   Improvements petitioned for by a majority of the owners of the
adjacent property to be benefited and specially assessed therefor; or
      3.   Any emergency resolution or ordinance necessary for the immediate
preservation of public peace, health, welfare, or safety; shall take effect,
unless a later date be specified therein, upon its passage and approval by the
Mayor, or upon the expiration of the time within which it may be vetoed by the
Mayor, or upon its passage over veto by the Mayor, as the case may be.
   No other resolution or ordinance shall become effective until thirty (30)
days after its passage and approval by the Mayor, or upon the expiration of the
time within which it may be vetoed by the Mayor, or upon its passage over veto
by the Mayor, as the case may be.
   No action of Council authorizing:
      1.   The surrender or joint exercise of any of its powers; or
      2.   The granting of any franchise; or
      3.   The enactment, amendment, or repeal of any zoning or building
resolution or ordinance; or
      4.   An increase of utility rates; or
      5.   The changing of any ward boundaries; or
      6.   Any change in the boundaries of the City; shall be taken until a
public hearing on said action shall have occurred, no later than seven (7) days
before final enactment by Council.
   No retroactive utility rate increases shall be authorized by Council.
   C.   Committee Deliberations. All proposed ordinances and resolutions,
except those of a purely ceremonial nature, and those of a procedural nature,
shall be referred by the President of Council to one (1) or more of the
standing committees of Council as appropriate to the subject matter, unless
this requirement is waived by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of
Council.
   The committee(s) shall consider the proposed legislative action separately
and/or jointly and shall report their recommendations to Council for final
disposition.
   The recommendations reported by such committee(s) shall be in writing and
shall be accompanied by the original documents, if any, upon which such report
is based. Such report and supporting documentation shall be entered or referred
to upon the journal of Council.
   If any matter referred to committee has not been reported upon for two (2)
successive regular Council meetings, such matter may be brought before Council,
with or without an accompanying committee report, upon the vote of a two-thirds
(2/3) vote of the members of Council.
   Nothing in this provision shall preclude any standing committee from
proposing an ordinance or resolution on their own initiative. Intentional
failure to follow this section pertaining to committees which results in gross
abuse of corporate power shall invalidate any action taken by the Council as a
whole.
§ 4.10 EMERGENCY PROCEDURES.
   A.   Each emergency resolution and ordinance shall contain a statement of
the necessity for such emergency action, and its enactment shall require the
affirmative vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the members of Council.
   B.   No such action of Council authorizing:
      1.   The surrender or joint exercise of any of its powers; or
      2.   The granting of any franchise; or
      3.   The enactment, amendment, or repeal of any zoning or building
resolution or ordinance; or
      4.   An increase of utility rates; or
      5.   The changing of any ward boundaries; or
      6.   Any change in the boundaries of the City;
shall be taken as an emergency measure unless authorized by a three-fourths (3/
4) vote of the members of Council.
§ 4.11 PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   Council shall have the power to determine the method of publication of its
adopted ordinances and resolutions, and of any other of its proceedings, which
other proceedings it deems proper to publish. Such publication shall be by
posting for a minimum period of two (2) weeks, the ordinance and resolution in
at least five (5) public places within the City, and the publication of a
concise summary of the ordinance or resolution in at least any one (1)
newspaper of general circulation in the City once a week for two (2)
consecutive weeks. Until such time as Council provides for the method of
publication, such public notice shall be given in the manner provided by the
general laws of the State of Ohio.
§ 4.12 CLERK OF COUNCIL.
   The Clerk of Council shall be appointed by Council and shall serve at the
pleasure of Council. The Clerk of Council shall keep the journal of Council, an
accurate and complete record of all proceedings of Council; authenticate by
their signature and have custody of all laws, ordinances, and resolutions of
Council; have custody of all official documents, reports, papers, and files of
Council; and perform other such duties as Council shall require.
(Amended October 13, 2020)
   The Clerk may also hold another municipal appointive office within the
classified or unclassified service of the City but shall not hold any municipal
elective office while serving as Clerk of Council.
   During the temporary absence or disability of the Clerk of Council, Council
shall by affirmative vote of a simple majority of its members appoint a like-
qualified individual to perform the duties of that office.
§ 4.13 COMPENSATION AND BONDS.
   Council shall fix the compensation of the Mayor, members of Council, and
each officer and employee, or member of any board or commission of the City,
whether elected or appointed, except as specifically otherwise provided in this
Charter. Not less than thirty (30) days prior to the final date for filing
nominating petitions for the primary election, in years of a regular Municipal
Election, Council shall fix the compensation of the Mayor and all members of
Council for the two (2) year period commencing January 1 of the following year.
Such compensation shall not thereafter be changed with respect to such period.
Neither the Mayor, nor any Council member, shall benefit from an increase in
compensation while serving within the term of office in which an increase was
approved. The compensation of every other officer, employee, and member of any
board or commission of the City, as fixed by Council, may at any time be
changed by ordinance or resolution of Council.
   The Mayor, Finance Director, and such other officers, employees, or members
of any board or commission as Council may require, shall give bond in such
amount and with such surety as may be approved by Council. The premium on such
bonds shall be paid by the City.
§ 4.14 FRANCHISES.
   Council may by ordinance grant an exclusive franchise to any person, firm,
or corporation to construct or operate a public utility on, across, under, or
above any public street or public real estate within the City for a period not
in excess of twenty-five (25) years. Council may prescribe in any such
ordinance the kind or quality of service or product to be furnished, the rate
or rates to be charged therefor, and such other terms as it shall deem
beneficial to the public interest. The right of Council to grant such franchise
shall be limited by the provisions of Section
4.9 and Section
4.10 of this Charter.
   Such franchise may be amended or renewed in the manner and subject to the
provisions established here for original grants.
   All such grants, amendments, and renewals shall be made subject to the
continuing right of Council to provide reasonable regulations for the operation
of such utilities with reference to such streets and public real estate,
including the right to require such reconstruction, relocation, alteration, or
removal of structures and equipment used in such streets or public real estate
as shall, in the opinion of Council, be required by the public interest.
§ 4.15 COUNCIL RELATIONSHIP TO ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS.
   Neither Council, nor any of its committees, nor any of its several members,
shall in any manner take part in the discipline of, or give orders to, any
subordinates and employees in the administrative service of the City
responsible to the Mayor, but must deal directly with the Mayor. Council may
inquire into the conduct of any office or department and into the performance
of any contract or any of the affairs of the City.
ARTICLE V. NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
§ 5.1 EFFECT OF STATE LAW.
   All elections in the City shall be nonpartisan, without party affiliation
appearing on the ballot. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the laws
of the State of Ohio shall govern the nomination and election of the elective
officers of the City. Elections shall be held and conducted, and the results
thereof ascertained and certified, as provided by the general laws of the State
of Ohio, and by the election authorities and procedure provided by law.
§ 5.2 REGULAR, PRIMARY, AND SPECIAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
   Municipal elections for the purpose of the election of officers provided for
in this Charter shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in
November in odd numbered years. Elections so held shall be known as regular
Municipal elections. An election conducted for the purpose of nominating
persons as candidates for elective office as provided in this Charter, to be
voted upon at the next regular Municipal election, shall be known as a primary
election. Other elections shall be held as may be required by law or provided
for in this Charter. Such other elections shall be known as special Municipal
elections. At any time, by resolution, the Council may order a special
Municipal election, the purpose of which shall be set forth in the resolution.
§ 5.3 NOMINATIONS.
   There shall be no primary election for a municipal office unless the number
of persons filing nominating petitions exceeds one (1) more than two (2) times
the number of offices available for nomination. For the office of Mayor, there
shall be no primary election unless four (4) or more persons file nominating
petitions.
   For the office of Council member At Large, if there are three (3) offices
available, there shall be no Primary Election unless eight (8) or more persons
file a nominating petition.
   For the office of a Ward Council member, there shall be no primary election
for such ward unless four (4) or more persons file a nominating petition for
such ward.
   For purposes of this provision affecting the necessity for a primary
election, the term “nominating petition” shall include only those petition and
nomination papers which the Board of Elections shall have reviewed, examined,
and certified as to their sufficiency and validity.
   In the event it is necessary to hold a primary election, such nonpartisan
primary election shall be held in the City on the first Tuesday after the first
Monday in May prior to such Municipal election. Those persons receiving the
highest vote totals, and equal in number to twice the number of offices for
which such election is held, shall be designated candidates for such office,
subject to applicable provisions of this Charter. Each candidate shall file a
separate petition. Group petitions shall not be used for any elective office in
the City.
   Forms provided by the Board of Elections, if appropriate, or by the City,
for the nomination of nonpartisan candidates for such office, shall be used and
filed with the Board of Elections as required by state law.
(Amended November 3, 1998)
§ 5.4 NOMINATING PETITIONS.
   Although a primary election may not be necessary, as provided by this
Charter, each person desiring to become a candidate for nomination for any City
office shall, not later than 4:00 p.m. of the ninetieth (90th) day before the
date set by Section
5.3 of this Charter, file with the Board of Elections, a nominating petition
and a petition requiring signatures of registered electors as follows: not less
than fifty (50) nor more than one-hundred fifty (150) for the office of Ward
Council member; not less than seventy-five (75) nor more than two-hundred
twenty-five (225) for the office of Council member At Large; not less than one-
hundred fifty (150) nor more than three-hundred fifty (350) for the office of
Mayor; and not less than seventy-five (75) nor more than two-hundred twenty-
five (225) for the office of the Director of Law.
(Amended November 5, 2019)
   Such petitions may contain the names and addresses of five (5) registered
electors of the City designated in advance by the candidate as a nominating
committee. Such committee may fill vacancies caused by the death or withdrawal
of the candidate as set forth in this section of the Charter.
   If a person nominated by petition, in accordance with this section of the
Charter, for the offices of Mayor Council member or Director of Law, and who
faces a nonpartisan primary contest for nomination by the electorate, should
die or withdraw due to illness or loss of elector status not less than thirty-
five (35) days before the day of such primary election, the vacancy so created
may be filled only by the nominating committee designated in the nominating
petition of such affected candidate.
   If a person is either nominated in the primary election as a candidate at
the next regular Municipal election for one (1) of the offices named in this
section, or certified as a candidate for the next regular Municipal election
without the necessity of a primary election in accordance with the provisions
of this Article, and such candidate dies or withdraws due to illness or loss of
elector status not less than thirty-five (35) days before such regular
Municipal election, the vacancy so created may be filled only by the nominating
committee of five (5) persons designated in the nominating petition filed by
the affected candidate prior to the Primary Election.
   To fill the vacancy created by the death or withdrawal of a candidate for
any of the offices named in this section, a majority of the members of the
nominating committee designated by the nominating petition of the affected
candidate shall file with the Board of Elections, not less than thirty (30)
days before either the primary election, or the regular Municipal election, a
sworn, notarized statement, signed by a minimum of three (3) members of such
committee, designating the person they select to fill such vacancy. Such
statement must be accompanied by the written acceptance of the person so
certified as their candidate choice.
(Amended November 3, 1998)
ARTICLE VI. CITY DEPARTMENTS
§ 6.1 ESTABLISHMENT OF CITY DEPARTMENTS.
   A.   The following departments are hereby created and established by this
Charter:
      1.   Department of Finance
      2.   Department of Law
      3.   Department of Planning
      4.   Department of Public Safety
      5.   Department of Public Service
   Council may create additional departments as necessary.
(Amended November 8, 2005) (Moved for clarification purposes per 2019-R52
adopted 8/27/19 by City Council as a non-substantive change)
   B.   Abolishment of City Departments. Council may consolidate, divide and
re-assign the operating divisions of the departments created by this Charter or
by Council to assure operating and management efficiently. Council may not
abolish a department created by this Charter but may abolish a city department
created by Council.
§ 6.2 DIRECTORS.
   Each city department shall be headed by a director (hereinafter, a
“Director”). The qualifications, education, and experience of each Director,
excepting that of the Director of Law, shall be certified by the Director of
Law and no binding offer of employment may be made to a Director appointee
prior to such certification.
(Amended November 8, 2005)
   Council shall have the responsibility for the development of job
descriptions for all Director positions created by this Charter or Council.
Such job descriptions shall indicate specific job duties, organizational
responsibilities, and limits of authority.
   Directors appointed by the Mayor pursuant to this Charter shall require a
majority vote of approval by Council and shall serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor and Council.
   Except as otherwise specified in this Charter, the dismissal of a Director
shall require a two-thirds (2/3) vote of Council in concurrence.
(Amended November 5, 2019)
§ 6.3 DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.
   A.   Qualifications. The Director of Finance shall have:
      1.   An undergraduate degree in accounting or a related field, including
a minimum of twenty-four (24) semester hours or thirty-six (36) quarter hours
of accounting, taxation, and/or auditing courses;
      2.   A minimum of five (5) years’ experience in accounting which includes
a minimum of two (2) years’ experience in the practice and/or auditing of
municipal or governmental accounting; and
      3.   A minimum of two (2) years management or supervisory experience.
   B.   Powers and Duties. The Director of Finance shall:
      1.   Be the fiscal officer of the City;
      2.   Be responsible for the collection, disbursement, and custody of all
funds and shall establish and maintain those records and procedures necessary
to perform his duties;
      3.   Perform such other functions as may be assigned by ordinance or
resolution or by order of the Mayor; and
      4.   Perform all other duties performed by city treasurers and city
auditors under the general laws of the State of Ohio.
§ 6.4 DIRECTOR OF LAW.
   A.   Qualifications. The Director of Law shall:
      1.   Be an attorney who is licensed, during the term of the Director of
Law’s appointment, to practice law in the State of Ohio;
      2.   Have a minimum of five (5) years of employment or public practice
experience in municipal and/or other governmental law (Amended November 8,
2005); and
      3.   For a Director of Law first elected or appointed after January 1,
2020 shall:
         (a)   For at least two (2) continuous years immediately prior to the
Director of Law’s election or appointment, and, during the Director of Law’s
term, be a qualified elector and resident of the City;
         (b)   Be an attorney who is licensed, during the term of the Director
of Law’s election or appointment, to practice law in the State of Ohio and
maintain the qualifications for a Certificate of Good Standing from the Supreme
Court of Ohio during the term of the Director of Law’s appointment or election
to office (Amended November 5, 2019); and
         (c)   Have a minimum of five (5) years of employment or public
practice experience in municipal and/or other governmental law.
(Amended November 8, 2005)
   For the purposes of Section 6.4 A. 3. (c), “employment or public practice
experience in municipal and/or other governmental law” shall mean either (i)
experience as a director of law or assistant director of law for an Ohio
municipality, or substantially equivalent position for the State of Ohio or one
of its political subdivisions or agencies, or (ii) substantially equivalent
experience as an attorney representing the State of Ohio or one or more of its
instrumentalities, municipalities, political subdivisions or agencies in civil
matters, including but not limited to representation of such entities in state
or federal court or agency proceedings.
   The Director of Law shall not otherwise be employed by the City and shall
hold no other public office other than that of a notary public, member of the
Ohio National Guard or Reserve Corps of the United States.
   The Director of Law shall be a part-time or full-time position with such
compensation (and benefits, if any) as fixed by ordinance or resolution of
Council as provided herein.
   If required by ordinance or resolution of Council, the Director of Law shall
certify to the Director of Finance on a biweekly or other periodic basis
determined by Council that the Director of Law has complied with the workweek
requirements as set forth by ordinance or resolution of Council.
(Amended November 5, 2019)
   B.   Powers and Duties. The Director of Law shall:
      1.   Be the legal advisor on all legal matters coming before the City and
shall represent or direct the representation of the City in all litigation,
cases, or suits coming before the City;
      2.   Prepare or review all contracts, ordinances, resolutions, and other
documents or instruments as required by the Mayor and Council;
      3.   Have other powers and duties performed by directors of law of
general statutory plan cities under the general laws of the State of Ohio; and
      4.   Perform other duties specified by city solicitors by the laws of the
State of Ohio.
   Nothing in this Charter shall preclude the City from contracting for
additional legal services as may be periodically required.
   C.   Election; Term of Office. The Director of Law shall represent the City
in accordance with the ethical standards for Ohio attorneys as set forth in the
Ohio Rules for Professional Conduct adopted by the Supreme Court of Ohio. In
the event there is a conflict of interest, the conflict shall be resolved in
accordance with the Ohio Rules for Professional Conduct adopted by the Supreme
Court of Ohio. The Director of Law shall be an elector of the City of Green and
the position shall be an elected position to coincide with the election of the
Mayor unless an election is required to fill a vacancy in the office of the
Director of Law as provided in Section 6.4.D. of this Charter. The Director of
Law shall serve a four-year term not to exceed two consecutive elected terms
but may be appointed in the event of a vacancy pursuant to Section 6.4(D) of
this Charter. Any partial term to fill a vacancy shall not count as a four (4)
year term with respect to the foregoing term limits.
   The Director of Law shall be nominated pursuant to Sections 5.3 and 5.4 of
the Charter in the same manner as the Mayor requiring the same number of
signatures as Council members at Large. (Issue 14, 2018 General Election) For
the office of the Director of Law, there shall be no primary election unless
four (4) or more persons file nominating petitions.
(Amended November 5, 2019)
   D.   Vacancy in Office. Whenever the office of the Director of Law shall
become vacant for any reason, whether occurring by death, disqualification,
recall, removal, or resignation, such vacancy shall be filled by a three-
fourths (3/4ths) majority vote of Council from among qualified electors making
application in accordance with the provisions set forth below.
   Council shall fill the vacancy not less than thirty (30) days, nor more than
forty-five (45) days after it occurs. In the event a vacancy shall occur in the
office of the Director of Law between a November General Election and December
31 of that year, the above time periods to fill the vacancy shall be tolled
and, therefore, not begin to run, until January 1 of the following year.
   If Council shall fail to fill the vacancy within said forty-five (45) day
period, the power of Council to do so shall lapse, and the Mayor may make an
appointment to fill the vacancy, from among qualified electors making
application in accordance with the provisions set forth below or fill the
vacancy as an interim or acting appointment.
   Such appointee shall have the qualifications as specified in Section 6.4.A.
of this Charter for a candidate for election to the office of Director of Law,
except that an interim or acting appointee need not be an elector of the City.
An appointee, other than an appointee subject to Section 3.3.D. of the Charter,
shall hold office for the balance of the unexpired term, or until the beginning
of the term of a successor duly elected for the unexpired term at the next
regular Municipal election held following the vacancy in said office, further
provided that said election shall occur more than ninety (90) days subsequent
to the vacancy in said office.
   The Director of Law newly elected pursuant to this provision shall assume
office the following January 1.
   Applicants for a Director of Law vacancy shall submit a letter of
qualifications together with petitions signed by a minimum of seventy-five (75)
electors of the City at-large. The date of petition, and the dates of all
signatures on such petitions, shall be after the date of vacancy in the office
for which the petitions are being submitted.
(Amended November 5, 2019; Amended October 13, 2020)
§ 6.5 DIRECTOR OF PLANNING.
   A.   Qualifications. The Director of Planning shall have a minimum of five
(5) years’ experience in the area of planning and community development.
   B.   Powers and Duties. The powers and duties of the Director of Planning
shall include the following:
      1.   Oversee the implementation of the long-range plan developed by the
Planning and Zoning Commission for the orderly and well-managed growth of the
City pursuant to the ordinances and resolutions of the City.
      2.   Oversee and review commercial and residential development to assure
compliance with this long-range plan pursuant to the ordinances and resolutions
of the City.
      3.   Participate in the review of any proposed changes in zoning
ordinances, plotting, subdivision, or other commercial or residential
developments.
      4.   Attend Planning Commission meetings and function as a liaison
between the Mayor, Council, and the Planning Commission.
      5.   Interface with contractors and developers in the City’s review and
approval of plans for commercial or residential construction.
      6.   The Department shall include the Zoning and Inspection Division.
§ 6.6 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY.
   A.   Composition. The Mayor shall serve as Director of Public Safety until
such time as Council provides, by ordinance, for the separation of the two (2)
positions.
   B.   Powers and Duties. The Director of Public Safety shall oversee all
matters relating to public safety, including police, fire, and emergency
medical services.
§ 6.7 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SERVICE.
   A.   Qualifications. The Director of Public Service shall be selected on the
basis of their administrative and executive qualifications. The Director of
Public Service shall have a minimum of five (5) years management or supervisory
experience.
   B.   Powers and Duties. The Director of Public Service shall make all the
necessary rules and regulations for the governing of the Department of Public
Service and the operation of the divisions thereof. The Department shall
include, but not be limited to, divisions of Cemeteries, Custodial Services,
Health and Environment, Highways and Parks and Recreation.
ARTICLE VII. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§ 7.1 ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
   The following boards and commissions are hereby created and established as
City Boards and Commissions:
   A.   Civil Service Commission
   B.   Parks and Recreation Board
   C.   Planning and Zoning Commission
   D.   Zoning Board of Appeals
§ 7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   All persons appointed to any city board or commission must be qualified
electors of the City.
   No voting member of a City board or commission shall be an elected or
appointed official, officer, or employee of the City.
   Members of the City boards and commissions shall serve without compensation
unless expressly provided for by other provisions of this Charter or by
ordinance of Council. Reimbursement for expenses incurred by the members of
City boards and commissions in the performance of their duties shall be
permitted.
   Members of each City board or commission may serve multiple terms.
   Each City board or commission shall appoint a secretary who shall prepare
minutes of each meeting and shall provide copies of same to the Mayor and
President of Council and for public posting at the City administrative offices.
Each city board or commission shall adopt written operating rules and
regulations subject to approval or revision by a simple majority vote of the
members of Council and shall keep a complete journal of its proceedings.
   At the first meeting of each year, each City board or commission shall
select a Chairperson from its appointed members who shall serve for one (1)
year. A member may serve multiple terms as Chairperson.
   A vacancy during the term of any City board or commission member shall be
filled for the remaining unexpired term in the same manner as that vacated
member’s original appointment.
§ 7.3 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION.
   A.   Composition and Term. The Civil Service Commission shall consist of
three (3) members, appointed for staggered terms of six (6) years or until
their successors have been appointed.
   The members of the Civil Service Commission shall be appointed as follows.
One (1) member shall be appointed by the Mayor, one (1) member shall be
appointed by Council, and one (1) member shall be appointed by the Green Local
Board of Education. If the Board of Education shall fail to make its
appointment within thirty (30) days after written notification by the Clerk of
Council, the Mayor shall make that appointment. Members of the Civil Service
Commission shall be persons of recognized competence in personnel
administration, public administration, labor relations, law, or a relevant
field.
   B.   Powers and Duties. The Civil Service Commission shall provide by
written rule for the ascertainment of merit and fitness as the basis for
appointment and promotion in the service of the City, and for appeals from
actions of transfer, reduction, or removal of classified personnel under the
civil service provisions.
   Except as provided in collective bargaining agreements with the City, which
agreements shall govern in event of conflict with the Civil Service Commission
rules and regulations, the municipal Civil Service Commission shall prescribe,
amend and enforce rules and regulations for the classification of positions,
removals, transfers, layoffs, suspensions, reductions and reinstatements, and
for standardizing efficiency in the Civil Service of the City of Green.
   The Civil Service Commission shall provide for examinations and resignations
and for appointments, and promotions within the classified civil service. The
Civil Service Commission may adopt rules and regulations that establish
standards, examination rules and credits, and procedures for appointments and
promotions within the classified civil service that differ from those
established by the Ohio Revised Code as long as such rules and regulations are
reviewed and approved by City Council.
(Amended November 6, 2012)
   C.   Classification of Service. All compensated positions in the service of
the City shall be in the classified service and shall be appointed pursuant to
competitive examination, except the following, which shall comprise the
unclassified service of the City:
   The Mayor and Council members; and
      1.   All administrative department directors; and
      2.   Members of all City boards and commissions; and
      3.   Members of any auxiliary police force or unit, and volunteer or
part-time members of any fire force or division; and
      4.   Consultants and others engaged to provide services as independent
contractors; and
      5.   Temporary employees who are employed for not more than one hundred
eighty (180) days continuously, nor more than one hundred eighty (180) days in
a twelve (12) month period; and
      6.   The Clerk of Council, other employees of Council, and the secretary
of each City board or commission established by this Charter or by ordinance,
provided that if such Clerk, employee, or secretary shall hold other employment
within the classified service of the City. This section shall not exempt such
person from the requirement of competitive examination to hold such other
employment.
   Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, Council may pursuant to
Section
6.2., determine which additional administrative positions shall be considered
classified or unclassified.
(Amended November 3, 1998)
§ 7.4 PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD.
   A.   Composition and Term. The Parks and Recreation Board shall consist of
five (5) members, appointed for staggered terms of five (5) years, or until
their successors have been appointed.
   The members of the Parks and Recreation Board shall be appointed as follows.
Three (3) members shall be appointed by the Mayor, and two (2) members shall be
appointed by Council. The Chairperson of the appropriate committee of Council
shall serve as a non-voting member of the Parks and Recreation Board.
(Amended November 3, 1998)
   B.   Powers and Duties. The Parks and Recreation Board shall advise with
respect to the acquisition, development, maintenance, and operation of the
parks and recreational facilities of the City. The Board shall solicit input
from, provide assistance to, and cooperate with civic, historical, and youth
athletic organizations in providing these services and facilities.
   The Parks and Recreation Board shall serve in an advisory capacity to both
the Mayor and Council. The Parks and Recreation Board shall develop a plan to
provide for the parks and recreational needs of the community and shall oversee
implementation of that plan.
   The Board has no power to commit the expenditure of public moneys except as
expressly provided for by Council. The authority to purchase, sell, lease,
dispose of, or accept as donations, any property or moneys resides in Council.
   Council shall be required to provide an estimate of appropriate moneys for
parks and recreation to the Board no later than November 15 of the year prior
to the year for which moneys are to be appropriated. It shall be the duty of
the Parks and Recreation Board to develop an annual plan for the most effective
and beneficial use of the moneys so appropriated.
§ 7.5 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   A.   Composition and Term. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist
of five (5) members, appointed for staggered terms of five (5) years, or until
their successors have been appointed.
   The members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be appointed by the
Mayor and approved by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members of Council. The
Director of Planning, the Chairman of the Planning Committee of Council, and
one member of the Parks and Recreation Board shall serve as non-voting members
of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   An alternate member shall also be appointed by the Mayor and approved by
two-thirds of the vote of members of Council, for a term of five (5) years, or
until their successor has been appointed.
(Amended November 2, 2010)
   B.   Powers and Duties. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be
responsible for planning the orderly growth and development of the City. The
Commission shall recommend to Council a long-range plan for the City growth and
development.
   The Commission shall conduct studies and make recommendations to Council
concerning any items which require legislative action.
   The Commission shall have those additional powers and duties as prescribed
by ordinance and resolution, and, to the extent not in conflict with this
Charter and the City’s ordinances and resolutions, the Commission may exercise
those powers granted by the law.
   Any legislation to be considered by Council, concerning zoning shall be
brought to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its consideration and
recommendation.
   C.   Role of Alternate Member. The alternate member shall attend all
meetings and will receive the same compensation paid to other members of the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
   The alternate member shall participate in the discussion of any matter
before the Planning and Zoning Commission as if the alternate member was an
active, voting member.
   The alternate member shall only vote on any matter if a Planning and Zoning
Commission member is absent for any reason, including sickness and/or conflict
of interest, however, the alternate member shall not vote if five (5) standing
members of the Planning and Zoning Commission are present and able to vote.
(Amended November 2, 2010)
§ 7.6 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   A.   Composition and Term. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five
(5) members, appointed for staggered terms of five (5) years, or until their
successors have been appointed.
   The members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Mayor
and approved by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members of Council. Members of
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be persons of recognized competence in the
areas of construction, architecture, or real estate.
   B.   Powers and Duties. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Board of Appeals
to hear and decide appeals made for exceptions to and variations from the
application of ordinances, orders, and regulations of City administrative
officials or agencies, governing building and zoning in the City. Such appeals
decisions shall be in conformity with the purpose and intent of such ordinances
and regulations. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have such other duties as
Council may designate.
ARTICLE VIII. FINANCE AND TAXATION
§ 8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   The laws of the State of Ohio relating to budgets, appropriations, taxation,
debts, bonds, assessments, and other fiscal matters of the City shall be
applicable to the City, except as modified or necessarily inconsistent with the
provisions of this Charter, or when provision therefor is made in the
Constitution of the State of Ohio.
§ 8.2 ALLOCATION OF INCOME TAX REVENUES.
   The funds collected under the provisions of any Municipal income tax in the
City shall be deposited in a special fund known as the Income Tax Revenue Fund.
Disbursements of moneys from this fund shall be made as follows:
   A.   First, funds shall be allocated to defray all expenses of collection,
administration, and enforcement of the income tax and the provisions of the
ordinance.
   B.   Second, a minimum of seven percent (7%) of the tax revenues shall be
allocated and assigned to the City parks and recreation program. Such funds
shall be appropriated first to capital expenditures, that is, the purchase of
property, building construction, or other improvements with a life of five (5)
years or longer; provided that if the total expended funds for such capital
expenditures are less than the total funds available for capital expenditures,
up to fifteen percent (15%) of the seven percent (7%) of income tax revenues
available annually may be expended for the City’s parks and recreation special
events and programming. Any unused funds shall, on an annual basis, be assigned
to a fund for use only for future capital expenditures, special events and
programming in support of the City’s parks and recreation program on the same
allocation basis set forth in this Section. (Amended November 6, 2012) This
provision shall be reviewed by the Charter Review Commission as specified in
the time period mandated in Section
9.2.
(Amended November 8, 2005)
   C.   Third, funds shall be allocated as required to defray expenses of the
General Fund of the City.
(Amended November 3, 1998)
§ 8.3 LIMITATION ON TOTAL MUNICIPAL INCOME TAX.
   Where a resident of the City is subject to income tax in another
municipality or joint economic development district such resident shall not pay
City income tax on such income that exceeds the tax imposed at the higher of
the two tax rates.
(Amended November 5, 2019)
§ 8.4 INCOME EXEMPT FROM MUNICIPAL INCOME TAX.
   The following types of income shall be exempt from payment of municipal
income tax:
   A.   Poor relief and welfare payments, unemployment insurance benefits,
private and company sponsored retirement pensions and benefits, public
retirement pensions and benefits and disability benefits from local, state, and
Federal governments and from charitable, religious and educational
organizations.
   B.   Proceeds from insurance paid by reason of death, including pensions and
all disability benefits; annuities and other gratuities from all sources that
are not the result of compensation for services rendered.
   C.   Salaries, wages, and other compensation paid by an employer to a person
under eighteen (18) years of age, who is a full-time student in an accredited
elementary school, middle school, junior high school, high school, college, or
university.
   D.   Insurance payments or other compensation received as the result of
casualty losses or damage to property.
   E.   Income received in the form of child support payments required by a
divorce agreement or by the courts.
   F.   Interest and dividends from intangible property.
   G.   Military pay and allowances received as a member of the armed forces of
the United States.
   H.   The income of all individuals whose gross earned income is three-
thousand ($3,000) dollars per year or less.
   I.   The income of any charitable, religious, scientific, literary,
educational, fraternal, or other non-profit organization as enumerated in Ohio
R.C. 718.01 and which is exempt from payment of real estate taxes.
   J.   The monetary value of all grants, assistantships and scholarships
received by a student attending an accredited college or university.
   K.   Capital gains.
§ 8.5 ESTABLISHMENT OF NEW CITY SERVICES.
   When a function of the City is proposed to be performed for the first time
subsequent to the adoption of this Charter by officers and employees of the
City rather than pursuant to contracts with other governments, persons, or
firms, and the cost of the annual operation and capital requirements would
exceed twenty percent (20%) of the City’s revenues in the prior fiscal year,
which revenues were lawfully available for such function, then Council shall
place the question of whether such function shall be performed by officers and
employees of the City rather than by contract upon the ballot at the next
general, primary, or regular Municipal election to be held within the City. The
Council may cause such an election to be held at a special election on any date
upon a vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the members of Council.
   This Section shall apply to the police and public utility functions. This
Section shall not apply where a three-fourths (3/4) majority of the members of
Council determines that the function must be established due to State or
national law, or where Council determines by a unanimous vote of its members
that such function cannot be provided by contract at a reasonable cost.
   This provision shall not include programs in effect as of the effective date
of this Charter, or those programs established by this Charter.
   This provision shall not preclude Council from contracting with other
governmental or private entities to provide such services on a fee basis.
ARTICLE IX. CHARTER AMENDMENT AND REVIEW
§ 9.1 CHARTER AMENDMENT.
   This Charter may be amended in accordance with the terms and provisions of
the Constitution of the State of Ohio.
   If two (2) or more inconsistent proposed amendments on the same subject
shall be submitted at the same election, only the one (1) of such amendments
receiving the largest affirmative vote, not less than a majority, shall become
a part of this Charter.
§ 9.2 CHARTER REVIEW.
   In January five (5) years after the effective date of this Charter, and in
January every seven (7) years thereafter, the Mayor shall appoint with approval
of a simple majority vote of the members of Council, by January 14, a Charter
Review Commission composed of five (5) electors of the City. The appointees
shall hold no other City elective or appointive office, nor be employed by the
City except on an advisory board.
   All meetings of the Charter Review Commission shall be public. Such
Commission shall select its own Chairperson and Secretary and adopt its own
rules for the conduct of its business. The members of the Commission, unless
otherwise provided by Council, shall serve without compensation, and the term
of the Commission shall end on the day of the next regular Municipal or Ohio
general election occurring at least nine (9) months after their appointments.
   The Charter Review Commission shall, on or before June 12 of the same year,
recommend to Council any alterations, revisions, or amendments to this Charter.
The Council shall publish the recommendations of the Charter Review Commission
in at least any one (1) newspaper of general circulation within the City once a
week for two (2) successive weeks; and, Council shall hold a public hearing on
such recommendations within one (1) week after the second publication thereof.
   The Council shall submit the amendments to the electors at the next regular
Municipal or Ohio general election, unless rejected by a three-fourths (3/4)
vote of the members of Council for each proposed amendment.
(Amended November 3, 1998)
ARTICLE X. INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM, AND RECALL
§ 10.1 INITIATIVE.
   The electors of the City shall have the same right and power to initiate or
propose any ordinance or resolution as is now or may hereafter be provided by
the Constitution and laws of the State of Ohio, except as otherwise provided in
this Charter.
§ 10.2 REFERENDUM.
   The electors of the City shall have the right and power to approve or reject
any ordinance or resolution or other measure passed by Council as is now or may
later be provided by the Constitution and laws of the State of Ohio, except as
provided in this Charter.
   When petitions for referendum are filed, all preliminary actions required
for the issuing of debt may be taken during the period prior to the referendum
election, but no debt instruments shall be sold, issued or delivered until
after the election has been held and the vote is favorable to issuing the debt
instruments.
§ 10.3 RECALL.
   The electors of the City shall have the power to remove any elective officer
of the City by recall election. If an elective officer has served at least six
(6) months of his term, a petition demanding his removal may be filed with the
Clerk of Council. The manner of signing, the method of circulating, the form
and requirements as to the affidavit, and the other requirements of the general
laws of the State of Ohio regulating initiative and referendum laws shall also
apply in the case of recall in the City, except as otherwise provided in this
Charter. Such petition shall contain the name and office of the person whose
removal is sought and a statement, in not more than two-hundred (200) words, of
the grounds for removal. The circulation of such recall petitions is restricted
to qualified electors for the office of the officer sought to be recalled. Such
petition shall be signed by at least twenty percent (20%) of the registered
electors eligible to vote at the last preceding regular Municipal election for
the office of the officer sought to be recalled.
   Within ten (10) days after such petition shall have been filed, the Clerk of
Council shall determine whether or not the petition meets the requirements
hereof. If the Clerk of Council shall find the petition sufficient, he shall
promptly certify same to Council and shall deliver a copy of such certificate
to the officer whose removal is sought and shall make a record of such
delivery. If the officer whose removal is sought does not resign within seven
(7) days after such delivery is made, the Council shall thereupon fix a day for
holding a recall election, not less than forty-five (45) and not more than
sixty (60) days after the date of such refusal to resign.
   At such recall election, this question shall be placed on the ballot: “Shall
(name of officer) be allowed to continue as (name of office)?”, with provision
on the ballot for voting affirmatively or negatively on the question. If a
majority of the votes cast are certified in the affirmative, such officer shall
remain in office and no further recall petition may be filed against him for a
period of two (2) years. If a majority of the votes cast are certified in the
negative, such officer shall be considered as removed, his office shall be
declared vacant, and such vacancy shall be filled as provided in this Charter.
The officer removed by such recall election shall not be eligible for
appointment to the vacancy created thereby, nor shall he be eligible for
appointed office in the City for a period of one (1) year from the date of his
removal.
ARTICLE XI. TRANSITION
Historical Perspective to 1993
(Change in title made by 2005 Charter Review Commission, adopted May 11, 2005)
§ 11.1 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The provisions of this Charter shall be submitted to the voters at the
general election to be held in November 1992. This Charter, if approved at said
election, shall become effective January 1, 1993, except as may otherwise be
provided for in this Charter.
§ 11.2 INITIAL CITY OFFICERS.
   Upon the effective date of this Charter, the Mayor and Council defined under
this Charter shall be composed of the currently serving Mayor and Council of
the Village of Green. Such officers shall continue to be compensated as
previously authorized until Council revises the method or rate of compensation
by ordinance or resolution in accordance with the provisions of this Charter.
   Should any official of the City occupy an elective office by reason of
appointment to fill a vacancy occurring before the effective date of this
Charter, he shall serve as an appointed official until elected, or replaced by
a person elected to fill the unexpired term in accordance with the provisions
of the Charter dealing with vacancies in office.
   These officials shall have all the rights and powers provided herein the
same as if they had been elected under the provisions of this Charter.
   The Mayor, whose term expires on December 31, 1993, shall be replaced by a
Mayor, elected in the regular Municipal election of 1993, and again every four
(4) years hence.
   Those Council members whose terms expire on December 31, 1993, shall be
replaced by four (4) Ward Council members, elected in the regular Municipal
election of 1993, and again every four (4) years hence. Those Council members
whose terms expire on December 31, 1995, shall be replaced by three (3) Council
members At Large elected in the regular Municipal election of 1995, and again
every four (4) years hence.
   The Village of Green Clerk/Treasurer shall continue to serve as Director of
Finance until December 31, 1993.
§ 11.3 ABOLISHMENT OF OFFICES.
   The elected office of Clerk/Treasurer is abolished under the provisions of
this Charter.
§ 11.4 FIRST ELECTION.
   The first election under this Charter shall be the first Tuesday after the
first Monday in the month of November 1993, unless it is necessary, under the
provisions of the Charter, for a primary election which shall be held in
conjunction with the 1993 Ohio primary election.
§ 11.5 CONTINUATION OF EMPLOYEES.
   Upon the effective date of this Charter all individuals lawfully appointed
and employed by the City, shall continue employment with the new City of Green
under the same terms, privileges, duties, and responsibilities, and with no
loss in pay and in the same position to which such employees would normally be
assigned, subject to the following:
   A.   That no civil service, psychological or physical examinations shall be
required of such employees to qualify for initial employment with the new City.
   B.   That nothing in the terms and conditions of this Charter shall be
construed so as to limit the lawful authority of the new City to determine
employment requirements beyond the effective date of this Charter, or to create
any expectancy of employment or re-employment beyond the effective date of this
Charter.
   Any officer or employee who has been in the classified service of the City
for a period of more than ninety (90) days on the effective date of this
Charter or who has been continuously and permanently employed for more than
ninety (90) days in a position which will be included in the classified service
as a result of the adoption of this Charter, shall retain his position until
discharged, reduced, promoted or transferred pursuant to the provisions of
civil service.
§ 11.6 CITY BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
   A.   General Provisions. All current members of existing City Boards and
Commissions shall serve through December 31, 1992. All appointments effective
on or after January 1, 1993, shall be in the manner provided for under the
applicable section of this Charter. The initial meeting of each City board or
commission in 1993 shall be called by the Mayor. The Mayor shall preside at the
initial meeting until a permanent board or commission Chairperson is selected.
   B.   Initial Terms of Office. In order to establish the staggered terms of
office required by this Charter for members of the City boards and commissions,
the initial members of these bodies shall be appointed in the manner prescribed
below. Upon the expiration of each initial term, the responsible appointing
authority shall re-appoint a member for a full term as provided herein.
Vacancies occurring during any member’s initial term shall be filled for the
remaining unexpired initial term in the same manner as the vacated member’s
original appointment.
   C.   Civil Service Commission. The members of the Civil Service Commission,
under this Charter, shall be appointed as follows. The Mayor shall appoint one
(1) member for an initial six (6) year term, the Green Local Board of Education
shall appoint one (1) member for an initial four (4) year term, and Council
shall appoint one (1) member for an initial two (2) year term.
   D.   Parks and Recreation Board. The members of the Parks and Recreation
Board, under this Charter, shall be appointed as follows. The Mayor shall
appoint one (1) member for an initial five (5) year term, and one (1) member
for an initial one (1) year term, the Green Local Board of Education shall
appoint one (1) member for an initial four (4) year term, and one (1) member
for an initial two (2) year term, and Council shall appoint one (1) member for
an initial three (3) year term.
   E.   Planning and Zoning Commission. The members of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, under this Charter, shall be appointed as follows. The Mayor shall
appoint, and Council shall approve, five (5) members, one (1) for an initial
five (5) year term, one (1) for an initial four (4) year term, one (1) for an
initial three (3) year term, one (1) for an initial two (2) year term, and one
(1) for an initial one (1) year term.
   F.   Zoning Board of Appeals. The members of the Zoning Board of Appeals,
under this Charter, shall be appointed as follows. The Mayor shall appoint, and
Council shall approve, five (5) members, one (1) for an initial five (5) year
term, one (1) for an initial four (4) year term, one (1) for an initial three
(3) year term, one (1) for an initial two (2) year term, and one (1) for an
initial one (1) year term.
ARTICLE XII. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 12.1 SUCCESSION.
   The City of Green, under this Charter, is hereby declared to be the legal
successor of the City of Green, under the general laws of the State of Ohio,
and as such it has title to all property, real and personal, owned by its
predecessor including all moneys on deposit and all taxes in process of
collection together with all accounts receivable and rights of action. The City
is liable for all outstanding orders, contracts, and debts of its predecessor,
and for any other obligations for which it may be held liable, as such
successor, by any court of competent jurisdiction. All contracts entered into
by the City for its benefit prior to the effective date of this Charter, shall
continue in full force and effect.
   All laws and parts of laws relating to or affecting the City in force when
this Charter shall take effect are hereby repealed and superseded to the extent
that the same are inconsistent with the provisions of the Charter; however, all
laws, ordinances and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of the
Charter shall continue in full force and effect until the same shall be
lawfully amended or repealed under the terms and provisions of this Charter.
§ 12.2 DEFINITION OF MAJORITY.
   For as long as Council shall consist of seven (7) members, a simple majority
shall be deemed to be four (4) members, a two-thirds (2/3) majority shall be
deemed to be five (5) members, and a three-fourths (3/4) majority shall be
deemed to be six (6) members. Should the size of Council be changed by future
charter amendment, the number of votes satisfying these definitions shall be
revised appropriately to be consistent with the stated types of majority,
providing that the number of votes satisfying each definition shall be
different and unique.
§ 12.3 HEADINGS.
   The article and section headings herein have been inserted for convenience
in reference and are not intended to define or limit the scope of, or otherwise
affect, any provisions of this Charter.
§ 12.4 GENDER.
   Change all references from masculine/feminine pronoun he/she to gender
neutral terms.
(Amended August 27, 2019 per Resolution 2019-R52)
§ 12.5 DEADLINES.
   The time within or by which any act or thing is required to be done by any
of the provisions of this Charter shall be computed by excluding the first day
and including the last day, except that when the last day falls on a Saturday,
Sunday, or legal holiday, then the act or thing shall be done by the next
succeeding day which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
§ 12.6 OPEN MEETINGS.
   It is the intent of this Charter that, except as provided herein, meetings
of public bodies shall be held in accord with Ohio’s Open Meetings Act, Section
121.22 of the Ohio Revised Code, including, but not limited to, any successor
or related section or amendment thereto. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
following provisions shall take precedence over and amplify the Ohio Open
Meetings Act, (Section 121.22 of the Revised Code), including but not limited
to any successor or related section or amendment thereto.
   A.   A board, commission, or committee shall not be deemed to be a public
body if its sole authority is to make recommendations to a decision-making
body. However, all committees or similar bodies of Council shall be deemed to
be public bodies, even if such committees contain less than a majority of
Council members and have no decision-making authority. For purposes of this
provision, a “committee of Council” shall include any committee appointed by
Council which includes two (2) or more Council members, whether serving in a
voting or non-voting capacity.
   B.   Executive sessions may be held by public bodies with an attorney for
the purpose of discussing pending or imminent court action involving the City,
or for the purpose of seeking and receiving legal counsel and advice on any
matter involving the City.
§ 12.7 ETHICAL CONDUCT AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   The standards of ethical conduct and avoidance of conflicts of interest for
all elected and appointed officers, officials, and employees of the City shall
be those established by the general laws of the State of Ohio.
   The civil and criminal penalties imposable for violations of such standards
shall be in accordance with the general laws of the State of Ohio.
§ 12.8 REMOVAL OF OFFICIALS.
   Elected officials and members of City Boards and Commissions shall be
removed for cause as provided in this Section of the Charter.
   As used in this section of the Charter, the “charging official” shall mean:
The Mayor, except where the person accused of grounds for removal is the person
holding the office of Mayor; or the President of Council where the person
sought to be removed for cause holds the office of Mayor.
   The charging official, if he has reason to believe there is probable cause
(as such causes are defined in this section) for removal of an elected official
or member of a City board or commission, shall give notice of the alleged cause
for removal and the time, date, and place of the commencement of a hearing for
removal, which shall not be earlier than ten (10) days after the service of the
notice, to the accused person by personal service, certified mail or by leaving
a copy of such notice at the person’s last known place of residence in the
City. At such time, date, and place and at any adjourned meetings of such
hearing, the Council shall hear the cause for removal; shall provide an
opportunity for the accused person to be heard and present defenses and shall
determine whether the accused person shall be removed from office. The Council
may remove an official for any of the following causes by a three-fourths (3/4)
vote of the members of Council. Such person shall not vote on any matter during
the removal procedure and shall not be counted in determining required
majorities. The following are grounds for removal of elected officials and
members of City Boards and Commissions:
   A.   Failure to possess the qualifications of office required pursuant to
the provisions of this Charter.
   B.   Conviction of a felony or other crime involving moral turpitude.
   C.   Failure to take the required oath, or to give any bond required of him
within twenty (20) days after effective date of his election or appointment, or
obligation to give a new or additional bond.
   D.   Being adjudicated legally incompetent.
   E.   Conduct which is determined by Council to be gross misconduct or gross
neglect of duty with respect to his official powers or duties.
   F.   Violation of his oath of office.
   G.   Gross failure of a Council member or of a City board or commission
member to abide by the rules of Council or the City board or commission, as
appropriate; or absence from three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the
Council or City board or commission without being excused by Council or the
City board or commission, as appropriate.
   Upon the removal of an official from office pursuant to this Section, the
office of the offending person shall be declared vacant, subject to any appeal
to and review by an appropriate court, and the vacancy shall be filled as
provided in this Charter.
   The removal of an official or the occurrence of any of the causes permitting
the removal shall not invalidate any action of the official or anybody,
including Council, in which the member participated. The subsequent removal of
a person who fills a vacancy created pursuant to this section by reinstatement
by a court of a person previously removed by Council, shall not invalidate any
action of the person who filled the vacancy or anybody, including Council, in
which such person who filled the vacancy participated.
   Council shall be the judge of the qualifications of and of the grounds for
removal from office and shall conduct the proceedings relative to removal.
Council shall have the power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and
require the production of evidence, either on its own motion or through the
process of any appropriate court or officer thereof. A person charged with
conduct constituting grounds for removal from office shall receive a public
hearing, and a record of the proceedings shall be made and preserved. A notice
of such hearing shall be published in at least any one (1) newspaper of general
circulation in the City at least one (1) week in advance of the hearing, and in
such event, the President of Council, or other presiding officer of Council,
may reschedule the time, date, and place of the hearing to accommodate the
publication of the notice. If the hearing is rescheduled, the President of
Council, or other presiding officer, shall notify the accused person of such
fact. Decisions made by Council under this Section shall be subject to review
by the Courts on matters of law and whether Council acted arbitrarily and
without probative evidence to support the grounds for removal.
   The Director of Law or special counsel engaged by the Director of Law shall
prosecute the removal proceedings before Council and any review thereof by the
courts. In the event the person sought to be removed from office is the
Director of Law, a special counsel engaged by the Mayor, with the approval of a
majority of Council, (Amended November 5, 2019) shall prosecute the removal
proceedings before Council and any review thereof by the courts. If a person
accused is not finally removed, the City shall pay the reasonable costs of the
defense of such person and any compensation withheld pending the appeal of the
action of Council.
§ 12.9 SEPARABILITY.
   If a section or part of a section of this Charter proves to be invalid or
unconstitutional, the same shall not be held to invalidate or impair the
validity, force, or effect of any other section, or part of a section of this
Charter, unless it clearly appears that such other section, or part of a
section, is wholly and necessarily dependent for its operation upon the section
or part of a section so held invalid or unconstitutional.
§ 12.10 CHARTER CORRECTIONS.
   City Council shall be authorized to make typographical corrections to or
changes or deletions in, as well as changes in the form of, the Charter;
however, the changes shall relate to matters of form; or, to make the Charter
consistent with Ohio law, upon advice of the Director of Law. Any such
modification, change, or correction shall, in all cases, be approved by
resolution of Council, prior to going into effect. No modification, change or
correction shall affect the construction, meaning, substance, or intent of the
Charter as adopted and amended by the people, except where the change corrects
the Charter to comply with Ohio law. The specific powers granted by this
Section include:
   A.   City Council may correct obvious misspellings and typographical errors.
   B.   City Council may divide the text of any section or paragraph into
shorter paragraphs or subparagraphs and letter or number the same to improve
clarity and ease of reference.
   C.   City Council may renumber the sections and rearrange their order to
provide:
      1.   More coherent grouping of sections related in subject matter; and
      2.   Continuous, consecutive numbering of sections.
   D.   City Council may remove inconsistent language and correct language that
violates Ohio law to ensure that the Charter complies with Ohio law.
   Upon the adoption of any amendment that creates or abolishes an office or
offices or changes the powers or duties of any officer or agency of the City,
the City Council shall make necessary correlative changes in existing sections
that refer to such offices, officers, or agencies by deleting therefrom, as the
case may be, the name of the office created or the title of the officer or
agency then having such powers or duties.
(Amended November 6, 2012)
ARTICLE XIII. GAMING
   Casino gaming, horseracing, scheme of chance, game of chance or gambling
device shall not be allowed or operated in the City of Green, except for non-
profit charitable purposes as authorized under Ohio law or Green City
Ordinance. Nothing in this provision shall be construed to nullify the
provisions of the Ohio Constitution Article 15, Section 6.
(Amended November 6, 2012)
LIST OF CHARTER COMMISSION AND CHARTER
REVIEW COMMISSION MEMBERS
1992 Charter Commission Members
 
John M. Torok, Chair   Kimberly A. Zurz, Vice-Chair
Dale R. Brott          Ellen A. Campbell
Daniel L. Croghan      Elizabeth A. Dinie
Linda Dumke            Donn J. Force
Sandra A. Kalenterides Ted A. Mallo
Carl T. Mickelson      Carolyn Patterson
Roberta A. Ravagnani   John W. Thornburg
 
1998 Charter Review Commission Members
 
Michael P. Christy, Chair Bruno L. Codispoti, Vice-Chair
Diane Lawrence            Robert A. Mitchell
Jane S. Warmus
 
2005 Charter Review Commission Members
 
David France, Chair Josie McElroy, Vice-Chair
Susan Allen         Leonard Falcone
Sheri Lamanna
 
2012 Charter Review Commission Members
 
Susan Allen, Chair Ted A. Mallo, Vice-Chair
Jim Branney        Jeff Evans
Josie McElroy
 
2019 Charter Review Commission Members
 
Susan Allen, Chair Vivianne Duffrin, Vice-Chair
Ted A. Mallo       Christopher J. Meager “C.J.”
Sherry Neubert
 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
11.   WARDS AND BOUNDARIES
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Short titles
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Rules of construction
   
10.04   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal
   
10.05   Construction of section references
   
10.06   Conflicting provisions
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Ordinances repealed
   
10.11   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.12   Ordinances saved
   
10.13   Application to future ordinances
   
10.14   Interpretation
   
10.15   Amendments to code; amendatory language
   
10.16   Statutory references
   
10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.18   Determination of legislative intent
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 SHORT TITLES.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the municipality,
as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“municipal code”, for which designation “code of ordinances”, “codified
ordinances” or “code” may be substituted. Title, chapter and section headings
do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
(R.C. § 1.01)
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to such
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “traffic code”. Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01". Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
(Prior Code, § 202.01)
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AND/OR. The word “and” may be read as “or”, and the word “or” may be read as
“and”, if the sense requires it.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
   CERTIFIED MAIL. Includes registered mail.
   CHILD. Includes child by adoption.
   COUNCIL. The Legislative Authority of the municipality.
   COUNTY. Summit County, Ohio.
   FIRE CHIEF. The Chief of the Fire Department if a Fire Department has been
established in the municipality, and shall include the Fire Prevention Officer
if no Fire Department has been established in the municipality.
   IMPRISONED. The same meaning as in R.C. § 1.05.
   INTERNET. The international computer network of both federal and non-federal
interoperable packet switched data networks, including the graphical subnetwork
known as the World Wide Web.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or
as a servant, agent or employee.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of incorporeal nature.
   LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY. The Legislative Authority of the municipality.
   MAY. Is permissive.
   MUNICIPALITY, CITY, TOWN, VILLAGE or MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. When used in
this code, shall denote the municipality irrespective of its population or
legal classification.
   O.A.C. Refers to the Ohio Administrative Code.
   OATH. Includes affirmation.
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner or
tenant in common of the whole or part of that property.
   PERSON. Includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership and association.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real property.
   PLAN OF SEWERAGE, SYSTEM OF SEWERAGE, SEWER and SEWERS. Includes sewers,
sewage disposal works and treatment plants, and sewage pumping stations,
together with facilities and appurtenances necessary and proper therefor.
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates, and interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the municipal, county, state
or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the
sale of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.
   R.C. Refers to the Ohio Revised Code.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail.
   SHALL. Is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE. The State of Ohio.
   STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts and all other public thoroughfares within the municipality.
   SWEAR. Includes affirm.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   WRITING. Includes printing.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. The terms include any representation of words,
letters, symbols or figures; this provision does not affect any law relating to
signatures.
   YEAR. Twelve consecutive months.
(R.C. §§ 1.02, 1.05, 1.44, 1.59, 701.01) (Prior Code, § 202.02)
§ 10.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Common and technical usage. Words and phrases shall be read in context
and construed according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and
phrases that have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by
legislative definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
(R.C. § 1.42)
   (B)   Singular and plural; gender; tenses. As used in this code, unless the
context otherwise requires:
      (1)   The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular.
      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders.
      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future tense.
(R.C. § 1.43)
   (C)   Calendar; computation of time.
      (1)   The time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day; except that when
the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then the act may be done on
the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal holiday.
      (2)   When a public office, in which an act required by law is to be
performed, is closed to the public for the entire day that constitutes the last
day for doing the act or before its usual closing time on that day, the act may
be performed on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal
holiday.
      (3)   As used in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) of this section, LEGAL
HOLIDAY means the following days:
         (a)   The first day of January, known as New Year’s Day;
         (b)   The third Monday in January, known as Martin Luther King, Jr.
Day;
         (c)   The third Monday in February, known as Washington-Lincoln Day;
         (d)   The day designated in the “Act of June 28, 1968”, 82 Stat. 250,
5 U.S.C. § 6103, as amended, for the commemoration of Memorial Day;
         (e)   The nineteenth day of June, known as Juneteenth day;
         (f)   The fourth day of July, known as Independence Day;
         (g)   The first Monday in September, known as Labor Day;
         (h)   The second Monday in October, known as Columbus Day;
         (i)   The eleventh day of November, known as Veteran’s Day;
         (j)   The fourth Thursday in November, known as Thanksgiving Day;
         (k)   The twenty-fifth day of December, known as Christmas Day; and
         (l)   Any day appointed and recommended by the Governor of this state
or the President of the United States as a holiday.
      (4)   If any day designated in this section as a legal holiday falls on a
Sunday, the next succeeding day is a legal holiday.
(R.C. § 1.14)
      (5)   When an act is to take effect or become operative from and after a
day named, no part of that day shall be included. If priority of legal rights
depends upon the order of events on the same day, the priority shall be
determined by the times in the day at which they respectively occurred.
(R.C. § 1.15)
      (6)   If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from
a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding
month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there
are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends
on the last day of that month.
(R.C. § 1.45)
      (7)   In all cases where the law shall require any act to be done in a
reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice
shall mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the
duty or compliance with the notice.
   (D)   Numbers. If there is a conflict between figures and words in
expressing a number, the words govern.
(R.C. § 1.46)
   (E)   Authority. When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as
well be done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be
construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (F)   Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three
or more municipal officers or other persons shall be construed as giving that
authority to a majority of the officers or other persons, unless it shall be
otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority, or it is
inconsistent with state law or municipal charter provisions.
   (G)   Exceptions. The rules of construction shall not apply to any law which
contains any express provision excluding the construction, or when the subject
matter or context of the law is repugnant thereto.
(Prior Code, § 202.03)
§ 10.04 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (A)   The repeal of a repealing statute does not revive the ordinance
originally repealed nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein.
(R.C. § 1.57)
   (B)   The re-enactment, amendment or repeal of an ordinance does not, except
as provided in division (C) of this section:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action
taken thereunder;
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded or incurred thereunder;
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; or
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment; and the
investigation, proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed, as if the ordinance had not
been repealed or amended.
   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture or punishment for any offense is reduced by
a re-enactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the ordinance
as amended.
(R.C. § 1.58)
   (D)   An ordinance which is re-enacted or amended is intended to be a
continuation of the prior ordinance and not a new enactment, so far as it is
the same as the prior ordinance.
(R.C. § 1.54)
(Prior Code, § 202.04)
§ 10.05 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, or of divisions or subdivisions of a
section, the reference shall be construed to mean a violation of any provision
of the section, sections, divisions or subdivisions included in the reference.
   (B)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
(R.C. § 1.23)
   (C)   A reference to any portion of a provision of this code applies to all
re-enactments or amendments thereof.
(R.C. § 1.55)
   (D)   If a section refers to a series of numbers or letters, the first and
the last numbers or letters are included.
(R.C. § 1.56)
   (E)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter has been
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
(Prior Code, § 202.05)
§ 10.06 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   If a general provision conflicts with a special or local provision,
they shall be construed, if possible, so that effect is given to both. If the
conflict between the provisions is irreconcilable, the special or local
provision prevails as an exception to the general provision, unless the general
provision is the later adoption and the manifest intent is that the general
provision prevail.
(R.C. § 1.51)
   (B)   (1)   If ordinances enacted at different meetings of the Legislative
Authority are irreconcilable, the ordinance latest in date of enactment
prevails.
      (2)   If amendments to the same ordinance are enacted at different
meetings of the Legislative Authority, one amendment without reference to
another, the amendments are to be harmonized, if possible, so that effect may
be given to each. If the amendments are substantively irreconcilable, the
latest in date of enactment prevails. The fact that a later amendment restates
language deleted by an earlier amendment, or fails to include language inserted
by an earlier amendment, does not of itself make the amendments irreconcilable.
Amendments are irreconcilable only when changes made by each cannot reasonably
be put into simultaneous operation.
(R.C. § 1.52)
   (C)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of this code,
or between any of the provisions of this code and any standard code adopted by
the municipality pursuant to R.C. § 731.231, the provision that establishes the
higher or stricter standard shall control.
(Prior Code, § 202.06)
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of this code or the application thereof to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions or applications of the section or related sections which can
be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end
the provisions are severable.
(R.C. § 1.50) (Prior Code, § 202.07)
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the municipality exercising the powers, duties
or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
words, the omission of any words necessary to express the intention of the
provisions affected, the use of words to which no meaning can be attached, or
the use of a word when another word was clearly intended to express the
intention, the spelling shall be corrected, and the words supplied, omitted or
substituted shall conform with the manifest intention, and the provision shall
have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as
originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question
exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.10 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   With the exception of any ordinances specifically saved by the municipality,
this code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
§ 10.11 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature, all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of ordinances,
and all ordinances specifically saved by the municipality shall remain in full
force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
legislative body, or a certain municipal officer or employee, to make
additional ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the
intention of the ordinance, all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature
serving the purpose, effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent
thereto, shall remain in effect and are saved.
§ 10.13 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.14 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.15 AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.
   (A)   Any chapter, section or division amended or added to this code by
ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this code may be numbered in
accordance with the numbering system of this code and need not be inserted in
this code, but shall be treated as if printed for inclusion herein.
   (B)   The following language may be used by the municipality to amend, add,
or repeal a chapter, section, or division:
      (1)   To amend a section: “Section                 of the Municipal Code
of Ordinances is amended to read as follows: ....”
      (2)   To add a section: “Section                 of the Municipal Code of
Ordinances, which is to be added to and amends the Municipal Code of
Ordinances, reads as follows: ....”
      (3)   To repeal a section: “Section                 of the Municipal Code
of Ordinances, which reads as follows, is repealed: ....”
§ 10.16 STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, located in parentheses
immediately following a division or section of this code, this indicates that
the text of the division or section is substantially equivalent to the
statutory provision.
Example: (R.C. § 4511.02)
   (B)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference” following
the text of a section, this indicates that the reader should refer to that
statute for further information.
Example:
§ 30.08 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   Unless otherwise exempted by state law, all public records shall be promptly
prepared and made available for inspection to any person.
Statutory reference:
Public records, see R.C. § 149.43
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way,
contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.18 DETERMINATION OF LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   (A)   In enacting an ordinance, it is presumed that:
      (1)   Compliance with the constitutions of the State and of the United
States is intended;
      (2)   The entire ordinance is intended to be effective;
      (3)   A just and reasonable result is intended; and
      (4)   A result feasible of execution is intended.
(R.C. § 1.47)
   (B)   An ordinance is presumed to be prospective in its operation unless
expressly made retrospective.
(R.C. § 1.48)
   (C)   If an ordinance is ambiguous, the court, in determining the intention
of the Legislative Authority, may consider among other matters:
      (1)   The object sought to be attained;
      (2)   The circumstances under which the ordinance was enacted;
      (3)   The legislative history;
      (4)   The common law or former legislative provisions, including laws
upon the same or similar subjects;
      (5)   The consequences of a particular construction; and
      (6)   The administrative construction of the ordinance.
(R.C. § 1.49)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Whenever, in this municipal code or in any ordinance of the
municipality, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is
otherwise provided, whoever violates any such provision shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding $500, a term of imprisonment not exceeding six months, or
both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which
a violation continues or occurs.
   (B)   The failure of any officer or employee of the municipality to perform
any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or
employee to the penalty imposed for a violation unless a penalty is
specifically provided for the failure.
Cross-reference:
   Misdemeanor classifications, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Ordinance violations and penalties, see R.C. § 715.67
CHAPTER 11: WARDS AND BOUNDARIES
Section
   
11.01   Acceptance of ward boundaries
Statutory reference:
   Voting precincts, see R.C. § 3501.18
§ 11.01 ACCEPTANCE OF WARD BOUNDARIES.
   City Council accepts the ward boundaries set forth in the map attached as
Exhibit B to Ordinance 2011-06, passed June 28, 2011, as the official Council
ward boundaries, subject to future change, and in accordance with the
provisions of § 4.2 of the Charter.
(Prior Code, § 206.01) (Ord. 2011-06, passed 6-28-2011)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
31.   CITY COUNCIL
      
32.   CITY EMPLOYEES
      
33.   CITY ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
      
34.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
      
35.   CITY POLICIES
      
36.   EARNED INCOME TAX EFFECTIVE THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2015
      
37.   EARNED INCOME TAX BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2016
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Cost of copies of city records
   
30.02   Public records available
Health and Welfare
   
30.15   Union of City and County Health Districts
   
30.16   Unauthorized spills, releases or discharges of hazardous materials;
procedure to recover costs
Claims Against the City
   
30.30   Authority of Law Director to settle claims
   
30.31   Claims Review Board
   
30.32   Liability Loss Account
Statutory reference:
   Boards of health, see R.C. Ch. 3707
   Building inspection for sanitation, see R.C. §§ 715.26 and 715.29
   Employment of a physician, see R.C. §§ 715.38 and 715.39
   Health districts, see R.C. Ch. 3709
   Initiative, see R.C. §§ 731.28 et seq.
   Jurisdiction outside municipal limits, see R.C. §§ 715.50 and 743.25
   Political subdivision tort liability, see R.C. Ch. 2744
   Referendum, see R.C. §§ 731.29 et seq.
   State law re ordinances and resolutions, see R.C. §§ 731.17 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 COST OF COPIES OF CITY RECORDS.
   (A)   The following costs are hereby established as the reasonable costs for
copies provided to the public for records of the city:
8-1/2 x 11 $0.10 per copy
8-1/2 x 14 $0.10 per copy
11 x 17    $0.10 per copy
18 x 24    $1 per copy
22 x 34    $2 per copy
24 x 36    $3 per copy
36 x 48    $4 per copy
DVD copies $2 per meeting
 
   (B)   For photocopies of 8 x 11 and 8 x 14 sized documents, the initial 25
photocopies received by an individual during each month shall be provided at no
charge. If an individual obtains more than 25 photocopies during any month, the
individual shall pay for all copies obtained during that month at the rates set
forth in division (A) of this section.
   (C)   The city will provide copies of its public records to other government
entities at no charge.
   (D)   Individuals requesting public records to be forwarded to them via
email shall be provided those records within a reasonable period of time at no
charge, if the records are maintained in an email accessible database.
   (E)   If any individual makes a public records request, incurs a charge for
compliance with that request and requests that the documents be sent to them by
U.S. mail, the city will mail the documents after the receipt of the copy
charge(s), including postage, that is due from that individual.
(Prior Code, § 222.01) (Res. 95-R162, passed 12-20-1995; Ord. 04-21, passed 10-
12-2004; Ord. 06-06, passed 5-9-2006)
§ 30.02 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   (A)   (1)   Upon request by any person and subject to division (H) of this
section, all public records responsive to the request shall be promptly
prepared and made available for inspection to the requester at all reasonable
times during regular business hours. Subject to division (H) of this section,
upon request by any person, a public office or person responsible for public
records shall make copies of the requested public record available to the
requestor at cost and within a reasonable period of time.
      (2)   When considering whether a state or local law enforcement agency
promptly prepared a video record for inspection or provided a video record for
production within a reasonable period of time, in addition to any other
factors, a court shall consider the time required for a state or local law
enforcement agency to retrieve, download, review, redact, seek legal advice
regarding, and produce the video record. Notwithstanding any other requirement
set forth in R.C. Chapter 149, a state or local law enforcement agency may
charge a requester the actual cost associated with preparing a video record for
inspection or production, not to exceed $75 per hour of video produced, nor
$750 total. As used in this division, ACTUAL COST, with respect to video
records only, means all costs incurred by the state or local law enforcement
agency in reviewing, blurring or otherwise obscuring, redacting, uploading, or
producing the video records, including but not limited to the storage medium on
which the record is produced, staff time, and any other relevant overhead
necessary to comply with the request. A state or local law enforcement agency
may include in its public records policy the requirement that a requester pay
the estimated actual cost before beginning the process of preparing a video
record for inspection or production. Where a state or local law enforcement
agency imposes such a requirement, its obligation to produce a video or make it
available for inspection begins once the estimated actual cost is paid in full
by the requester. A state or local law enforcement agency shall provide the
requester with the estimated actual cost within five business days of receipt
of the public records request. If the actual cost exceeds the estimated actual
cost, a state or local law enforcement agency may charge a requester for the
difference upon fulfilling a request for video records if the requester is
notified in advance that the actual cost may be up to 20% higher than the
estimated actual cost. A state or local law enforcement agency shall not charge
a requester a difference that exceeds 20% of the estimated actual cost.
      (3)   If a public record contains information that is exempt from the
duty to permit public inspection or to copy the public record, the public
office or the person responsible for the public record shall make available all
of the information within the public record that is not exempt. When making
that public record available for public inspection or copying that public
record, the public office or the person responsible for the public record shall
notify the requester of any redaction or make the redaction plainly visible. A
redaction shall be deemed a denial of a request to inspect or copy the redacted
information, except if federal or state law authorizes or requires a public
office to make the redaction. When the auditor of state receives a request to
inspect or to make a copy of a record that was provided to the auditor of state
for purposes of an audit, but the original public office has asserted to the
auditor of state that the record is not a public record, the auditor of state
may handle the requests by directing the requestor to the original public
office that provided the record to the auditor of state.
   (B)   To facilitate broader access to public records, a public office or the
person responsible for public records shall organize and maintain public
records in a manner that they can be made available for inspection or copying
in accordance with this section. A public office also shall have available a
copy of its current records retention schedule at a location readily available
to the public. If a requester makes an ambiguous or overly broad request or has
difficulty in making a request for copies or inspection of public records under
this section, such that the public office or the person responsible for the
requested public record cannot reasonably identify what public records are
being requested, the public office or the person responsible for the requested
public record may deny the request but shall provide the requester with an
opportunity to revise the request by informing the requester of the manner in
which records are maintained by the public office and accessed in the ordinary
course of the public office’s or person’s duties.
   (C)   If a request is ultimately denied, in part or in whole, the public
office or the person responsible for the requested public record shall provide
the requester with an explanation, including legal authority, setting forth why
the request was denied. If the initial request was provided in writing, the
explanation also shall be provided to the requester in writing. The explanation
shall not preclude the public office or the person responsible for the
requested public record from relying upon additional reasons or legal authority
in defending an action commenced under R.C. § 149.43(C).
   (D)   Unless specifically required or authorized by state or federal law or
in accordance this section, no public office or person responsible for public
records may limit or condition the availability of public records by requiring
disclosure of the requester’s identity or the intended use of the requested
public record. Any requirement that the requester disclose the requester’s
identity or the intended use of the requested public record constitutes a
denial of the request.
   (E)   A public office or person responsible for public records may ask a
requester to make the request in writing, may ask for the requester’s identity,
and may inquire about the intended use of the information requested, but may do
so only after disclosing to the requester that a written request is not
mandatory and that the requester may decline to reveal the requester’s identity
or the intended use and when a written request or disclosure of the identity or
intended use would benefit the requester by enhancing the ability of the public
office or person responsible for public records to identify, locate or deliver
the public records sought by the requester.
   (F)   If any person requests a copy of a public record in accordance with
this section, the public office or person responsible for the public record may
require the requester to pay in advance the cost involved in providing the copy
of the public record in accordance with the choice made by the requester under
this division. The public office or the person responsible for the public
record shall permit the requester to choose to have the public record
duplicated upon paper, upon the same medium upon which the public office or
person responsible for the public record keeps it, or upon any other medium
upon which the public office or person responsible for the public record
determines that it reasonably can be duplicated as an integral part of the
normal operations of the public office or person responsible for the public
record. When the requester makes a choice under this division, the public
office or person responsible for the public record shall provide a copy of it
in accordance with the choice made by the requester. Nothing in this section
requires a public office or person responsible for the public record to allow
the requester of a copy of the public record to make the copies of the public
record.
   (G)   (1)   Upon a request made in accordance with this section and subject
to division (F) of this section, a public office or person responsible for
public records shall transmit a copy of a public record to any person by United
States mail or by any other means of delivery or transmission within a
reasonable period of time after receiving the request for the copy. The public
office or person responsible for the public record may require the person
making the request to pay in advance the cost of postage if the copy is
transmitted by United States mail or the cost of delivery if the copy is
transmitted other than by United States mail, and to pay in advance the costs
incurred for other supplies used in the mailing, delivery or transmission.
      (2)   Any public office may adopt a policy and procedures that it will
follow in transmitting, within a reasonable period of time after receiving a
request, copies of public records by United States mail or by any other means
of delivery or transmission pursuant to division (G) of this section. A public
office that adopts a policy and procedures under division (G) of this section
shall comply with them in performing its duties under that division.
      (3)   In any policy and procedures adopted under division (G) of this
section:
         (a)   A public office may limit the number of records requested by a
person that the office will physically deliver by United States mail or by
another delivery service to ten per month, unless the person certifies to the
office in writing that the person does not intend to use or forward the
requested records, or the information contained in them, for commercial
purposes.
         (b)   A public office that chooses to provide some or all of its
public records on a web site that is fully accessible to and searchable by
members of the public at all times, other than during acts of God outside the
public office’s control or maintenance, and that charges no fee to search,
access, download, or otherwise receive records provided on the web site, may
limit to ten per month the number of records requested by a person that the
office will deliver in a digital format, unless the requested records are not
provided on the web site and unless the person certifies to the office in
writing that the person does not intend to use or forward the requested
records, or the information contained in them, for commercial purposes.
         (c)   For purposes of division (G) of this section, COMMERCIAL shall
be narrowly construed and does not include reporting or gathering news,
reporting or gathering information to assist citizen oversight or understanding
the operation or activities of government, or nonprofit educational research.
   (H)   A public office or person responsible for public records is not
required to permit a person who is incarcerated pursuant to a criminal
conviction or a juvenile adjudication to inspect or to obtain a copy of any
public record concerning a criminal investigation or prosecution or concerning
what would be a criminal investigation or prosecution if the subject of the
investigation or prosecution were an adult, unless the request to inspect or to
obtain a copy of the record is for the purpose of acquiring information that is
subject to release as a public record under this section and the judge who
imposed the sentence or made the adjudication with respect to the person, or
the judge’s successor in office, finds that the information sought in the
public record is necessary to support what appears to be a justiciable claim of
the person.
   (I)   (1)   Upon written request made and signed by a journalist, a public
office, or person responsible for public records, having custody of the records
of the agency employing a specified designated public service worker, as
defined in R.C. § 149.43, shall disclose to the journalist the address of the
actual personal residence of the designated public service worker and, if the
designated public service worker’s spouse, former spouse or child is employed
by a public office, the name and address of the employer of the designated
public service worker’s spouse, former spouse or child. The request shall
include the journalist’s name and title and the name and address of the
journalist’s employer and shall state that disclosure of the information sought
would be in the public interest.
      (2)   Division (I)(1) of this section also applies to journalist requests
for:
         (a)   Customer information maintained by a municipally owned or
operated public utility, other than social security numbers and any private
financial information such as credit reports, payment methods, credit card
numbers, and bank account information.
         (b)    Information about minors involved in a school vehicle accident
as provided in division R.C. § 149.43(A)(1)(gg), other than personal
information as defined in R.C. § 149.45.
      (3)   As used in this division (I), JOURNALIST means a person engaged in,
connected with or employed by any news medium, including a newspaper, magazine,
press association, news agency or wire service, a radio or television station,
or a similar medium, for the purpose of gathering, processing, transmitting,
compiling, editing or disseminating information for the general public.
   (J)   Upon a request made by a victim, victim’s attorney, or victim’s
representative, as that term is used in R.C. § 2930.02, a public office or
person responsible for public records shall transmit a copy of a depiction of
the victim as described in R.C. § 149.43(A)(1)(ii) to the victim, victim’s
attorney, or victim’s representative.
   (K)   (1)   To ensure that all employees of public offices are appropriately
educated about a public office’s obligations under this section, all elected
officials or their appropriate designees shall attend training approved by the
Attorney General as provided in R.C. § 109.43. A future official may satisfy
the requirements of this division by attending the training before taking
office, provided that the future official may not send a designee in the future
official’s place.
      (2)   All public offices shall adopt a public records policy in
compliance with this section for responding to public records requests. In
adopting a public records policy under this division, a public office may
obtain guidance from the model public records policy developed and provided to
the public office by the Attorney General under R.C. § 109.43. Except as
otherwise provided in this section or R.C. § 149.43, the policy may not limit
the number of public records that the public office will make available to a
single person, may not limit the number of public records that it will make
available during a fixed period of time, and may not establish a fixed period
of time before it will respond to a request for inspection or copying of public
records, unless that period is less than eight hours.
      (3)   The public office shall distribute the public records policy
adopted by the public office under this division (K) to the employee of the
public office who is the records custodian or records manager or otherwise has
custody of the records of that office. The public office shall require that
employee to acknowledge receipt of the copy of the public records policy. The
public office shall create a poster that describes its public records policy
and shall post the poster in a conspicuous place in the public office and in
all locations where the public office has branch offices. The public office may
post its public records policy on the internet web site of the public office if
the public office maintains an internet web site. A public office that has
established a manual or handbook of its general policies and procedures for all
employees of the public office shall include the public records policy of the
public office in the manual or handbook.
(R.C. § 149.43(B), (E))
Statutory reference:
   Availability and scope of public records; mandamus action to compel
disclosure, see R.C. § 149.43
   Competitive bidding, public inspection and copying prohibited, see R.C. §
125.071
HEALTH AND WELFARE
§ 30.15 UNION OF CITY AND COUNTY HEALTH DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Council finds and determines that it is in the best interests of the
city and its inhabitants that the City Health District unite with the County
General Health District pursuant to the provisions of R.C. § 3709.07.
   (B)   The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to enter into a contract
with the chairperson of the District Advisory Council of the County General
Health District and the Mayors of the Cities of Cuyahoga Falls, Tallmadge,
Stow, Norton, Twinsburg, Macedonia and Fairlawn, or such of them as may be
authorized to join, to unite the County Health District and the health
districts of the uniting cities as the County General Health District for the
administration of health affairs and public health services for the combined
district pursuant to R.C. § 3709.07.
(Prior Code, § 212.01) (Ord. 92-10, passed 7-14-1992)
§ 30.16 UNAUTHORIZED SPILLS, RELEASES OR DISCHARGES OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS;
PROCEDURE TO RECOVER COSTS.
   The City Council approves the following procedure for the recovery of costs
incurred by the city to investigate, mitigate, remove and abate unauthorized
spills, releases and discharges of hazardous materials.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DISASTER SERVICES. Any service provided by the city to investigate,
clean-up, remove or mitigate any spill, release or discharge deemed by the Fire
Chief or his or her designee to be a hazard to the public health, environment
or property.
      EMERGENCY ACTION. Any action required to investigate and minimize the
potential damage to public health, environment or property caused by the spill,
release or discharge upon discovery.
      HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance defined by federal, state or local
statutes to be a HAZARDOUS MATERIAL, hazardous substance, toxic material or
toxic substance. This includes materials determined by the Fire Chief or his or
her designee to be hazardous.
   (B)   Procedure. Any person or entity responsible for any necessary
investigation and/or causing or allowing an unauthorized spill, release or
discharge of a hazardous material into or upon the environment is liable to the
city for the cost of disaster services rendered. The costs shall be paid by the
person or entity responsible for any investigation and/or causing or allowing
the unauthorized spill, release and discharge of hazardous materials into or
upon the environment that requires emergency action to protect the public
health or safety of the environment. The Fire Chief, or his or her designee,
shall keep a detailed record of its costs for investigating, mitigating,
minimizing, removing or abating the unauthorized spill, release and discharge
of hazardous materials. Promptly after the completion of such measures, the
Fire Chief, or his or her designee, shall certify those costs to the Law
Director, as appropriate, and shall request that the Law Director bring a civil
action for recovery of costs against the person or entity responsible for the
investigation of and/or the unauthorized spill, release and discharge of
hazardous materials. Not less than 30 days before bringing the civil action,
the Law Director shall submit a written itemized claim for the total certified
costs incurred by the city and a written notice that unless the amount is paid
to the city within 30 days after the date of mailing the claim and notice, the
city will file a civil action for the amount due. Moneys recovered under this
division (B) shall be credited to the appropriate funds of the city from which
moneys were expended in performing the emergency action.
   (C)   Emergency services contracts. The Fire Chief, without compliance with
formal bidding procedures, may enter into standby professional emergency
services agreements with qualified, licensed, insured hazardous materials
service providers for emergency abatement of hazardous materials incidents.
Such providers shall be selected on the basis of quoted service rates,
qualifications and availability.
(Prior Code, § 212.02) (Ord. 01-20, passed 10-23-2001)
CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY
§ 30.30 AUTHORITY OF LAW DIRECTOR TO SETTLE CLAIMS.
   The Law Director is hereby given the exclusive authority to settle or
compromise claims against the city up to an amount not to exceed the
jurisdictional amount of an Ohio Municipal Small Claims Court as established by
R.C. § 1925.02. The Law Director shall notify Council and the Mayor after the
settlement of a claim.
(Prior Code, § 214.01) (Ord. 96-10, passed 7-9-1996)
§ 30.31 CLAIMS REVIEW BOARD.
   There is hereby established a Claims Review Board, which shall consist of
the Director of Law, the Director of Finance and the chairperson of the Council
Finance Committee. No claim in excess of the amount set forth in §
30.30 will be paid by the city unless approved by a majority of the members of
the Claims Review Board and confirmed by majority of the members of Council.
(Prior Code, § 214.02) (Ord. 96-10, passed 7-9-1996)
§ 30.32 LIABILITY LOSS ACCOUNT.
   (A)   There is hereby established a liability loss account to be used for
the payment of claims against the city or any of its officers or employees for
injury, death or loss to persons or property allegedly caused by an act or
omission of the city or any of its employees, within the scope of their duties
for the city, for which the city could be liable under R.C. Ch. 2744. Said
funds may also be used to pay the costs of administering the account, the costs
of defending claims and the costs of adjusting claims made against the city.
   (B)   The sum of $10,000 is hereby appropriated from the unappropriated
balance of the general fund to the liability loss account. The funds contained
in the liability loss account shall be used solely for the purposes provided
for in division (A) of this section.
   (C)   The establishment of the liability loss account shall not constitute,
nor be construed as, a waiver of the immunities in favor of the city contained
within R.C. Ch. 2744.
(Prior Code, § 214.03) (Ord. 96-10, passed 7-9-1996)
CHAPTER 31: CITY COUNCIL
Section
Council
   
31.01   Meetings
   
31.02   Rules of procedure
   
31.03   Clerk of Council
   
31.04   Deputy Clerk
Public Meetings
   
31.15   Adoption of rules for notification of meetings to the public and news
media; purposes
   
31.16   Definitions
   
31.17   Notice of regular and organizational meetings
   
31.18   General notice of special meetings
   
31.19   Notice to news media of special meetings
   
31.20   Notification of discussion of specific types of public business
   
31.21   Information from Clerk; delegation of authority; interpretations and
presumptions
Statutory reference:
   Legislative authority of cities, see R.C. §§ 731.01 et seq.
   Meetings of governmental bodies to be public, see R.C. § 121.22
COUNCIL
§ 31.01 MEETINGS.
   Council shall have as its regular meeting dates the second and fourth
Tuesdays of each calendar month at 7:00 p.m. at the City Administration
Building. Special meetings may be called by a vote of Council taken at any
regular or special meeting thereof, or shall be called by the Clerk of Council
or by any three members of Council. All special meetings are pursuant to § 4.8
of the City Charter.
(Prior Code, § 220.01) (Ord. 93-6, passed 2-20-1993; Res. 98-R52, passed 6-23-
1998)
§ 31.02 RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   The following rules of procedure shall control the parliamentary conduct of
Council. The rules, regulations, bylaws and journal of City Council shall be
open for public inspection at all reasonable times. All future amendments of
these rules of procedure shall be adopted through a resolution passed by the
City Council.
SECTION 1 - Meetings.
Rule 1.1 - Organizational Meetings.
Within the first seven (7) days of January of each year, Council shall meet for
the purpose of organization. The Mayor, or a person appointed by the Mayor,
shall call this meeting and shall preside as temporary Chairman only until the
President of Council is elected.
Rule 1.2 - Regular Meetings.
The City Council shall hold its Regular meetings on the second and fourth
Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m. at the Green Administration Bldg. Council
may also convene a regular meeting directly following the Organizational
Meeting as provided for in Rule 1.1.
The Council President or acting president shall have the sole authority to
cancel any regularly scheduled Council meeting.
Council President shall notify the Clerk of Council who will then notify
interested parties of the cancellation, including, but not limited to:
   Council members
   Mayor
   City employees
   Media/press
   School personnel/students
   Scheduled speakers
Rule 1.3 - Special Meetings.
After the organizational meeting, Council shall meet at such times prescribed
in its rules, regulations, bylaws, or by resolution or ordinance, except that
it shall hold regularly scheduled meetings at least once during each calendar
month. Such Council meetings shall be known as Regular meetings. All other
Council meetings shall be known as Special Meetings.
Special Meetings of the Council may be called as provided by its rules,
regulations, bylaws, or by resolution or ordinance. In the absence of any such
provisions, Special Meetings may be called by a vote of Council taken at any
Regular or Special meeting thereof, or shall be called by the Clerk of Council
upon written request of the Mayor, or the President of Council, or by any three
(3) members of Council. Notice in writing of each Special Meeting called at the
request of the Mayor, the President of Council, or by three (3) members of
Council shall state the date and time, and subject or subjects to be considered
at such meeting. No subject or subjects, other than those listed in this
written notice shall be considered at such Special Meetings. The written notice
required by this section shall be served by the Clerk of Council upon the Mayor
and each member of Council, either personally, electronically, or by leaving a
copy thereof at his usual place of residence, not less than twenty-four (24)
hours proceeding the time for the meeting. In the event that a Special Meeting
is called by a vote of Council taken at any Regular or Special Meeting from
which any member of Council was absent, written notice of such special meeting
shall be given such absentee in the manner provided here.
Service of such notice may be waived by an instrument in writing signed prior
to the hour of such meeting, and the Mayor and any Council member shall be
deemed conclusively to have waived such notice by their attendance at any such
meeting.
All Regular and Special Meetings of Council shall be held at the City
Administration Building or at such other places in the City as Council may
direct, providing that notice of the change in location shall be posted at the
administration building no later than one (1) hour prior to the meeting.
(Charter 4.8)
Rule 1.4 - Holiday Scheduling.
Council may choose to suspend a regular meeting, but not to exceed two
consecutive regular meetings. Council shall hold at least one regularly
scheduled meeting during each calendar month.
Rule 1.5 - Executive Sessions.
An Executive Session may be called during Regular or Special Meetings,
including Committee Meetings, in compliance with the Sunshine Law. Items
discussed in Executive Session are to remain confidential. Any Member of
Council violating this rule may be subject to censure.
Rule 1.6 - Sunshine Law.
All Regular Meetings, Special Meetings, Executive Sessions, and Committee
Meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Sunshine Law. (R.C. §
121.22) All Meetings of Council, and its committee meetings, shall be public
and any citizen shall have access to the minutes and record of these meetings
at all reasonable times.
Rule 1.7 - Quorum.
A majority of Council shall constitute a quorum to conduct business, but a
lesser number may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of the
absent members in such manner and under such penalties as may be prescribed by
resolution or ordinance.
Rule 1.8 - Order of Business.
Business shall be conducted in the following order:
    1.)   Call to Order
   2.)   Pledge of allegiance
   3.)   Roll Call
   4.)   Council Study Session
   5.)   Public Report
   6.)   Public Hearings
   7.)   Reading of Correspondence
   8.)   First Reading of New Legislation
   9.)   Report of Council Committees
   10.)   Mayor’s Report
   11.)   Unfinished Business
   12.)   New Business
   13.)   Adjournment
SECTION 2 - Council Organization.
Rule 2.1 - Officers.
At the organizational meeting of Council in January of each year as provided by
the City Charter, Council shall by simple majority vote, through the use of a
roll call vote elect from among its members a President of Council and a Vice-
President of Council each to serve for one (1) year.
(Charter section 4.5)
Rule 2.2 - Term of Office.
Any Council member so elected as president of council or vice president of
council may serve for two (2) consecutive one (1) year terms, after which they
shall be ineligible for re-election to those Council offices until a period of
not less than one (1) year has elapsed.
(Charter section 4.5)
Rule 2.3 - Removal of Officers.
The officers of Council shall serve at the pleasure of Council. A vote of a
majority of members of the Council shall be required to remove a member from
office.
Rule 2.4 - Presiding Officer.
The President is the presiding officer of Council. In the absence of the
President, the Vice-President shall preside.
Rule 2.5 - Vacancy of Officer.
Any vacancy of the office of President of Council, whether occurring by death,
disqualification, recall, removal, resignation, or by succession to the office
of Mayor, shall be filled by the Vice-President of Council for the remainder of
the unexpired term of President of Council. The vacancy so created in the
office of Vice President of Council shall be filled by a Council member elected
by the majority of the remaining members of Council, without first appointing a
replacement council member. The successor shall hold office for the balance of
the un-expired term of Vice-President of Council. If the vacancy created by the
accession of Vice-President of Council shall not be filled by the Council
within thirty (30) days from the date such vacancy occurs, the power of Council
to do so shall lapse, and the Mayor shall appoint one (1) of the remaining
member of Council to fill the vacancy.
(Charter Section 4.6)
Rule 2.6 - Duties of the President.
The President shall preserve order and decorum, prevent personal reflections
and confine members in debate to the question. They may, in common with any
other member, call any member to order who shall violate any of the rules and
shall, when in the chair, decide all questions of order, subject to an appeal
to Council on the demand by two or more members. On such appeal there shall be
no debate, but the members making the appeal may briefly state the reason for
the same, and the presiding officer shall have the right to a similar brief
statement.
Rule 2.7 - Clerk of Council.
The Clerk of Council shall be appointed by Council, and the Clerk shall serve
at the pleasure of the Council. The Clerk shall keep the Journal of Council, an
accurate and complete record of all proceedings of Council; authenticate by the
Clerk's signature and have custody of all laws, ordinances, and resolutions of
Council; have custody of all official documents, reports, papers, and files of
Council; and perform other such duties as Council shall require. Copies of
minutes of Boards and Commissions will be kept on file. (Charter section 4.12)
If the Clerk should need to correct previously approved minutes, the Clerk
shall notify the President of Council and obtain written approval before making
such corrections.
Rule 2.8 - Vacancy of Clerk Position.
During the temporary absence or disability of the Clerk of Council, the deputy
clerk shall perform the duties of the Clerk of Council. If no individual holds
the position of deputy clerk, Council shall by an affirmative vote of a simple
majority of its members appoint a liked-qualified individual to perform the
duties of that office.
(Charter section 4.12)
SECTION 3 - Committees.
Rule 3.1 - Standing Committees.
The seven standing committees shall be as follows:
   a.   Finance
   b.   Planning and Community Economic Development
   c.   Public Safety
   d.   Rules and Personnel
   e.   Environment and Parks
   f.   Transportation, Connectivity & Storm Water
   g.   Intergovernmental and Utilities
Rule 3.2 - Special Committees.
The President of Council may appoint special committees as are necessary to
carry out the duties of Council.
Rule 3.3 - Number of Members on Committees.
There shall be three (3) members on each standing committee. Membership on
special committees will be established by the President of Council.
Rule 3.4 - Committee Appointments.
The President of Council shall appoint committee members and special committee
members as are necessary to carry out the duties of Council.
Rule 3.5 - Attendance by Non-Committee Members.
Council members may attend Committee meetings of committees of which they are
not a member, however they are in attendance as a member of the general public
and not in their official capacity.
Rule 3.6 - Committee Chair and Vice-Chair.
The Chair is the first name appearing on the list of committee members and the
Vice-Chair will be the second name appearing on the list of committee members.
Rule 3.7 - Committee Meetings.
The Committees shall meet in the Council Chambers at 5:00 p.m. on the second
and fourth Tuesday of each month. A committee may call a special meeting. The
notice for a special meeting shall state the date and time, and the subject or
subjects to be considered at such meeting. No subject or subjects, other than
those listed in this written notice, shall be considered at such special
meetings. Written minutes of the meetings are to be taken and kept on file with
the Clerk of Council.
Rule 3.8 - Duties of Committees.
   a.   All proposed ordinances and resolutions, except those of a purely
ceremonial nature, shall be referred by the President of Council to one (1) or
more of the standing committees of Council as appropriate to the subject
matter, unless this requirement is waived by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the
members of Council.
   b.   Said committee(s) shall consider the proposed legislative action
separately and/or jointly and shall report their recommendations to Council for
final disposition.
   c.   Such report of the committee(s) recommendations shall be given by the
Chair during Council session. Minutes and documentation shall be entered into
the Journal of the Committees. The video shall serve as the official minutes
for council meetings. A summary of the meeting which detail the general
discussion on each agenda item as well as the vote(s) on all ordinances and
resolutions and shall be accompanied by the original documents, if any, upon
which such report is based. Such report and documentation shall be entered or
referred to upon the Journal of Council.
   d.   If any matter referred to committee has not been reported upon for two
(2) successive Regular Council Meetings, such matter may be brought before
Council, with or without an accompanying committee report, upon the vote of a
two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members of Council.
   e.   Nothing in this provision shall preclude any standing committee from
proposing an ordinance or resolution on its own initiative. Intentional failure
to follow this section pertaining to committees which results in gross abuse of
corporate power shall invalidate any action taken by the Council as a whole.
(Charter section 4.9)
Rule 3.9 - Quorum for Committees.
Committees containing three members must have two members present for a quorum.
A majority vote of the members is necessary to take action.
Rule 3.10 - The President and the Standing Committees
The President of Council shall be an ex officio member of all standing
committees of which they are not a member, or does not chair, but shall not
vote upon any question coming before those committees. The President of Council
may, however, be counted as a member of a committee for the purpose of making a
quorum. The President may also serve as a regular member with full voting power
for a maximum of forty-five (45) days in the event of the death, resignation,
or removal of a Council member from a committee. The President shall fill any
vacancy occurring on a committee within forty-five (45) days after the vacancy
occurs by appointing another member of Council to fill the unexpired term.
Rule 3.11 - Committee of the Whole.
The Council may resolve itself into a Committee of the Whole when it wishes, so
that the entire Council may consider an issue.
SECTION 4 - Parliamentary Procedures.
Rule 4.1 - Call to Order.
At the time appointed for Council to meet, the President shall take the Chair
and immediately call the members to order.
Rule 4.2 - Roll Call.
Before proceeding, the Clerk shall call the roll and enter into the minutes the
members present or absent.
Rule 4.3 - Suspension of Rules.
These rules of procedure may be temporarily suspended at any meeting of Council
by a three-fourths (3/4) vote of all members elected, (6 yeas needed), insofar
as said suspension is not a conflict with the status of the Constitution of the
State of Ohio. The vote on such suspension shall be taken by yeas and nays, and
entered into the Journal of Council. Any measure to be adopted as an emergency
measure requires an explanation be given prior to a motion being made as to why
such an action is necessary. (Charter Section 4.9)
Rule 4.4 - Amendments to Rules.
The Rules of Council are to remain in full force and effect until amended or
repealed by Council. These rules may be amended, altered, or new rules adopted
by a simple majority of the Council members at any meeting of Council on the
report of the Rules Committee to which the subject had been referred at a
previous meeting.
Rule 4.5 - Questions and Motions.
When a motion is made and seconded, the President or the Clerk shall state the
question, which then places it before Council. Following debate, the President
or the Clerk shall put the question to a vote and announce the results of the
vote.
Rule 4.6 - Demand for a Vote.
The President of Council or any other member of Council may demand a division,
which shall be taken by a roll call. The motion calling the previous question
closes debate, stops further amendments to the last motion and brings it to an
immediate vote. The previous question applies only to the last motion made. It
is not in order for a member of Council to speak to a question under
consideration or to make a motion and immediately demand the previous question.
Rule 4.7 - Objection to Consideration.
As soon as a motion or proposition has been stated, any member may object to
consideration. This cannot be amended or debated. It requires a majority vote
of all members to pass.
Rule 4.8 - Reconsideration.
Any member who previously voted with the prevailing side, may move to
reconsider any vote or proceeding of the Council. This motion shall be made not
later than the next regular meeting. An action taken by Council shall only be
reconsidered once.
Rule 4.9 - Point of Order.
A point of order is a motion made by a member of Council when they believe the
Rules of Council are being violated. This motion may be made when another
member has the floor and does not require a second. The presiding officer must
determine the validity of the motion. If the decision is that the Rules are
being violated, the presiding officer shall enforce the Rules of Council.
Rule 4.10 - Point of Information.
A point of information is a request by a member of Council to the presiding
officer, requesting information relevant to the business at hand. The presiding
officer shall direct the request to the appropriate person and all information
shall be exchanged through the presiding officer in order to maintain decorum.
Rule 4.11 - Procedures Not Included in Council Rules.
In the absence of any rule governing matters of business in either the Rules of
Council, the City Charter, or the Statutes of the State of Ohio, Roberts Rules
of Order, Revised shall be the standard of parliamentary usage.
Rule 4.12 - Withdrawal.
The sponsor of legislation may withdraw such legislation at any time before the
President of Council has "stated the question" and placed it before Council as
set forth in Rule 4.5 in a regular or special meeting of Council.
SECTION 5 - Debate and Decorum.
Rule 5.1 - Preservation of Decorum.
The presiding officer shall preserve decorum and maintain order at all times,
prevent personal reflections during debate and in making assignments, and
confine members to the question before Council.
The presiding officer or any other member of the Council may call to order a
member who violates these rules. This decision shall be subject to an appeal to
Council at the request of one (1) member, who shall state the reasons for the
appeal. There shall be no debate on such appeal, but the President shall have
the right to answer the appeal.
Rule 5.2 - Speaking by Council Members.
Any member of Council desiring to speak shall raise his hand for recognition by
the President. Upon recognition, the member shall be allowed to speak. No
member shall speak longer than five minutes at one time, without leave, and no
member shall speak again on the same motion until all members of Council
desiring to speak on that motion have had an opportunity to do so.
Rule 5.3 - Speaking by Members of the Administration.
Any member of the administration, including the Mayor, who desires to speak
shall ask for recognition by the President. Upon recognition, the member of the
Administration shall be allowed to speak.
Rule 5.4 - Speaking by Non-Members of Council.
(See Section 7)
Rule 5.5 - Profane Language.
The use of profane or vulgar language is absolutely forbidden, either by
Council members or by any others attending the Council meeting.
Rule 5.6 - Power to Preserve Decorum.
The Council may, with a majority vote by yeas and nays, vote to suspend the
meeting in order to preserve order and decorum.
Rule 5.7 - Recording of Council Meetings.
Any and all forms of the official recording of Council meetings shall be under
the direction of Council without any form of censorship, excepting the deletion
of profanity, obscenity, or any matter unacceptable under FCC regulations.
SECTION 6 - Enacting Legislation.
Rule 6.1 - Council Actions.
The Council shall act officially only by ordinance or resolution.
Rule 6.2 - Passage or Adoption.
All ordinances, resolutions, and rules for the government of Council shall
require for their passage or adoption, an affirmative vote of a simple majority
of all members elected, and the votes on their passage or adoption shall be
taken by yeas and nays and recorded in the Journal of Council.
(Charter Section 4.9)
Rule 6.3 - Voting.
All members of Council present shall vote on the question on the call by yea or
by nay. The only exception being if the Council member feels they have a
personal interest in the matter, at which time it is permissible for them to
abstain from voting. Any members, not being excused, who refuses to vote on the
question when the yeas and nays are taken, shall be guilty of contempt of
Council and may for such contempt be censured by a majority vote of Council.
Rule 6.4 - Demand for Vote.
Any member may demand the yeas and nays and it shall be taken on the passage of
any resolution, question or proposition submitted to Council. In taking the
yeas and nays, the Clerk shall call the names of the members. Before the
announcement of the vote by the President, the Clerk shall read the votes so
taken upon demand of any member.
Rule 6.5 - Motions.
When a motion is made and seconded, it shall be stated by the President before
any debate shall be in order. Any such motion and any amendment thereto may be
withdrawn by the movers thereof at any time before decision, if the majority of
the members so agree.
Rule 6.6 - Non-Debatable Motions.
Motion to adjourn, lay on the table, for the previous question, or for
reconsideration of a previous ordinance or resolution shall be decided without
debate.
Rule 6.7 - Motions - Procedures During Debate.
When a question is before Council, no motion shall be entertained except:
   1.)   To adjourn (without debate)
   2.)   To lay on the Table (without debate)
   3.)   For the previous question (without debate)
   4.)   To refer to committee (with debate)
   5.)   To amend (with debate)
   6.)   To postpone indefinitely (with debate)
Such motions shall have precedence in the foregoing order.
Rule 6.8 - Presenting Ordinances and Resolutions to Council.
Proposed Ordinances and Resolutions shall be introduced in written or printed
form. Each one shall contain only one subject, which shall be clearly stated m
the title. The exception is the general appropriation ordinance, for which
monies are to be appropriated.
(Charter 4.9)
The title of proposed ordinances and resolutions relating to a matter pending
in litigation shall clearly identify the parties to the litigation, the court
in which the matter is pending, and the relevant case number(s).
Rule 6.9 - Introduction of Legislation.
All new legislation must be received by the Clerk of Council by 12:00 noon on
the Thursday preceding the meeting at which it is to be introduced. Legislation
received after the time stated above will be deferred until the next regularly
scheduled Council meeting unless authorized by Council President.
Rule 6.10 - Resolutions, Congratulations, and Commendations.
Resolutions of congratulations, commendations, condolences, and the like, which
are not a general and permanent nature, may be voted and acted upon at once
after one reading.
Rule 6.11 - Assigning New Legislation.
The President of Council shall assign all new legislative items to the
appropriate committee and/or committees.
Rule 6.12 - Copies of Legislation.
When legislation is presented to Council, the Clerk of Council shall have
copies made and distributed to each Council member, make all relevant documents
available to Council in electronic format and will provide written copies upon
request.
Rule 6.13 - Number of Readings.
Every resolution and every ordinance shall be read at three (3) different
Regular Council Meetings, unless any or all readings are dispensed with by a
three-fourths (3/4) vote of the members of Council (6 yeas needed). Ordinances
and resolutions shall be deemed to have been read if a written, printed, or an
electronic copy of the ordinance or resolution shall have been furnished to
each member of Council prior to its introduction and if the title thereof is
fully read, provided that such ordinance or resolution shall be read in full if
so directed by motion approved by affirmative vote of a simple majority of
Council.
(Charter Section 4.9)
Rule 6.14 - When Legislation Becomes Effective.
Each resolution or ordinance providing for
   a.)   the appropriation of money; or
   b.)   improvements petitioned for by a majority of the adjacent property to
be benefitted and specially assessed therefore; or
   c.)   any emergency resolution or ordinance necessary for the immediate
preservation of public peace, health, welfare, or safety,
   shall take effect, unless a later date be specified therein, upon its
passage and approval by the Mayor, or upon the expiration of the time within
which it may be vetoed by the Mayor, or upon its passage over veto by the
Mayor, as the case may be.
No other resolution or ordinance shall become effective until thirty (30) days
after its passage and approval by the Mayor, or upon the expiration of the time
within which it may be vetoed by the Mayor, or upon its passage over veto by
the Mayor, as the case may be.
(Charter Section 4.9)
Rule 6.15 - Legislation Requiring a Public Hearing.
No action of Council authorizing
   a.)   the surrender of joint exercise of any of its powers; or
   b.)   the granting of any franchise; or
   c.)   the enactment, amendment, or repeal or any zoning or building
resolution or ordinance; or
   d.)   an increase of utility rate; or
   e.)   the changing of any ward boundaries; or
   f.)   any change in the boundaries of the City,
   shall be taken until a public hearing on said action shall have occurred, no
later than seven (7) days before final enactment by Council.
(Charter Section 4.9)
Rule 6.16 - Appropriation of Money.
Money may be appropriated by ordinance or resolution. All legislation for the
appropriation of money, the issue of bonds, the transfer of any money to any
fund or the payment of claims shall designate the code number of the funds from
which and to which such moneys are appropriated or transferred. Such
legislation shall be referred without debate to the Finance Committee for
consideration and report, unless the rules be suspended by an affirmative vote
of three-fourths (3/4) of all elected members.
Rule 6.17 - Amendments.
No resolution or ordinance shall be revised or amended unless the resolution or
ordinance superseding it contains the entire resolution or ordinance as revised
or amended, or the section or sections so revised or amended. The original
resolution or ordinance, or section or sections thereof, shall be considered to
be repealed.
(Charter Section 4.9)
SECTION 7 - Public Comment
Rule 7.1 - Citizens Addressing Council.
Individual citizens shall be permitted to address Council at Regular and
Special Meetings. This rule shall not pertain to previously set public hearings
on specific matters before Council.
Rule 7.2 - Time Allotted.
The Public Comment portion of the Meeting shall continue for no longer than
thirty (30) minutes. No individual shall be permitted to speak longer than
three minutes on any one particular subject.
The Public Comment portion of the meeting shall not be shortened by a scheduled
public hearing or special presentation to Council, but shall be the full thirty
(30) minutes as set forth in these rules.
Rule 7.3 - Speaking Roster.
Any individual wishing to address Council shall sign the speaking roster
prepared by the Clerk of Council. This roster will be left at the door until
such time as the presiding officer requests the list to begin the Public
Comment portion of the meeting. Signatures shall include addresses.
Rule 7.4 - Conduct of Speakers.
Each speaker must identify themselves and shall state the subject of their
comments which shall be addressed to the presiding officer. The presiding
officer shall have the power to equitably divide the time available among the
speakers. All speakers shall observe all rules of decorum. No debate,
disrespect or obscenities shall be permitted.
Rule 7.5 - Employee Grievances.
No person shall be permitted to speak on any individual City employee grievance
problem unless all the City Grievances Procedure Steps have been exhausted by
the person involved.
Rule 7.6 - Response of the Presiding Officer.
The presiding officer may refer any question posed, to a member of Council or
the Administration to answer.
SECTION 8 - General.
Rule 8.1 - Access to Information.
Any person may visit, email or telephone the office of the Clerk of Council
during that office’s regular office hours to determine, based on information
available at that office, the time and place of regular meetings; the time,
place, and purpose of any then known Special Meetings; and the agenda for such
meetings as then available.
Rule 8.2 - Council Relationship to Administrative Officers.
Neither Council, nor any of its committees, nor any of its several members,
shall in any matter take part in the discipline of, give orders to, any
subordinates and employees in the administrative service of the City
responsible to the Mayor, but must deal directly with the Mayor. Council may
inquire into the conduct of any office or department and into the performance
of any contract or any of the affairs of the City.
(Charter Section 4.15)
(Prior Code, § 220.02) (Ord. 2015-11, passed 8-13-2015; Ord. 2018-07, passed 4-
10-2018; Ord. 2023- 16, passed 2-13-2024)
§ 31.03 CLERK OF COUNCIL.
   Council hereby authorizes a change in employment status for the Clerk of
Council from part-time to full-time status, with all city benefits, effective
immediately.
(Prior Code, § 220.03) (Res. 94-R19, passed 3-22-1994)
§ 31.04 DEPUTY CLERK.
   (A)   The City Council establishes the position of Deputy Clerk of Council.
   (B)   The position of Deputy Clerk of Council will be added to the listing
of non-bargaining positions at pay grade level 5 and the salary range for the
position shall be as set forth by resolution from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 220.04) (Res. 2007-R50, passed 9-25-2007)
PUBLIC MEETINGS
§ 31.15 ADOPTION OF RULES FOR NOTIFICATION OF MEETINGS TO THE PUBLIC AND NEWS
MEDIA; PURPOSES.
   (A)   The rules set forth in this subchapter are adopted pursuant to R.C. §
121.22(F) for the purposes of:
      (1)   Establishing a reasonable method for any person to determine the
time and place of all regularly scheduled meetings and the time, place and
purpose of all special meetings;
      (2)   Making provisions for giving advance notice of special meetings to
the news media that have requested notification; and
      (3)   Making provisions for persons to request and obtain reasonable
advance notification of all meetings at which any specific type of public
business is to be discussed.
   (B)   These rules apply to each municipal body, as defined in §
31.16, of the city, and are in addition to any applicable legal requirements as
to notices to members of a municipal body or to others in connection with
specific meetings or specific subject matters.
(Prior Code, § 208.01) (Ord. 91-22, passed 6-25-1991)
§ 31.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLERK. The Clerk of Council.
   DAY. A calendar day.
   MEETING. Any prearranged discussion of the public business of a municipal
body by a majority of the members of the municipal body.
   MUNICIPAL BODY. The legislative authority and any board, commission,
committee, agency, authority or similar decision-making body of the city.
   ORAL NOTIFICATION. Notification given orally either in person or by
telephone, directly to the person for whom such notification is intended, or by
leaving an oral message for such person at the address, or if by telephone at
the telephone number, of such person as shown on the records kept by the Clerk
under these rules.
   POST.
      (1)   To post in an area accessible to the public during the usual
business hours at the office of the Clerk and at the following locations:
         (a)   The Administrative Offices, 1755 Town Park Boulevard, Green, OH
44232;
         (b)   The Fire Department, 4200 Massillon Road;
         (c)   The Community Center, 4224 Massillon Road;
         (d)   The South Annex, 5383 Massillon Road; and
         (e)   The Green Branch Library, 4759 Massillon Road.
      (2)   A notice identifying the locations at which notifications will be
posted pursuant to these rules shall be published by the Clerk within ten
calendar days after the adoption of these rules.
   PUBLISHED. Published once in a newspaper having a general circulation in the
municipality, as defined in R.C. § 7.12, except that no portion of such
newspaper need be printed in the municipality. If at the time of any such
publication, there is no such newspaper of general circulation, then such
publication shall be in a newspaper then determined by the Clerk to have the
largest circulation in the municipality.
   SPECIAL MEETING. A meeting which is neither a regular meeting nor an
adjournment of a regular or special meeting to another time or day to consider
items specifically stated on the original agenda of such regular or special
meeting.
   WRITTEN NOTIFICATION. Notification in writing mailed, telegraphed or
delivered to the address of the person for whom such notification is intended
as shown on the records kept by the Clerk under these rules, or in any way
delivered to such person. If mailed, such notification shall be mailed by
first-class mail, deposited in a U.S. Postal Service mailbox no later than the
second day preceding the day of the meeting to which such notification refers;
provided that at least one regular mail delivery day falls between the day of
mailing and the day of such meeting.
(Prior Code, § 208.02) (Ord. 91-22, passed 6-25-1991)
§ 31.17 NOTICE OF REGULAR AND ORGANIZATIONAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Clerk shall post a statement of the time(s) and place(s) of
regular meetings of each municipal body for each calendar year not later than
the second day preceding the day of the first regular meeting (other than the
organizational meeting) of the calendar year of that municipal body. The Clerk
shall check at reasonable intervals to ensure that such statement remains so
posted during such calendar year. If at any time during the calendar year the
time or place of regular meetings, or of any regular meeting, is changed on a
permanent or temporary basis, a statement of the time and place of such changed
regular meetings shall be so posted by the Clerk at least 24 hours before the
time of the first changed regular meeting.
   (B)   The Clerk shall post a statement of the time and place of any
organizational meeting of a municipal body at least 24 hours before the time of
such organizational meeting.
   (C)   Upon the adjournment of any regular or special meeting to another day,
the Clerk shall promptly post notice of the time and place of such adjourned
meeting.
(Prior Code, § 208.03) (Ord. 91-22, passed 6-25-1991)
§ 31.18 GENERAL NOTICE OF SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Except in the case of a special meeting referred to in §
31.19(D), the Clerk shall, no later than 24 hours before the time of a special
meeting of a municipal body, post a statement of the time, place and purposes
of such special meeting.
   (B)   The statement under this section and the notifications under §
31.19 shall state such specific or general purpose or purposes then known to
the Clerk to be intended to be considered at such special meeting and may
state, as an additional general purpose, that any other business as may
properly come before such municipal body at such meeting may be considered and
acted upon.
(Prior Code, § 208.04) (Ord. 91-22, passed 6-25-1991)
§ 31.19 NOTICE TO NEWS MEDIA OF SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   (1)   Any news medium organization that desires to be given advance
notification of special meetings of a municipal body shall file with the Clerk
a written request therefor.
      (2)   Except in the event of an emergency requiring immediate official
action as referred to in division (D) of this section, a special meeting shall
not be held unless at least 24 hours’ advance notice of the time, place and
purposes of such special meeting is given to the news media that have requested
such advance notification in accordance with division (B) of this section.
   (B)   (1)   News media requests for such advance notification of special
meetings shall specify the municipal body that is the subject of such request;
the name of the medium; the name and address of the person to whom written
notifications to the medium may be mailed, telegraphed or delivered; the names,
addresses and telephone numbers (including addresses and telephone numbers at
which notifications may be given either during or outside of business hours) of
at least two persons to either one of whom oral notifications to the medium may
be given; and at least one telephone number which the request identifies as
being manned, and which can be called at any hour for the purpose of giving
oral notification to such medium.
      (2)   Any such request shall be effective for six months from the date of
filing with the Clerk or until the Clerk receives written notice from such
medium canceling or modifying such request, whichever is earlier. Each
requesting news medium shall be informed of such period of effectiveness at the
time it files its request. Such requests may be modified or extended only by
filing a complete new request with the Clerk. A request shall not be deemed to
be made unless it is complete in all respects, and such request may be
conclusively relied upon by the city, the municipal body that is the subject of
such request, and the Clerk.
   (C)   The Clerk shall give such oral notification or written notification,
or both, as the Clerk determines, to the news media that have requested such
advance notification in accordance with division (B) of this section, of the
time, place and purposes of each special meeting, at least 24 hours prior to
the time of such special meeting.
   (D)   In the event of an emergency requiring immediate official action, a
special meeting may be held without giving 24 hours advance notification
thereof to the requesting news media. The persons calling such meeting, or any
one or more of such persons or the Clerk on their behalf, shall immediately
give oral notification or written notification, or both, as the person or
persons giving such notification determine, of the time, place and purposes of
such special meeting to such news media that have requested such advance
notification in accordance with division (B) of this section. The minutes or
the call, or both, of any such special meeting shall state the general nature
of the emergency requiring immediate official action.
(Prior Code, § 208.05) (Ord. 91-22, passed 6-25-1991)
§ 31.20 NOTIFICATION OF DISCUSSION OF SPECIFIC TYPES OF PUBLIC BUSINESS.
   (A)   (1)   Any person, upon written request and as provided herein, may
obtain reasonable advance notification of all meetings at which any specific
type of public business is scheduled to be discussed.
      (2)   Such person may file a written request with the Clerk specifying
the person’s name and the address(es) and telephone number(s) at or through
which the person can be reached during and outside of business hours; the
specific type of public business the discussion of which the person is
requesting advance notification of; the municipal body that is the subject of
such request; and the number of calendar months (not to exceed six) which the
request covers. Such request may be cancelled by request from such person to
the Clerk.
      (3)   Each such written request shall be accompanied by stamped self-
addressed envelopes sufficient in number to cover the number of regular
meetings during the time period covered by the request and an estimated number
of six special meetings. The Clerk shall notify in writing the requesting
person when the supply of envelopes is running out, and if the person desires
notification after such supply has run out, such person must deliver to the
Clerk an additional reasonable number of stamped self-addressed envelopes as a
condition to receiving further notifications.
      (4)   Such requests may be modified or extended only by filing a complete
new request with the Clerk. A request shall not be deemed to be made unless it
is complete in all respects, and such request may be conclusively relied upon
by the city, the municipal body that is the subject of such request, and the
Clerk.
   (B)   (1)   The Clerk shall give such advance notification under this
section by written notification, or by oral notification, or both, as the Clerk
determines.
      (2)   The contents of written notification under this division (B)(2) may
be a copy of the agenda of the meeting. Written notification under this
division (B)(2) may be accomplished by giving advance written notification, by
copies of the agendas, of all meetings of the municipal body that is the
subject of such request.
(Prior Code, § 208.06) (Ord. 91-22, passed 6-25-1991)
§ 31.21 INFORMATION FROM CLERK; DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY; INTERPRETATIONS AND
PRESUMPTIONS.
   (A)   Any person may visit or telephone the office of the Clerk during that
office’s regular office hours to determine, based on information available at
that office, the time and place of regular meetings; the time, place and
purposes of any then known special meetings; and whether the available agenda
of any such future meeting states that any specific type of public business,
identified by such person, is to be discussed at such meeting.
   (B)   Any notification provided herein to be given by the Clerk may be given
by any person acting on behalf of or under the authority of the Clerk.
   (C)   A reasonable attempt at notification shall constitute notification in
compliance with these rules.
   (D)   A certificate by the Clerk as to compliance with these rules shall be
conclusive upon the city and the municipal body involved.
(Prior Code, § 208.07) (Ord. 91-22, passed 6-25-1991)
CHAPTER 32: CITY EMPLOYEES
Section
Employees Generally
   
32.01   Bonds
   
32.02   Hospitalization for elected officials
   
32.03   Service awards
   
32.04   Ohio Public Employees Deferred Compensation Program
   
32.05   Public Employees' Retirement System
   
32.06   Police and Fire Disability and Pension Fund
   
32.07   Use of occupant restraint systems while on official travel status
   
32.08   Mileage reimbursement
   
32.09   Sick leave, personal leave, funeral leave, vacation leave and
compensatory time for regular, full-time nonbargaining employees; authority of
Finance Director
   
32.10   Vacation leave for full-time and part-time non-bargaining employees and
holidays for full-time nonbargaining employees
   
32.11   Tuition reimbursement
   
32.12   Seasonal employees; certification
   
32.13   Authority of Mayor re extension of employment benefits
   
32.14   Work-Connected Injury Wage Continuation Policy
Administrative Secretary
   
32.25   Establishment of position
   
32.26   Hiring by full-time department directors
   
32.27   Exemption from examinations to retain position
Human Resources Director
   
32.40   Establishment of position; appointment
   
32.41   Job description
   
32.42   Human Resources Administrative Coordinator
   
32.43   Human Resources Manager
EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
§ 32.01 BONDS.
   (A)   The following bonds and amounts are hereby authorized:
 
Position             Amount
Finance Director     $5,000
Mayor                $5,000
President of Council $1,000
 
   (B)   Such bonds shall be retroactive and effective as of January 1, 1991.
(Prior Code, § 258.01) (Ord. 91-7, passed 1-9-1991)
§ 32.02 HOSPITALIZATION FOR ELECTED OFFICIALS.
   The premium for health insurance for the following elected officials of the
city shall be paid by the city on the same basis as the premium is paid for
other employees of the city: Mayor, Council members and elected Law Director.
(Prior Code, § 258.02) (Res. 91-R9, passed 1-24-1991)
§ 32.03 SERVICE AWARDS.
   (A)   Council hereby authorizes the establishment of a service award system
for city employees.
   (B)   Pins for years of service shall be awarded in five-year increments, as
follows: five years, ten years, 15 years and 20 years.
   (C)   Employees serving the city for a period of 25 years shall receive a
clock.
   (D)   Employees serving the city for a period of 30 years shall receive a
plaque.
   (E)   Employees serving the city for a period of 35 years, or at retirement,
shall be entitled to a recognition function with an appropriate gift.
(Prior Code, § 258.03) (Res. 92-R44, passed 9-8-1992)
§ 32.04 OHIO PUBLIC EMPLOYEES DEFERRED COMPENSATION PROGRAM.
   (A)   The city hereby adopts a plan under the Ohio Public Employees Deferred
Compensation Program and shall properly contract with any eligible employee who
desires to participate in the plan. The plan adopted by the city shall be the
uniform plan as promulgated by and as amended from time to time by the Ohio
Public Employees Deferred Compensation Board.
   (B)   The Ohio Public Employees Deferred Compensation Board is hereby
authorized to administer the plan under the program and to do all things
necessary or proper for the administration of the plan, consistent with the
Ohio Revised Code and all the rules and regulations promulgated by the Board,
whether in the Ohio Administrative Code or otherwise. The Board is hereby
authorized to administer the plan under the program consistent with the program
adoption agreement, a copy of which is attached to original Resolution 94-R34,
passed May 10, 1994.
   (C)   The city is hereby authorized to execute the program adoption
agreement with the Ohio Public Employees Deferred Compensation Board.
   (D)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and appointed as the
responsible official who will implement and oversee the administration of the
plan under the program on behalf of the city, in accordance with the program
adoption agreement. The Director of Finance is authorized to provide the Ohio
Public Employees Deferred Compensation Board with any information it may
properly require for the administration of the plan under the program.
(Prior Code, § 258.04) (Res. 94-R34, passed 5-10-1994)
§ 32.05 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
   (A)   (1)   Effective July 31, 1994, the full amount of the statutorily
required contributions to the Public Employees’ Retirement System of Ohio
(PERS) shall be withheld from the gross pay of each person within any of the
classes established in division (B) of this section and shall be picked up
(assumed and paid to the PERS) by the city. This pick-up by the city is, and
shall be designated as, public employee contributions and shall be in lieu of
contributions to the PERS by each person within any of the classes established
in division (B) of this section. No person subject to this pick-up shall have
the option of choosing to receive the statutorily required contribution to the
PERS directly instead of having it picked up by the city or of being excluded
from the pick-up.
      (2)   The city shall, in reporting and making remittance to the PERS,
report that the public employee’s contribution for each person subject to this
pick-up has been made as provided by the statute.
   (B)   The pick-up by the city provided by this section shall apply to all
persons who are employees of the city who are or become contributing members of
the PERS.
   (C)   The city’s method of payment of salary to employees who are
participants in the PERS is hereby modified as follows, in order to provide for
a salary reduction pick-up of employee contributions to the PERS:
      (1)   (a)   The total salary for each employee shall be the salary
otherwise payable under city policies. Such total salary of each employee shall
be payable by the city in two parts:
            1.   Deferred salary; and
            2.   Cash salary.
         (b)   An employee’s deferred salary shall be equal to that percentage
of that employee’s total salary which is required, from time to time by the
PERS, to be paid as an employee contribution by that employee, and shall be
paid by the city to the PERS on behalf of that employee as a pick-up and in
lieu of the PERS employee contribution otherwise payable by that employee. An
employee’s cash salary shall be equal to that employee’s total salary less the
amount of the pick-up for that employee, and shall be payable, subject to
applicable payroll deductions, to that employee.
      (2)   The city shall compute and remit its employer contributions to the
PERS based upon an employee’s total salary. The total salaries payable under
applicable city policies and the pick-up provisions of this section shall not
be greater than the amounts it would have paid for those items had this section
not been in effect.
   (D)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and directed to implement
the provisions of this section to institute the pick-up of the statutorily
required contributions to the PERS for those persons referred to in division
(B) of this section, so as to enable them to obtain the result in federal and
state tax deferments and other benefits.
(Prior Code, § 258.05) (Res. 94-R56, passed 7-26-1994)
§ 32.06 POLICE AND FIRE DISABILITY AND PENSION FUND.
   (A)   (1)   Effective July 31, 1994, the full amount of the statutorily
required contributions to the Police and Fire Disability and Pension Fund
(PFDPF) shall be withheld from the gross pay of each person within any of the
classes established in division (B) of this section and shall be picked-up
(assumed and paid to the PFDPF) by the city. This pick-up by the city is, and
shall be designated as, public employee contributions and shall be in lieu of
contributions to the PFDPF by each person within any of the classes established
in division (b) of this section. No person subject to this pick-up shall have
the option of choosing to receive the statutorily required contribution to the
PFDPF directly instead of having it picked up by the city or of being excluded
from the pick-up.
      (2)   The city shall, in reporting and making remittance to the PFDPF,
report that the public employee’s contribution for each person subject to this
pick-up has been made as provided by the statute.
   (B)   The pick-up by the city provided by this section shall apply to all
persons who are employees of the city who are or become contributing members of
the PFDPF.
   (C)   The city’s method of payment of salary to employees who are
participants in the PFDPF is hereby modified as follows, in order to provide
for a salary reduction pick-up of employee contributions to the PFDPF:
      (1)   (a)   The total salary for each employee shall be the salary
otherwise payable under city policies. Such total salary of each employee shall
be payable by the city in two parts:
            1.   Deferred salary; and
            2.   Cash salary.
         (b)   An employee’s deferred salary shall be equal to that percentage
of that employee’s total salary which is required, from time to time by the
PFDPF, to be paid as an employee contribution by that employee, and shall be
paid by the city to the PFDPF on behalf of that employee as a pick-up and in
lieu of the PFDPF employee contribution otherwise payable by that employee. An
employee’s cash salary shall be equal to that employee’s total salary less the
amount of the pick-up for that employee, and shall be payable, subject to
applicable payroll deductions, to that employee.
      (2)   The city shall compute and remit its employer contributions to the
PFDPF based upon an employee’s total salary. The total salaries payable under
applicable city policies and the pick-up provisions of this section shall not
be greater than the amounts it would have paid for those items had this section
not been in effect.
   (D)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and directed to implement
the provisions of this section to institute the pick-up of the statutorily
required contributions to the PFDPF for those persons referred to in division
(B) of this section, so as to enable them to obtain the result in federal and
state tax deferments and other benefits.
(Prior Code, § 258.06) (Res. 94-R71, passed 7-26-1994)
§ 32.07 USE OF OCCUPANT RESTRAINT SYSTEMS WHILE ON OFFICIAL TRAVEL STATUS.
   (A)   All city employees who drive or ride in city- or privately-owned
vehicles on official travel status shall utilize the complete occupant
restraint systems provided in said vehicles.
   (B)   The appropriate appointing authorities shall take the actions
necessary to ensure that their employees utilize occupant restraint systems
while on official travel status.
(Prior Code, § 258.07) (Ord. 93-5, passed 3-9-1993)
§ 32.08 MILEAGE REIMBURSEMENT.
   (A)   The mileage reimbursement rate for employees who use their personal
automobile for city business purposes is hereby established at $0.31 per mile.
   (B)   Upon the release of the Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue
Service, publication Travel, Entertainment, Gift and Car Expenses, the Finance
Director of the city is hereby directed to change the reimbursement rate to the
most recent published rate, effective January 1 following the release of said
publication.
(Prior Code, § 258.08) (Res. 97-R71, passed 9-9-1997)
§ 32.09 SICK LEAVE, PERSONAL LEAVE, FUNERAL LEAVE, VACATION LEAVE AND
COMPENSATORY TIME FOR REGULAR, FULL-TIME NONBARGAINING EMPLOYEES; AUTHORITY OF
FINANCE DIRECTOR.
   (A)   All regular, full-time employees are entitled to sick leave benefits
accumulated, without limitation, at a rate of ten and one-half hours for each
completed calendar month worked.
   (B)   An employee who transfers from another political subdivision or public
agency to a position with the city may transfer any unused balance of sick
leave from his or her previous position to the city, pursuant to the applicable
sections of the Ohio Revised Code. It is the employee’s responsibility to
furnish a written statement from the previous employer certifying the
termination date and the total transferrable accumulated sick leave balance
upon termination.
   (C)   (1)   Any employee who, by reason of age and service, is granted
retirement or disability under the Police and Firemen’s Disability and Pension
Fund, is entitled to a payment in cash for 50% of all accumulated and unused
sick leave. The procedure and calculation of the payment will be based upon the
following:
         (a)   The employee must request, in writing, addressed to the
appointing authority, payment for accrued unused sick leave.
         (b)   Upon receipt of documentation that the retirement or disability
request has been authorized by the Police and Firemen’s Disability and Pension
Fund, the payment will be based upon the employee’s rate of pay at retirement
or disability.
         (c)   Such payment may not exceed 960 hours.
      (2)   In the event of the death of any employee, the employee’s heirs
shall be entitled to receive the same benefit as if the employee retired.
   (D)   Any eligible employee who has used 24 hours or less of accrued sick
leave during an entire calendar year, will earn eight hours of personal leave.
The personal leave must be used during the calendar year immediately following
the year it was earned, may not be carried over and may not be sold back to the
city as leave. An eligible employee is a regular, full-time employee who has
completed one full calendar year of employment with the city.
   (E)   All regular, full-time employees are entitled to paid funeral leave
due to the death of an immediate family member. Immediate family member, as
used in this section, includes the parents, spouse, children, siblings,
grandparents and grandchildren of the employee and of his or her spouse. An
eligible employee is entitled to seven consecutive days off due to the death of
a spouse or child, and three consecutive days off due to the death of a parent,
sibling, grandparent or grandchild of the employee or of his or her spouse.
   (F)   Unused vacation leave and compensatory time accrued by employees may
be sold back to the city by completing the appropriate paperwork and submitting
it to the Finance Department by November 1. An employee will receive
compensation at his or her current hourly rate, by separate check, in December.
A maximum of 48 hours of compensatory time and 40 hours of vacation leave may
be carried into the next calendar year.
   (G)   The Finance Director is hereby authorized and directed to administer
sick leave, funeral leave, sick leave incentive and leave sale compensation
benefits to regular, full-time, nonbargaining employees of the city, in
conformity with this section.
   (H)   Upon separation from employment due to death or retirement, full-time
employees (or their estate, if upon death), shall be compensated, at their
regular base hourly rate at the time of retirement or death, for 50% of all
accumulated and unused sick leave, up to a maximum of 960 hours.
(Prior Code, § 258.09) (Res. 95-R83, passed 6-27-1995; Res. 99-R19, passed 4-
13-1999; Res. 01-R37, passed 7-10-2001; Res. 04-R-13, passed 3-23-2004; Res.
04-R39, passed 6-8-2004; Res. 2007-R58. 9-25-2007)
§ 32.10 VACATION LEAVE FOR FULL-TIME AND PART-TIME NONBARGAINING EMPLOYEES AND
HOLIDAYS FOR FULL-TIME NONBARGAINING EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Vacation leave for full-time employees.
      (1)   Eligibility/accrual for full-time employees. Vacation service
credit is based upon years of uninterrupted full-time service with the city.
The following schedule will apply to all full-time employees:
 
Length of Service Weeks of Leave
1 to 4 years      2
5 to 9 years      3
10 to 14 years    4
15 years and over 5
 
      (2)   Crediting of vacation.
         (a)   Each full-time employee will be entitled to accumulate vacation
credits for each paid hour they are in an active pay status based upon a 40-
hour work week. Active pay status includes vacation, sick, personal,
compensatory time, jury duty, holidays, military leave, funeral leave and
approved seminars and training. The hourly accumulation rate per paid hour
follows:
 
Length of Service Hourly Accumulated Rate/ Paid Work Calendar Year Equivalent
                  Hour
0 to 4 years      0.0385                             2 weeks per year
5 to 9 years      0.0577                             3 weeks per year
10 to 14 years    0.0770                             4 weeks per year
15 years and over 0.0962                             5 weeks per year
 
         (b)   There will be a catch-up period in 2016 so as to allow vacation
balances which in the past were credited January 1, to be unaffected by the new
accrual basis. Accrual of hours will be calculated retroactive to January 1,
2016, and will be available to use as they are accrued. The accruals are in
addition to the 2016 vacation allotment previously granted on January 1, 2016.
Example: January 1, 2016, an employee is credited two weeks’ vacation; they
also will earn as of January 1, 2016 vacation based on the new formula of
0.0385 per each hour paid. At the end of 2016 if no vacation hours were used,
the full-time employee would have a four-week vacation balance on January 1,
2017.
      (3)   Length of service adjustment. Each covered full-time employee’s
hourly accumulation rate per paid hour will automatically be adjusted to the
appropriate rate shown in division (A)(2) of this section as the full-time
employee’s service qualifies them for the change.
      (4)   Maximum carry-over for full-time employees. A maximum of 40 hours
plus one year’s accrual of vacation hours may be carried over into the
following year. Any vacation leave in excess of the maximum permitted carryover
is forfeited.
      (5)   Probationary full-time employees. Upon completion of the
probationary period, full-time employees may schedule time off using accrued
vacation.
      (6)   Minimum increments for usage for full-time employees. Full-time
employees are permitted to take vacation leave in minimum increments of one
hour.
      (7)   Vacation sell-back for full-time employees. Full-time employees, by
November 1 of any year, upon approval of the department head, may elect to sell
accumulated but unused vacation leave according to the schedule below, at the
employee’s regular base hourly rate. The amount will be paid in a separate
payroll in December.
 
Vacation Entitlement Maximum Carryover    Maximum That Can Be Sold
2 weeks              1 year plus 40 hours 0 week
3 weeks              1 year plus 40 hours 1 week
4 weeks              1 year plus 40 hours 2 weeks
5 weeks              1 year plus 40 hours 3 weeks
 
      (8)   Vacation severance. Upon termination of city employment (retirement
of any kind, resignation, discharge or death), the employee or the employee’s
estate/designated beneficiary will be paid 100% of the employee’s accrued but
unused vacation at the employee’s then current rate of pay.
   (B)   Part-time vacation leave.
      (1)   Part-time vacation service credit. Part-time employees will earn
vacation service credit on the basis of the amount of hours paid in a given
year prorated to those regularly scheduled hours for full-time personnel (i.e.,
1,040 hours worked equals one-half year of vacation service credit). Upon
appointment to full-time status, a part-time employee will remain eligible for
full-time vacation and be credited with the employee’s prior part-time service
credit on the full-time scale.
      (2)   Part-time vacation eligibility/accrual. Part-time employees will
earn vacation based upon the amount of hours they work in the previous calendar
year; provided that they work a minimum of 500 hours. The maximum annual amount
of vacation available to be earned annually is 40 hours for the prior year’s
service. Part-time employees will be credited up to the maximum amount on the
basis of the amount of hours worked annually prorated to that of a full-time
employee (i.e., 1,040 hours worked equals 20 hours of vacation earned) on
January 1.
   (C)   Holidays. Full-time employees of the city shall be given a day off and
be compensated at their regular hourly rates for each of the following
holidays:
Holiday Date
Holiday                Date
New Year’s Day       January 1
Martin Luther King Day Third Monday in January
President’s Day      Third Monday in February
Memorial Day           Last Monday in May
Independence Day       July 4
Juneteenth             June 19
Labor Day              First Monday in September
Columbus Day           Second Monday in October
Veterans Day           November 11
Thanksgiving Day       Fourth Thursday in November
Christmas Day          December 25
 
      (1)   Holidays which fall on a Saturday will be observed on the preceding
Friday and holidays falling on a Sunday will be observed on the Monday
following the holiday for employees assigned to a standard Monday through
Friday work week. Holidays shall be observed on the dates indicated for those
employees assigned to a nonstandard work week. Employees who are required to
work on a holiday will receive holiday pay and also be compensated for actual
hours worked at the rate of one and one-half times their regular hourly rate of
pay in addition to holiday pay.
      (2)   If an employee who is scheduled to work on a holiday reports off
work due to illness, he or she may not use sick leave for the hours absent from
work. He or she will receive up to eight hours of holiday allowance for that
day, based upon the hours he or she was scheduled to work.
      (3)   The Friday after Thanksgiving is hereby established as a paid
holiday for full-time employees of the city who are not represented by an
existing bargaining unit.
   (D)   Floating holiday. A floating holiday of one eight-hour day is
established as an additional paid holiday to full-time employees not
represented by an existing bargaining unit.
(Prior Code, § 258.10) (Res. 95-R76, passed 6-27-1995; Res. 00-R36, passed 6-
13-2000; Res. 01-R36, passed 7-10-2001; Ord. 2016-13, passed 11-22-2016)
§ 32.11 TUITION REIMBURSEMENT.
   (A)   Provided that an employee obtains prior approval from the Mayor, such
employee shall be reimbursed in the amount of 80% for the cost of tuition, book
fees and related expenses incurred for any job-related or management degree
courses provided by any local college, local university, or recognized
vocational facility or institution of higher learning accredited by the Higher
Learning Commission of the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools;
provided that the employee obtains a grade of B (3.0) or better. Approved
courses requiring only a pass/fail grade require a grade of pass. Upon receipt
of tuition reimbursement from the city, the employee must sign a provision
authorizing the city to deduct from his or her final pay monies due the city if
the employee voluntarily leaves or is dismissed for cause within three years
after completing the course for which reimbursement was received. City
reimbursements shall be recovered from such employees, prorated according to
the following schedule and based on the date the employment relationship
terminated:
 
Date of Termination
Within 1 year of reimbursement 100%
Within 1 - 2 years             50%
Within 2 - 3 years             33%
 
   (B)   The city may require that an employee attend an employment related
seminar which is designed to enhance skills directly related to his or her
current position with the city. In such a case, the city shall pay the
following types of expenses incurred by the employee: lodging, meals, personal
automobile mileage or the costs of other modes of transportation, and tuition/
registration fees.
   (C)   An employee shall be paid for his or her regularly scheduled hours
while attending the seminar. An employee may not earn compensatory time or
overtime attending, or traveling to or from, such seminar.
(Prior Code, § 258.11) (Res. 95-R77, passed 6-27-1995; Res. 01-R67, passed 1-8-
2002)
§ 32.12 SEASONAL EMPLOYEES; CERTIFICATION.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of seasonal employee in the
city. Any individual hired for a seasonal employee position shall not work for
a period of more than 180 days during any calendar year. Any individual
employed as a seasonal employee shall not receive any city employee benefits,
other than those that are mandated by law.
   (B)   Pursuant to Charter Article VII, § 3, any person hired as a seasonal
employee is required to obtain Civil Service Commission certification if that
person is scheduled to work more than 90 days in a 12-month period.
Certification by the Civil Service Commission may be made pursuant to §§
7.1 or
7.2 of the Civil Service Commission rules governing classified employees.
(Prior Code, § 258.12) (Res. 97-R16, passed 4-8-1997)
§ 32.13 AUTHORITY OF MAYOR RE EXTENSION OF EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS.
   (A)   The Mayor shall have the authority to approve and extend employment
benefits to any city employee when justified, at the Mayor’s sole discretion,
through the executive order process. The Mayor shall report any additional
employment benefits paid to any city employee pursuant to this section to
Council within 30 days.
   (B)   The Finance Director is hereby authorized to pay additional benefits
upon the receipt of an executive order from the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 258.13) (Res. 00-R37, passed 6-27-2000)
§ 32.14 WORK-CONNECTED INJURY WAGE CONTINUATION POLICY.
   The City Council approves and adopts the work connected injury wage
continuation policy attached to Resolution No. 2004-R53, and authorizes the
Finance Department to make payments to full-time eligible employees pursuant to
the terms of the policy.
(Prior Code, § 258.14) (Res. 04-R53, passed 7-13-2004)
ADMINISTRATIVE SECRETARY
§ 32.25 ESTABLISHMENT OF POSITION.
   The position of administrative secretary is hereby established in and for
the city.
(Prior Code, § 252.01) (Res. 93-R63, passed 9-28-1993)
§ 32.26 HIRING BY FULL-TIME DEPARTMENT DIRECTORS.
   Each full-time department director is authorized to hire an administrative
secretary at a starting salary to be established from time to time by Council.
(Prior Code, § 252.02) (Res. 93-R63, passed 9-28-1993)
§ 32.27 EXEMPTION FROM EXAMINATIONS TO RETAIN POSITION.
   All current administrative secretaries are hereby exempted from competing in
and passing an examination to retain their current positions.
(Prior Code, § 252.05) (Res. 96-R93, passed 1-28-1997)
HUMAN RESOURCES DIRECTOR
§ 32.40 ESTABLISHMENT OF POSITION; APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of Human Resources Director.
The Human Resources Director is an administrative director position established
pursuant to Charter §
6.2. The Human Resources Director will perform the duties and meet the
qualifications established set forth in §
32.41.
   (B)   The Human Resources Director shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of two-thirds of the members of Council.
(Prior Code, § 254.01) (Res. 96-R101, passed 5-13-1997)
§ 32.41 JOB DESCRIPTION.
   The job description for the Human Resources Director shall be as follows:
   CLASSIFICATION:
      Human Resources Director
   REPORTS TO:
      Mayor
   PURPOSE:
      This position will be responsible for providing leadership and direction
for all human resources programs.
   RESPONSIBILITIES:
      (1)   Human resources organizational planning.
      (2)   Management of employee compensation and benefit program.
      (3)   Directing labor relations and implementing collective bargaining
agreements.
      (4)   Management of city safety health services.
      (5)   Assists with general policy administration in all human resources
programs.
   KNOWLEDGE, SKILLS AND ABILITY:
      This position requires a minimum of six years of successful and
progressive experience in human resources management, including a generalist
background with broad knowledge of programs. A bachelor’s degree in human
resources management or a related field, or any equivalent combination of
experience or training, is required.
      General administrative skills and abilities are required.
      Good interpersonal skills, along with good oral and written communication
skills, including the ability to prepare and explain written reports to the
Mayor, City Council, boards and commissions, and the general public.
      Ability to work with the Mayor, City Council and directors to implement
human resources projects beneficial to the city and its work force.
   STATUS:
      FLSA - exempt/administrative - professional
      Civil service - exempt
(Prior Code, § 254.02) (Res. 96-R101, passed 5-13-1997)
§ 32.42 HUMAN RESOURCES ADMINISTRATIVE COORDINATOR.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of Human Resources
Administrative Coordinator.
   (B)   The duties of the Human Resources Administrative Coordinator are as
set forth in Exhibit A attached to Resolution 98-R57, passed June 23, 1998, and
incorporated herein by reference.
   (C)   Compensation for the Human Resources Administrative Coordinator shall
be as established from time to time by Council.
   (D)   Because of the confidential and fiduciary nature of the position of
Human Resources Administrative Coordinator, such position shall be unclassified
and shall be exempt from Civil Service Rules and Regulations.
(Prior Code, § 254.03) (Res. 98-R57, passed 6-23-1998)
§ 32.43 HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGER.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of Human Resources Manager.
   (B)   The Human Resources Manager shall develop and implement policies and
programs regarding the city’s employees.
   (C)   Compensation for the Human Resources Manager shall be as established
from time to time by Council.
   (D)   Because of the confidential nature of the position of the Human
Resources Manager, the position is unclassified and is exempt from Civil
Service Rules and Regulations.
(Prior Code, § 254.04) (Res. 04-R45, passed 6-8-2004)
CHAPTER 33: CITY ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
Section
Department of Finance
   
33.001   Invoicing for allotment inspections
   
33.002   Authority to sign checks
   
33.003   Income Tax Auditor
   
33.004   Ambulance service fees
   
33.005   Investment policy
   
33.006   Blanket purchase orders
Department of Law
   
33.020   Law Director
   
33.021   Law Clerk/paralegal
Department of Engineering
   
33.035   City Engineer
   
33.036   Engineering Project Manager
Department of Planning
   
33.050   Planner
   
33.051   Assistant Planning Director
   
33.052   Planning Administrator
Fire Department
   
33.065   Authorized strength of part-time employees
   
33.066   Administrative Assistant
   
33.067   Full-time radio dispatchers
   
33.068   Dispatch Coordinator
   
33.069   Dispatch Manager
   
33.070   Mutual aid
   
33.071   Tactical medics; carrying of firearms
   
33.072   Outreach Associate
Department of Public Service
   
33.085   General maintenance person
   
33.086   Laborer, service equipment technician, equipment operators and traffic
signal/sign technician
   
33.087   Seasonal labor positions
   
33.088   Secretary of the Highway Department
   
33.089   Working Foreman - Highway; Working Foreman - Lands and Buildings
   
33.090   Storm Water Superintendent
   
33.091   Service Supervisor
   
33.092   Deputy Director of Public Service
Parks and Recreation Department
   
33.105   Superintendent of Parks and Recreation
   
33.106   Parks and Recreation Coordinator
   
33.107   Parks maintenance person
   
33.108   Full-time Secretary
   
33.109   Recreation Assistant
   
33.110   Authority of Mayor to set program fees
Economic Development and Community Improvement Corporation
   
33.125   Purposes; authority; designation as agency for development
   
33.126   Confirmation of Corporation's plan
   
33.127   Agreement between City and Corporation
   
33.128   Community Development Administrator
Statutory reference:
   Annual report to Council, see R.C. § 733.62
   City directors of law, see R.C. §§ 733.49 et seq.
   Community improvement corporations, see R.C. Ch. 1724
   Community redevelopment corporations, see R.C. Ch. 1728
   Departments of public service in cities, see R.C. §§ 735.01 et seq.
   Development corporations, see R.C. Ch. 1726
   Engineers and surveyors, see R.C. Ch. 4733
   Fire departments in cities, see R.C. §§ 737.08 et seq. and 737.21 et seq.
   Parks and recreation, see R.C. Ch. 755
   State law provisions re auditors and auditing, see R.C. §§ 733.10 et seq.
DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
§ 33.001 INVOICING FOR ALLOTMENT INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Finance Director is hereby authorized to invoice the appropriate
developer, or the owner of any building project, the cost of any inspection
provided by an agent of the city.
   (B)   The Finance Director is also authorized to add to the cost of
engineering services a $20 processing fee with each invoice.
(Prior Code, § 232.01) (Ord. 91-24, passed 7-30-1991; Ord. 93-15, passed 7-13-
1993)
§ 33.002 AUTHORITY TO SIGN CHECKS.
   (A)   With the exception of city payroll checks, the Mayor is hereby
authorized and directed to co-sign checks with the Finance Director.
   (B)   With the exception of city payroll checks, the President of Council
shall also be authorized to co-sign checks in the event the Mayor is not
available to do so.
   (C)   City payroll checks must be signed by the Director of Finance. In the
case of emergencies, absence due to illness or any other circumstance that
would preclude the Director of Finance from being able to sign the payroll
checks in a timely manner, the Mayor may sign in the Director of Finance’s
place, or a signature stamp using the Director of Finance’s signature may be
used if the Mayor is unavailable to sign.
(Prior Code, § 232.02) (Ord. 96-2, passed 3-26-1996; Ord. 04-23, passed 11-9-
2004)
§ 33.003 INCOME TAX AUDITOR.
   The position of Income Tax Auditor is hereby established. The compensation
for such position shall be as established from time to time by Council.
(Prior Code, § 232.03) (Res. 96-R8, passed 3-12-1996)
§ 33.004 AMBULANCE SERVICE FEES.
   (A)   The Finance Department shall charge all residents and nonresidents who
receive emergency medical and ambulance transport services from the Fire
Division the usual, reasonable and customary fees for such services. Usual,
reasonable and customary fees are defined as the lowest prevailing fees
established by the Medicare operations insurance carrier for the Medicare
locality area one, as revised from time to time.
   (B)   Emergency medical and ambulance transport services provided by the
Fire Division to residents of the city and nonresidents who work in the city
shall be billed to the individual’s private insurance company, Medicare or
Medicaid, as applicable. The amount paid for the services provided, by the
private insurance company, Medicare and/or Medicaid, as applicable, shall be
accepted by the city as full payment, and the city shall waive the right to
collect any remaining balance.
   (C)   All fees collected for emergency medical and ambulance transport
services shall be made available for use by the Fire Division to defray the
cost of operations, capital purchases and/or training.
(Prior Code, § 232.04) (Res. 95-R134, passed 11-14-1995; Ord. 05-29, passed 12-
13-2005)
§ 33.005 INVESTMENT POLICY.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the policy of the city to invest public funds in a
manner which will provide the highest investment return with the maximum
security, safety and preservation of principal while meeting the daily cash
flow demands of the city and conforming to all applicable statutes governing
the investment of public funds by an Ohio municipality. The Director of Finance
shall be the investment officer for the city, charged with the responsibility
for the purchase and sale of investments, and the carrying out of this
investment policy.
    (B)   Scope. This investment policy applies to all financial assets of the
city, including state and federal funds held by it. The Director of Finance
shall routinely monitor the contents of the city’s investment portfolio, the
available markets and relative value of competing investments, and will adjust
the portfolio accordingly.
    (C)   Prudence.
      (1)   Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under
circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and
intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for
speculation, but for investment, considering the probable safety of their
capital, as well as the probable income to be derived.
      (2)   The standard of prudence to be used by the Director of Finance
shall be the prudent person standard and shall be applied in the context of
managing the overall portfolio. Acting in accordance with this investment
policy and exercising due diligence shall relieve the Director of Finance of
personal responsibility for an individual security’s credit risk or market
price changes; provided that deviations from expectations are reported to
Council in a timely fashion and appropriate action is taken to control adverse
developments.
   (D)   Objectives. The primary objectives, in priority order, of the city’s
investment activities, shall be as follows.
      (1)   Safety. Safety of principal is the foremost objective of the
investment program. Investments of the city shall be undertaken in a manner
that seeks to ensure the preservation of capital in the overall portfolio. To
attain this objective, diversification is required in order that potential
losses on individual securities do not exceed the income generated from the
remainder of the portfolio.
      (2)   Liquidity. The city’s investment portfolio will remain sufficiently
liquid to enable it to meet all operating requirements which might be
reasonably anticipated.
      (3)   Return on investment. The city’s investment portfolio shall be
designed with the objective of attaining a market rate of return throughout
budgetary and economic cycles, taking into account this investment policy and
the cash flow characteristics of the portfolio.
   (E)   Ethics and conflicts of interest. Persons involved in the investment
process shall refrain from personal business activity that could conflict with
proper execution of the investment program or which could impair their ability
to make impartial investment decisions. Employees and investment consultants
shall disclose to the city any material financial interests in financial
institutions that conduct business within the city and any large personal
financial or investment positions that could be related to, or affected by, the
performance of the city’s portfolio. All employees and officers of, and
investment consultants to, the city shall subordinate their personal investment
transactions to those of the city, particularly with regard to the timing of
purchases and sales.
    (F)   Authorized financial dealers and institutions.
      (1)   The Director of Finance will maintain a list of financial
institutions and approved security brokers/dealers selected by credit
worthiness who or which are authorized to provide investment services and
qualify under R.C. § 135.14(M)(1). These may include primary dealers or
regional dealers who or which qualify under Securities and Exchange Commission
Rule 15c 3-1, being 17 C.F.R. § 240-15c3-1, and are registered with the Ohio
Department of Commerce to do business in the state.
      (2)   All financial institutions and brokers/dealers who or which desire
to become qualified suppliers of investment transactions to the city must
provide the Director of Finance with audited annual financial statements, proof
of good standing with the comptroller of currency or state banking regulators
or National Association of Securities Dealers certification, proof of Ohio
registration, and biographical and regulatory information on the persons who
are the primary contact with the entity. All financial institutions, brokers/
dealers and consultants who or which desire to conduct investment business with
the city must sign this investment policy, certifying that they have read it,
understand it and agree to abide by its contents.
      (3)   The Director of Finance shall receive prior approval by majority
vote of City Council to effectuate a transfer of city accounts presently held
by financial institutions to new financial institutions for those funds held
pursuant to this section.
   (G)   Authorized investments. The city is empowered by statute to invest in
the following types of securities:
      (1)   United States Treasury bills, notes, bonds or any other obligation
or security issued by the United States Treasury or any other obligation
guaranteed as to principal and interest by the United States;
      (2)   Bonds, notes, debentures or other obligations or securities issued
by any federal government agency or instrumentality, including, but not limited
to, the Federal National Mortgage Association, Federal Home Loan Bank, Federal
Farm Credit Bank, Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, Government National
Mortgage Association and Student Loan Marketing Association. All such
securities shall be direct issuances of federal government agencies or
instrumentalities;
      (3)   Interim deposits in duly authorized depositories of the city;
provided that such deposits are properly insured or collateralized as required
by law;
      (4)   Bonds and other obligations of the state;
      (5)   No-load money market mutual funds consisting exclusively of
securities as described in divisions (G)(1) and (G)(2) of this section, and
repurchase agreements secured by such obligations; provided that all such
investments under this division (G)(5) shall be made with a bank or savings and
loan association eligible to be a depository for public funds of Ohio
subdivisions; and provided further that any such fund meets the requirements of
R.C. Ch. 135, including that such fund not include any investment in a
derivative;
      (6)   Ohio Subdivision’s Fund (STAROhio); and
      (7)   Overnight or term (not exceeding 30 days) repurchase agreements
meeting the requirements of R.C. § 135.14(E), with a bank or savings and loan
association eligible to be a depository for public funds of Ohio subdivisions
or a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers.
   (H)   Diversification. The city will diversify its investments by security,
type and institution.
    (I)   Maximum maturities. To the extent possible, the city will attempt to
match its investments with anticipated cash flow requirements. No investment
shall be made unless the Director of Finance, at the time of making the
investment, reasonably expects it can be held to its maturity. Unless matched
to a specific obligation or debt of the city, the city will not directly invest
in securities as set forth in divisions (G)(1) to (G)(5) of this section
maturing more than five years from the date of settlement if such securities
bear interest at a fixed rate, and it will not directly invest in such
securities maturing more than two years from the date of settlement if they
bear interest at a variable rate.
   (J)   Safekeeping and custody. All security transactions, including
securities acquired subject to repurchase agreements, entered into by the city,
shall be conducted on a delivery-versus-payment basis. Purchased securities
will be held by a third party custodian, designated by the Director of Finance,
that is a Federal Reserve Bank or other qualified trustee within the meaning of
R.C. § 135.18(J), and the safekeeping of those securities for the benefit of
the city shall be evidenced by safekeeping receipts. Purchased securities shall
be released by the city only upon verification that the principal and interest,
or proceeds of sale of the securities, have been credited to the city’s
account.
   (K)   Prohibited investment practices. In addition to any other prohibitions
in the Ohio Revised Code, the city shall not:
      (1)   Contract to sell securities that have not yet been acquired on the
speculation that prices will decline;
      (2)   Make any investment in DERIVATIVES as defined in R.C. § 135.14(C);
      (3)   Invest in a fund established by another public body for the purpose
of investing public money of other subdivisions, unless the fund is either
STAROhio or a fund created solely for the purpose of acquiring, constructing,
owning, leasing or operating municipal utilities as authorized under R.C. §
715.02 or § 4 of Article XVIII of the Ohio Constitution;
      (4)   Enter into reverse repurchase agreements;
      (5)   Leverage current investments as collateral to purchase other
assets; and
      (6)   Invest in stripped principal or interest obligations of otherwise
eligible obligations.
   (L)   Internal controls. The Director of Finance shall develop and maintain
procedures for the operation of the city’s investment program in accordance
with this investment policy. These procedures shall be designed to prevent loss
of the city’s funds due to fraud, error, misrepresentation, unanticipated
market changes or imprudent actions.
   (M)   Reporting.
      (1)   The Director of Finance shall maintain a current inventory of all
investments including:
         (a)   A description of each security;
         (b)   The cost;
         (c)   Par value;
         (d)   Dates (beginning, settlement and maturity);
         (e)   Rates; and
         (f)   The seller.
      (2)   The Director of Finance shall also prepare and distribute quarterly
(or more frequently, if requested by the Council) a list of all investments and
a report on investment activity and returns.
    (N)   Education. The Director of Finance shall participate in any beginning
and/or continuing education training programs sponsored by the State Treasurer
or the State Auditor in which the Director of Finance is required to
participate pursuant to R.C. §§ 117.44, 135.22 and 733.27. Through
participation in those programs, the Director of Finance will develop and
maintain an enhanced background and working knowledge in investment, case
management and ethics.
    (O)   Nonbinding arbitration. The Director of Finance may enter into a
written investment or deposit agreement that includes a provision under which
the parties agree to submit to nonbinding arbitration (but not binding
arbitration) to settle any controversy that may arise out of that agreement so
long as such provision meets the requirements of the Ohio Revised Code and is
specifically approved by the Council.
   (P)   Investment policy adoption. This investment policy shall be adopted by
Council and, upon adoption, filed in the office of the State Auditor. The
policy shall be reviewed on an annual basis by Council or a committee
designated by it and any modifications made thereto must be approved by Council
and, upon adoption, filed in the office of the State Auditor.
(Prior Code, § 232.05) (Res. 97-R36, passed 5-27-1997; Res. 2019-R37, passed 6-
11-2019)
§ 33.006 BLANKET PURCHASE ORDERS.
   (A)   City Council hereby authorizes the Finance Director to prepare so-
called blanket certificates that do not exceed $10,000 against any specific
line item account over a period not running beyond the end of the current
fiscal year. The blanket certificate may, but need not, be limited to a
specific vendor. Only one blanket certificate may be outstanding at one
particular time for any one particular line item appropriation.
   (B)   City Council authorizes the amount of not to exceed $10,000 as the
legislatively approved amount for blanket purchase orders.
(Prior Code, § 232.06) (Res. 05-R35, passed 6-14-2005)
DEPARTMENT OF LAW
§ 33.020 LAW DIRECTOR.
   Commencing January 1, 2020, the position of Law Director shall be a part-
time position and the Law Director shall commit no less than an average of 20
hours per week to his or her duties set forth in Article 6.4 of the Charter.
The Law Director shall not be prohibited from handling other legal work, or to
be limited in his or her general practice of law, simply by virtue of his or
her status as Law Director for the city.
(Prior Code, § 234.01) (Res. 2019-R01, passed 1-15-2019)
§ 33.021 LAW CLERK/PARALEGAL.
   (A)   The position of Law Clerk/Paralegal is hereby established in the
Department of Law.
   (B)   The Law Director is authorized to hire a Law Clerk/Paralegal at a rate
to be established from time to time by Council.
(Prior Code, § 234.02) (Res. 93-R74, passed 10-12-1993)
DEPARTMENT OF ENGINEERING
§ 33.035 CITY ENGINEER.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of City Engineer for the
purpose of hiring an engineer on Council’s staff. The City Engineer is an
administrative director position created pursuant to §
6.2 of the Charter. The City Engineer will report to the Mayor and will perform
the duties and meet the qualifications set forth in divisions (C) through (E)
of this section.
   (B)   The City Engineer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
a two-thirds vote of the members of Council. Compensation shall be as
established from time to time by Council.
   (C)   The City Engineer shall direct and administer all operations of the
Department of Engineering in connection with the review, design, maintenance,
construction and accomplishment of public works improvements. The City Engineer
shall review and assist in the enforcement of criteria for subdivision
proposals and site plans.
   (D)   Responsibilities of the City Engineer shall include the following:
      (1)   Develop preliminary engineering and cost estimates for public
improvement projects;
      (2)   Establish criteria for design and construction of public works
improvements;
      (3)   Prepare specifications to obtain bids for construction of projects,
work with contractors in performance of projects, approve estimates, change
orders and release of retainers, and recommend contract awards;
      (4)   Review subdivision plans and multi-family site plans and provide
written comments/reports to the Planning Director;
      (5)   Assist and work in conjunction with the Planning Department in the
maintenance of construction drawings and other improvement plans, maps and
files for the city;
      (6)   Work in conjunction with the Planning Director and the Director of
Public Service to prioritize, estimate and implement capital improvement
projects; and
      (7)   Direct and supervise engineering staff for field inspection and
design work.
   (E)   (1)   The City Engineer must have a knowledge of principles and
practices of municipal engineering, demonstrated by the attainment of a
Bachelor’s Degree in Civil Engineering. He or she shall have a minimum of three
years of experience as an engineer. He or she is required to possess a license
to practice as a registered professional engineer in the state. A professional
survey (P.S.) designation is beneficial, but is not required.
      (2)   General administrative skills and abilities are required.
      (3)   Good interpersonal skills, and good oral and written communications
skills, including the ability to prepare and explain written reports to the
Mayor, Council, boards and commissions, and the general public are required.
      (4)   Computer skills are desired, primarily current CADD programs or GIS
systems to complement design and map management skills.
      (5)   The ability to work with the Mayor, Council and directors, to
implement projects beneficial to the city, is required.
(Prior Code, § 235.01) (Res. 95-R23, passed 6-23-1995; Res. 95-R143, passed 11-
28-1995)
§ 33.036 ENGINEERING PROJECT MANAGER.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of Engineering Project
Manager.
   (B)   The Engineering Project Manager shall assist the City Engineer in the
development and implementation of engineering and public works projects.
   (C)   Compensation for the Engineering Project Manager shall be as
established from time to time by Council.
   (D)   The position of Engineering Project Manager is a classified position
under the terms of Civil Service Rules and Regulations.
(Prior Code, § 235.02) (Res. 04-R44, passed 6-8-2004)
DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING
§ 33.050 PLANNER.
   (A)   There is hereby established the employment classification of Planner.
   (B)   Compensation shall be as established from time to time by Council.
   (C)   The duties of the Planner shall include the following:
      (1)   Assist in the preparation and monitoring of federal, state and
local grant/funding applications;
      (2)   Review project site plans for compliance with regulations;
      (3)   Assist in preparation of the city capital improvement plan;
      (4)   Assist in the coordination and compilation of statistics for the
master development plan and various other projects;
      (5)   Compile census and demographic statistics;
      (6)   Assist and offer information to developers, property owners,
realtors, residents and various agencies in relation to development proposals,
concepts and zoning;
      (7)   Prepare graphic display material;
      (8)   Conduct simple statistical surveys of land use;
      (9)   Research tax records for information related to planning projects,
legal advertisements and notification of affected land owners; and
      (10)   Perform similar related duties as assigned.
   (D)   The Planner must have a Bachelor’s Degree in planning, public
administration, urban studies or a related field, with at least two years
experience in principles and practices of municipal planning and public
administration. A Master’s Degree in planning, public administration or urban
studies may be substituted for experience. Knowledge and familiarity with city
master planning, city strategic planning and ordinances, and regulations
relative to planning and land use issues are required. Good interpersonal
skills, administrative skills, oral and written communication skills are also
required. Computer skills shall include a working knowledge of the CAD program
and GIS systems.
(Prior Code, § 236.01) (Res. 95-R106, passed 7-11-1995)
§ 33.051 ASSISTANT PLANNING DIRECTOR.
   (A)   Green City Council establishes the position of Assistant Planning
Director, as described in this section. Compensation shall be as established
from time to time by Council.
   (B)   Pursuant to the Charter of the City of Green the Assistant Planning
Director position will be nonbargaining, FLSA exempt, and unclassified and
exempt from Civil Service Rules and Regulations.
   (C)   Job description.
      (1)   Job summary. Under the direction of the Director of Planning,
assists in planning, assigning, directing, and reviewing the activities of
planning staff engaged in the compilation, analysis and interpretation of data
and policies in the Planning Department. Acts as the department director in the
absence of the Director.
      (2)   Qualifications.
         (a)   Minimum qualifications. Bachelor's Degree in planning or related
field and at least five years of progressive responsibility and experience in
the urban planning field; or an equivalent combination of education, training
and experience. Has obtained American Institute of Certified Planners (AICP)
certification; or will obtain within two years of employment.
         (b)   Preferred qualifications. A Master's Degree in planning or
related field, and supervisor experience are preferred.
      (3)   Essential job functions.
         (a)   Assists in planning, evaluating, and directing departmental
policies, programs, and operations.
         (b)   Oversees the functions of the Planning Department and Zoning
Division in the absence of the Director of Planning.
         (c)   Prepares and implements Department/Division budgets and makes
procedural and operational recommendations to Planning Director.
         (d)   Works with staff in the formulation and administration of city's
Comprehensive Plan and Land Development Code.
         (e)   Provides assistance and information to the public regarding
requirements for development.
         (f)   Assists in developing policies, methods, procedures, and work
performance for the successful operation of the Department.
         (g)   May meet with executive staff to discuss the status of projects,
programs, plans, resolve problems and related issues affecting the Department.
         (h)   Creates procedures and techniques to gather necessary planning
data to implement city's Comprehensive Plan recommendation strategies and
project-specific needs.
         (i)   Works with Economic Development Administrator and Community
Development Administrator to resolve issues and assist with work activities.
         (j)   Respond to and follow-up on all requests received from citizens,
elected officials, agencies, city employees and/or general public on an as
needed basis.
         (k)   Utilize GIS to provide mapping as needed.
         (l)   Reviews plans and prepares staff reports for city commissions
and boards.
         (m)   Oversees daily operation of the Zoning Division.
         (n)   Perform all other related duties as assigned.
      (4)   Knowledge, skills, and abilities. (*Indicates developed after
employment.)
         (a)   Knowledge of: Principles of community and urban planning;
federal and state laws related to planning and urban development; planning,
mapping, and graphic techniques; and techniques used to prepare, monitor and
update a long-range comprehensive plan.
         (b)   Skill in: Establishing and maintaining effective working
relationships with city employees and the public; applying statistical data
tools; preparing clear and concise written reports; collecting, tabulating, and
analyzing demographic statistics; prioritizing tasks and work assignments; and
drafting cartography, preparation of visual materials used in city planning
operations and group presentations; and skills using GIS, Microsoft Word, Excel
and PowerPoint.
         (c)   Ability to: Explain and enforce city policies; write a wide
variety of planning related documents; read and interpret construction
drawings, site plans and city ordinances; exercise good judgment, tact, and
diplomacy in all public interaction; speak and maintain public confidence and
interest, and exercise appropriate confidentiality.
      (5)   Physical demands strength rating. The physical demands involve
crawling, crouching, driving, far acuity, feeling, manual dexterity, handling,
hearing, kneeling, lifting, mental acuity, near acuity, pulling, pushing,
reaching, repetitive motion, speaking, standing, stooping, talking visual
acuity, and walking. May be required to exert up to 50 pounds of force
occasionally and/or up to 30 pounds of force frequently, and/or up to ten
pounds of force constantly to move objects.
(Res. 2024-R79, passed 2-11-2025)
§ 33.052 PLANNING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Green City Council establishes the position of Planning Administrator,
as described in this section. Compensation shall be as established from time to
time by Council.
   (B)   The position of Planning Administrator shall be non-bargaining, FLSA
exempt, and classified under Civil Service Rules and Regulations.
   (C)   Job description.
      (1)   Job summary. Under direction of the Director of Planning,
responsible for advanced professional planning work of high complexity and
variety and managing projects to completion. Areas of assignment may include
zoning, land use and comprehensive planning including technical and inspection
services related to development review. Assists in compilation, analysis and
interpretation of data and policies in the Planning Department.
      (2)   Qualifications. Requires a Bachelor's Degree in planning or related
field and at least three years of professional planning experience; or an
equivalent combination of education, training and experience. Related fields
include business management, community development, environmental, landscape
architecture, public administration, real estate, or urban or regional
planning. Supervisory experience preferred. American Institute of Certified
Planners (AICP) certification is also preferred.
      (3)   Essential job functions.
         (a)   Performs advanced professional work related to a variety of
planning assignments.
         (b)   Manages complex planning studies, development applications and
reviews consultant proposals.
         (c)   Reviews and processes complex comprehensive plan amendments,
rezonings, annexations, site plans and plats.
         (d)   Conducts research and prepares statistical reports on land use,
physical, social and economic issues.
         (e)   Provides professional planning assistance to member communities
on varied land use projects.
         (f)   Develops transportation plans, studies and analyses on a
regional basis.
         (g)   Performs field inspections to gather data relevant to the
development review process and/or to verify that development projects comply
with approved plans.
         (h)   Schedules and conducts meetings with advisory boards and elected
officials.
         (i)   Presents reports and other findings to staff, planning and
zoning boards and commissions, and elected officials and serves as liaison.
         (j)   Attends a substantial number of evening meetings.
         (k)   Supervises planners within the Department.
         (l)   Utilizes GIS to provide mapping as needed.
         (m)   Reviews plans, prepares staff reports for city commissions and
boards.
         (n)   Works in cooperation with the Zoning Division.
      (4)   Knowledge, skills, and abilities. (*Indicates learning on the job.)
         (a)   Knowledge of: Advanced knowledge of the philosophies,
principles, practices and techniques of planning; well-developed knowledge of
one or more planning disciplines such as land use, planning/zoning,
transportation planning, environmental planning, urban design, housing,
historic preservation or economic development; knowledge and experience in
construction processes; knowledge of principles, methodology, and practices of
research and data collection.
         (b)   Skill in: Effective writing techniques; computer programs and
applications including Microsoft Office, internet applications, and database
management; GIS programs and applications; excellent oral and written
communication skills in the preparation and presentation of planning reports or
projects; excellent interpersonal skills for facilitating relationships with
elected/appointed officials or other decision-makers; creative problem-solving
skills to gather relevant information to solve less well-defined planning
problems and group facilitation skills for community workshops.
         (c)   Ability to: Work on several projects or issues simultaneously;
provide effective supervision and staff management; manage projects effectively
and meet firm deadlines and facilitate in-person and virtual public
participation activities.
      (5)   Physical demands strength rating. The physical demands involve
crawling, crouching, driving, far acuity, feeling, manual dexterity, handling,
hearing, kneeling, lifting, mental acuity, near acuity, pulling, pushing,
reaching, repetitive motion, speaking, standing, stooping, talking visual
acuity, and walking. May be required to exert up to 50 pounds of force
occasionally and/or up to 30 pounds of force frequently, and/or up to ten
pounds of force constantly to move objects.
(Res. 2024-R80, passed 2-11-2025)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 33.065 AUTHORIZED STRENGTH OF PART-TIME EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   The authorized strength in the classification of part-time dispatcher
is hereby set at 12.
   (B)   The authorized strength in the classification of part-time firefighter
is hereby set at 20.
   (C)   The authorized strength in the classification of secretary is hereby
set at one.
   (D)   The Fire Chief is hereby authorized to maintain the part-time staffing
at the levels established by this section.
   (E)   When it is necessary to fill a vacancy or vacancies to maintain the
authorized level established by this section, the Fire Chief may recommend for
hire, the Mayor and/or the Public Safety Director may approve, and Council may
confirm, by motion, with a majority affirmative vote, the hiring of replacement
employees in the part-time classifications within the Fire Department.
   (F)   All persons so hired shall be paid at the rate of compensation then in
effect for part-time probationary employees in the classification into which
they are hired.
(Prior Code, § 242.01) (Ord. 92-15, passed 8-25-1992)
§ 33.0066 ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT.
   (A)   The Fire Chief is hereby authorized to immediately hire an individual,
who shall be under the direct supervision of the Fire Chief, to provide
administrative support and perform clerical duties for the Fire Department.
   (B)   The person selected pursuant to this section shall be hired as a part-
time employee, effective February 11, 1992, at an hourly rate which is
equivalent to the hourly rate currently established for the classification of
Fire Department Administrative Assistant.
   (C)   Effective March 1, 1992, the person selected pursuant to this section
shall be reclassified as a full-time salaried employee of the Fire Department
and shall be compensated at the salary established for the classification of
Fire Department Administrative Assistant which is in effect at that time,
subject to a 90-day probationary period.
(Prior Code, § 242.02) (Res. 92-R11, passed 2-11-1992)
§ 33.067 FULL-TIME RADIO DISPATCHERS.
   (A)   The position of full-time radio dispatcher is hereby established in
the Fire Department.
   (B)   The Fire Department is authorized to employ five full-time radio
dispatchers at a rate to be established from time to time by Council.
(Prior Code, § 242.03) (Res. 93-R68, passed 9-14-1993)
§ 33.068 DISPATCH COORDINATOR.
   (A)   The position of Dispatch Coordinator is hereby established in the Fire
Department.
   (B)   The position of Dispatch Coordinator shall receive compensation at a
rate determined from time to time by Council.
   (C)   The position of Dispatch Coordinator shall be a classified position
under the terms of the civil service rules and regulations and the position
shall be included within the AFSCME bargaining unit.
(Prior Code, § 242.04) (Res. 00-R21, passed 5-9-2000)
§ 33.069 DISPATCH MANAGER.
   (A)   The position of Dispatch Manager is hereby established.
   (B)   The position of Dispatch Manager will be added to the listing of
nonbargaining positions at pay grade level 9 and the salary range for the
position shall be as set forth by Council.
   (C)   The position of Dispatch Manager is a classified position under the
terms of the Civil Service Rules and Regulations.
(Prior Code, § 242.045) (Res. 05-R-05, passed 2-8-2005)
§ 33.070 MUTUAL AID.
   (A)   The Fire Chief is hereby authorized to provide and/or request fire
protection and services related to the preservation and protection of life and
property to and/or from any township, village or other municipality, public
service agency and/or private firefighting company located in the county, and/
or adjoining counties, without a contract when the ability to provide adequate
emergency services to the citizens of the affected area is deemed inadequate.
   (B)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to enter into mutual aid agreements
with any township, village or other municipality, public service agency and/or
private firefighting company located in the county and/or adjoining counties as
deemed necessary to provide or render mutual aid, assistance, resources,
including personnel and equipment, and knowledge to each other in the event of
emergency situations arising wherein the ability to provide adequate emergency
services to the citizens of the affected area is deemed inadequate.
(Prior Code, § 242.05) (Res. 00-R25, passed 4-25-2000)
§ 33.071 TACTICAL MEDICS; CARRYING OF FIREARMS.
   (A)   Tactical paramedics assigned by the Fire Chief and confirmed by the
County Sheriff to serve as medical support to the County Sheriff’s SWAT Team,
who have met the training requirements established by Fire Division Policy,
County Sheriff’s Office training policy and the state; and have been authorized
to carry by the Fire Chief, shall be permitted to carry a firearm while
functioning as a tactical paramedic with the SCSO SWAT Team, including on call
outs, special assignments, stand-by events, training and travel to and from
training, and call outs.
   (B)   Tactical medics authorized to carry a firearm shall be required to
provide their own weapon and it shall meet the same specifications as required
of the SCSO SWAT operators and be inspected and approved by the law enforcement
Firearms Training Bureau.
   (C)   Upon selection as a tactical medic and prior to authorization to carry
a firearm, the member shall meet the policy and training requirements of the
Fire Division and Sheriff’s Office and all training requirements established by
the state for tactical paramedics, including but not limited to:
      (1)   Use of force training pursuant to law enforcement training
guidelines;
      (2)   Successful completion of firearms qualification testing on an
annual basis; and
      (3)   Weapons retention training pursuant to law enforcement training
guidelines.
   (D)   The assigned Fire Division Tactical Medics shall comply with the
provisions of the Fire Division’s firearms policy.
(Prior Code, § 242.06) (Ord. 2019-24, passed 2-11-2020)
§ 33.072 OUTREACH ASSOCIATE.
   (A)   Green City Council establishes the position of Outreach Associate with
the job description as set forth in this section. Compensation shall be as
established from time to time by Council.
   (B)   The position of Outreach Associate shall be FLSA non-exempt and a non-
classified position under Civil Service Rules and Regulations.
   (C)   Job description.
      (1)   Job summary. Under EMS Bureau direction, assists the Community
Paramedic with focus on the Department's Quick Response Team (QRT) (e.g.,
multiple weekly home visits providing access to resources in pair with Summit
County Sheriff Officer and an ADM counselor, gathering and tracking data
associated with "hot spots" and follow up data when applicable, public
education and dissemination of resources, working with local and state
agencies).
      (2)   Qualifications. Position requires a medical and/or mental health
background (paramedic, registered nurse, licensed practical nurse, licensed
counselor, licensed social worker or in a similar field) with preferred one to
two years' experience in mental health. The city will consider applicants who
possess an equivalent combination of training and/or experience.
      (3)   Essential job functions.
         (a)   Responsible for gathering data associated with EMS alarms with
relation to drugs, alcohol, and mental health.
         (b)   Monitors "Hot Spots" and conducts surveillance and mapping of
the city's alarms regarding drugs, alcohol, and mental health to identify the
underserved in the community.
         (c)   Work with other government agencies, most specifically, the
Summit County Sheriff's Office and the ADM Board to coordinate home visits
after an incident involving drugs, alcohol, and mental health.
         (d)   Provides primary prevention strategies to educate various
audiences.
         (e)   Provides secondary prevention strategies to assist those
suffering from drugs, alcohol, and mental health issues.
         (f)   Assist the Community Paramedic with transport of non-emergency
patients (drugs, alcohol, mental health) when applicable.
         (g)   Assist in tracking data associated with the city's interventions
that meet the requirements of certain grant funding.
         (h)   Performs other related duties as directed by the Community
Paramedic or EMS Lieutenant determined to be necessary to promote, further, or
ensure the effective and efficient operation of the Department.
      (4)   Knowledge, skills and abilities.
         (a)   Knowledge of: Department policies and procedures; city
government structure and processes, Microsoft Office, HIPAA, UKG Kronos, etc.
         (b)   Skill in: Use of a personal computer; job related software (ESO,
NIFRS), verbal and written communication.
         (c)   Ability to: Research patient data, carry out detailed written or
oral instructions; interpret a variety of instructions in written form; deal
with problems involving several variables, document succinctly, exercise
independent judgement and discretion, compile and prepare data reports,
communicate effectively, cooperate with coworkers, handle sensitive inquiries,
resolve complaints.
      (5)   Equipment used. Personal computer, computer software (e.g.,
Microsoft Office, Kronos, VIP), printer, copy machine, fax machine, other
standard office equipment.
      (6)   Inherently hazardous or physically demanding working conditions.
The employee has exposure to chemical compounds found in an office environment
(e.g., toner, correction fluid, etc.); has contact with potentially violent or
emotionally distraught persons; occasionally lifts objects ten pounds or more;
occasionally carries objects ten pounds or more; occasionally pushes and pulls
objects ten pounds or more. Note: In accordance with U.S. Department of Labor
physical demands strength ratings. This is considered sedentary work.
(Res. 2024-R67, passed 11-12-2024)
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICE
§ 33.085 GENERAL MAINTENANCE PERSON.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of general maintenance
person, for the purpose of assisting the Director of Public Service with the
maintenance and service of the buildings and grounds of the city.
   (B)   Compensation for the general maintenance person shall be as
established from time to time by Council. The general maintenance person shall
perform the duties and meet the qualifications established by the city
administration.
(Prior Code, § 244.01) (Res. 95-R165, passed 2-13-1996)
§ 33.086 LABORER, SERVICE EQUIPMENT TECHNICIAN, EQUIPMENT OPERATORS AND TRAFFIC
SIGNAL/SIGN TECHNICIAN.
   (A)   There are hereby established the positions of laborer, service
equipment technician, equipment operator I, equipment operator II and traffic
signal/sign technician, for the purpose of assisting the Director of Public
Service with the implementation and performance of the policies and services of
the Highway Department.
   (B)   The positions established in division (A) of this section shall
perform the duties and meet the qualifications established by the city
administration.
   (C)   Compensation for the positions established in division (A) of this
section shall be as established from time to time by Council.
(Prior Code, § 244.02) (Res. 95-R154, passed 12-20-1995)
§ 33.087 SEASONAL LABOR POSITIONS.
   There are hereby established four seasonal labor positions for the
Department of Public Service to assist the Department in its functions. Any
individual hired for these positions shall work for a period not to exceed 90
days from the date of hire. The positions shall be paid at an hourly rate
established by Council. Persons employed in the seasonal labor positions shall
not receive any employee benefits.
(Prior Code, § 244.03) (Res. 95-R108, passed 7-25-1995)
§ 33.088 SECRETARY OF THE HIGHWAY DEPARTMENT.
   There is hereby established the position of Highway Department Secretary.
Compensation for such position shall be as determined from time to time by
Council.
(Prior Code, § 244.04) (Res. 96-R4, passed 2-13-1996)
§ 33.089 WORKING FOREMAN - HIGHWAY; WORKING FOREMAN - LANDS AND BUILDINGS.
   (A)   The positions of Working Foreman - Highway, and Working Foreman -
Lands and Buildings are hereby established, with rates of compensation as
determined from time to time by Council.
   (B)   The positions of Working Foreman - Highway, and Working Foreman -
Lands and Buildings will be classified positions under the terms of the civil
service rules and regulations and shall be included within the AFSCME
bargaining unit.
(Prior Code, § 244.05) (Res. 00-R22, passed 5-9-2000)
§ 33.090 STORM WATER SUPERINTENDENT.
   (A)   There is hereby created the position of Storm Water Superintendent
within the Storm Water Division of the Department of Public Service for the
purpose of managing the repair, maintenance and construction of storm water
management systems within the city.
   (B)   Compensation for the position of Storm Water Superintendent shall be
as established from time to time by Council.
   (C)   The position of Storm Water Superintendent is a classified position
under the terms of the civil service rules and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 244.06) (Res. 01-R12, passed 2-27-2001)
§ 33.091 SERVICE SUPERVISOR.
   (A)   The City Council establishes the position of Service Supervisor. The
position of Service Supervisor is established as a pay grade 9 and the salary
range for the position shall be as set forth by resolution from time to time.
   (B)   The position of Service Supervisor is a classified position under the
terms of the Civil Service Commission.
(Prior Code, § 244.07) (Res. 2007-R76, passed 11-28-2007)
§ 33.092 DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SERVICE.
   (A)   Green City Council establishes the position of Deputy Director of
Public Service, as described in this section. Compensation shall be as
established from time to time by Council.
   (B)   The Deputy Director of Public Service will be non-bargaining, FLSA
exempt, and unclassified and exempt from Civil Service Rules and Regulations.
   (C)   Position description.
      (1)   Job responsibilities. Under general direction of the Director of
Public Service, assists with oversight of long-term and day to day operations
of the Service Department; plans, organizes and implements programs and
administers the operations and staff of the Service Department. Performs
project management to execute Service Department objectives.
      (2)   Qualifications. Bachelor's Degree from an accredited four-year
college or university in applicable field required plus four or more years’
experience in public administration or construction/management including
progressively responsible experience including managerial responsibilities for
technical, professional and labor or trades personnel; or any combination of
training, education, or experience which provides the desired knowledge,
skills, and abilities to perform the essential functions of the position.
      (3)   Essential functions. For purposes of 42 U.S.C. § 12101:
         (a)   Assists Public Service Director with supervision of all Public
Service Department staff and responsible for direct supervision of GIS
Administrator (e.g., recommends and develops policy; interviews applicants;
recommends hiring, discipline, and firing; leads, motivates, collaborates,
empowers, rewards, coaches, and praises; trains and instructs employees;
assigns and directs work; appraises and evaluates performance; addresses
complaints and resolves problems; conducts orientation; prepares and conducts
employee reviews; ensure efficient organization and completion of work;
develops strategic plans; reviews and approves payroll; researches training
opportunities for staff; provides training; determines seasonal staff needs and
assists with hiring; etc.); assists with Department and city preparation for
labor negotiations, etc.
         (b)   Assists Public Service Director with oversight and planning for
Public Service Department (e.g., assists with legislative process for matters
related to Department; assists with budgeting process; works on Department
capital project planning; assists with development and implementation of
Department goals, strategies, and objectives; develops policies and procedures
for Department with Public Service Director approval, etc.).
         (c)   Oversees projects and contracts (e.g. , manages Department
projects; works with staff on goals and objectives of project; communicates
with vendor/contractors regarding project; negotiates contract and cost;
maintains oversight of budget and expenditures; engages with contractor
regarding delivery of project; interprets plans and specifications; works with
contractors/vendors and staff to resolve issues; oversees organization of
project team; reviews project before close out to ensure completion; closes out
project; assists with moving project through legislative and RFP process, if
necessary, etc.).
         (d)   Works in CityWorks system to manage Service Department requests,
work orders and maintenance of city assets.
         (e)   Serves as liaison to public and external entities to communicate
on issues related to the Public Service Department (e.g., engages with citizens
and other entities at public events or meetings; communicates with public on
issues related to Public Service Department; answers questions; resolves
complaints and issues, etc.).
         (f)   Assists Service Director with preparation of operating and
capital budget (e.g., meets with supervisors and senior staff to finalize
equipment requests; researches vendors and collect capital equipment bids;
reviews past historical spending; evaluates future capital equipment and
project needs; finalizes budget with management staff, etc.).
         (g)   Researches and provides guidance in compliance with city,
county, state, and federal regulations as it relates to the operations of the
Public Service Department; works with county, state, and federal officials
regarding compliance with regulations and laws; takes actions that contribute
to safe conditions for employees and the public; prepares appropriate
documentation; communicates with external communities regarding compliance
methods and techniques, etc.
         (h)   In absence of the Director of Public Service oversees operation
of the Public Service Department, etc.
         (i)   Maintains required licensures and certifications; attends
required events and trainings, etc.
         (j)   Meets all job safety requirements and all applicable OSHA safety
standards that pertain to essential functions.
         (k)   Demonstrates regular and predictable attendance.
         (l)   Performs other duties as required.
      (4)   Licensure or certification requirements. Must hold a valid Ohio
driver's license and remain insurable under the city's vehicle insurance
policy; other licenses and certifications as required.
      (5)   Knowledge, skills, and abilities. (*Indicates developed after
employment).
         (a)   Knowledge: Department practices and procedures*; office
practices and procedures; personnel rules and regulations*; workplace safety;
budgeting; government structure and process; public service; public relations;
labor relations; manpower planning; employee training and development; project
management; road maintenance and construction; EPA rules; supervisory
principles and practices; local geographic area; Microsoft Office products;
CityWorks*; UKG Kronos*; GIS principles; asset management principles; OSHA
regulations.
         (b)   Skill in: Computer operation; use of modern office equipment;
motor vehicle operation.
         (c)   Ability to: Carry out detailed but basic written or oral
instructions; interpret a variety of instructions in written, oral, picture, or
schedule form; deal with problems involving several variables within familiar
context; apply management principles to solve problems; exercise independent
judgment and discretion; interpret plans and specifications; read blueprints/
construction plans; compile and prepare reports; select most qualified
applicant according to specifications for referral; determine material and
equipment needs; train or instruct others; respond to routine inquiries from
public and/or officials; prepare and deliver speeches and presentations;
communicate effectively; understand a variety of written and/or verbal
communications; cooperate with coworkers on group projects; develop and
maintain effective working relationships; handle sensitive inquiries from and
contacts with officials and general public; resolve complaints; travel to and
gain access to work site; establish priorities in dynamic work environment;
manage projects from concept to completion; demonstrate leadership.
      (6)   Equipment used. The following are examples only and are not
intended to be all inclusive. Calculator, computer, fax machine, copier,
scanner, printer, telephone, and other standard modern business office
equipment; survey equipment; motor vehicle.
      (7)   Inherently hazardous or physically demanding working conditions.
The employee has exposure to chemical compounds found in an office environment
(e.g., toner, correction fluid, etc.); ascends and/or descends ladders, stairs,
or scaffolds; works in or around crowds; has exposure to life threatening
situations; has contact with potentially violent or emotionally distraught
persons; has exposure to hot, cold, wet, humid, or windy weather conditions;
has exposure to extreme non-weather related heat or cold; has exposure to
hazardous driving conditions; occasionally lifts objects ten pounds or more;
occasionally carries objects ten pounds or more; occasionally pushes objects
ten pounds or more; occasionally pulls objects ten pounds or more. Note: In
accordance with the U.S. Department of Labor physical demands strength ratings,
this is considered sedentary work.
(Res. 2025-R01, passed 2-11-2025)
PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT
§ 33.105 SUPERINTENDENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of Superintendent of Parks
and Recreation for the purpose of overseeing the implementation and fulfillment
of the policies and practices of the Parks and Recreation Department. The
Superintendent shall perform the duties and meet the qualifications established
by the city administration.
   (B)   Compensation for the Superintendent shall be as established from time
to time by Council.
(Prior Code, § 249.01) (Res. 95-R139, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 33.106 PARKS AND RECREATION COORDINATOR.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of Parks and Recreation
Coordinator. The Parks and Recreation Coordinator shall perform the duties
established by the City Council.
   (B)   Compensation for the Parks and Recreation Coordinator shall be as
established from time to time by Council.
   (C)   The position of Parks and Recreation Coordinator is a classified
position under the terms of the civil service rules and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 249.015) (Res. 01-R46, passed 8-28-2001)
§ 33.107 PARKS MAINTENANCE PERSON.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of parks maintenance person,
for the purpose of assisting the Superintendent of Parks and Recreation in the
maintenance of the buildings and grounds of the park system.
   (B)   Compensation for the parks maintenance person shall be as established
from time to time by Council. The parks maintenance person shall perform the
duties and meet the qualifications established by the city administration.
(Prior Code, § 249.02) (Res. 95-R164, passed 2-13-1996)
§ 33.108 FULL-TIME SECRETARY.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of full-time Secretary in the
Parks and Recreation Department.
   (B)   Compensation for the full-time Secretary shall be as established from
time to time by Council.
(Prior Code, § 249.03) (Res. 96-R80, passed 12-17-1996)
§ 33.109 RECREATION ASSISTANT.
   (A)   The City Council establishes the position of Recreation Assistant.
   (B)   The position of Recreation Assistant will be added to the listing of
bargaining unit jobs at a base rate as established by Council and incorporated
into the step level pay ranges in a normal manner.
   (C)   The position of Recreation Assistant is part-time and is an
unclassified position under the terms of the Civil Service Rules and
Regulations.
(Prior Code, § 249.035) (Res. 2007-R05, passed 2-27-2007)
§ 33.110 AUTHORITY OF MAYOR TO SET PROGRAM FEES.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized to set individual program fees for Parks and
Recreation Department activities within the city. The Mayor may designate this
authority to the Director of Public Service or the Superintendent of Parks and
Recreation.
(Prior Code, § 249.04) (Res. 98-R20, passed 4-14-1998)
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT CORPORATION
§ 33.125 PURPOSES; AUTHORITY; DESIGNATION AS AGENCY FOR DEVELOPMENT.
   For the purposes of creating jobs and employment opportunities and improving
the economic welfare of the people as provided in Article VIII, § 13 of the
Ohio Constitution, Council, pursuant to the provisions of R.C. § 1724.10,
hereby finds and determines that it is the policy of the city to promote the
health, safety, morals and general welfare of its inhabitants through the
designation of a community improvement corporation as the agency and
instrumentality of the city for the city’s industrial, commercial, distribution
and research development, and the Economic Development and Community
Improvement Corporation, being such a community improvement corporation and a
corporation not for profit, is hereby designated as the city’s agency and
instrumentality for its industrial, commercial, distribution and research
development.
(Prior Code, § 250.01) (Ord. 92-19, passed 11-10-1992)
§ 33.126 CONFIRMATION OF CORPORATION’S PLAN.
   Council hereby confirms the Economic Development and Community Improvement
Corporation’s Plan of Industrial, Commercial, Distribution and Research
Development for the city (hereinafter called the “plan”), which plan was
prepared and submitted to Council by said Corporation, and which plan is the
agreement which the Mayor is hereinafter authorized to enter into on behalf of
the city with said Corporation.
(Prior Code, § 250.02) (Ord. 92-19, passed 11-10-1992)
§ 33.127 AGREEMENT BETWEEN CITY AND CORPORATION.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized to enter into an agreement with the Economic
Development and Community Improvement Corporation in substantially the form and
containing the provisions set forth in Exhibit A attached to original Ordinance
92-19, passed November 10, 1992.
(Prior Code, § 250.03) (Ord. 92-19, passed 11-10-1992)
§ 33.128 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of Community Development
Administrator to develop and maintain economic development programs and perform
grant activities to enhance city project revenues. The position of Community
Development Administrator is established as a pay grade 8 and the minimum and
maximum compensation for the position shall be set from time to time by
resolution or ordinance of the City Council.
   (B)   Because of the confidentiality and fiduciary nature of the position of
the Community Development Administrator, the position is unclassified and is
exempt from Civil Service Rules and Regulations.
(Prior Code, § 250.04) (Res. 02-R23, passed 1-14-2003)
CHAPTER 34: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Civil Service Commission
   
34.001   Adoption of rules; scope; amendments; variations from state law
Parks and Recreation Board
   
34.015   Adoption of rules; scope; amendments; variations from state law
   
34.016   Procedure for determining appropriateness of real property for use as
a City park or recreation area
Joint Recreation Board
   
34.030   Establishment
   
34.031   Composition; appointments
   
34.032   Qualifications of members; terms
   
34.033   Compensation
   
34.034   Vacancies
   
34.035   Officers; rules
Beautification Commission
   
34.050   Establishment; membership
   
34.051   Responsibilities
   
34.052   Funding
   
34.053   Officers; rules and regulations; meetings
Historic Preservation Commission
   
34.065   Purposes
   
34.066   Definitions
   
34.067   Green Historic Preservation Commission
   
34.068   Powers and duties
   
34.069   Designation of procedures for individual landmarks
   
34.070   Procedures for designation of historic districts
   
34.071   Procedures for review of proposed alterations, demolition or new
construction
   
34.072   Minimum maintenance requirements
   
34.073   Violations
Audit Committee
   
34.085   Establishment; advisory capacity
   
34.086   Qualifications of members
   
34.087   Membership; terms
   
34.088   Responsibilities
City Tree Advisory Commission
   
34.100   Definitions
   
34.101   Commission established
   
34.102   Compensation
   
34.103   Responsibility of Commission
   
34.104   Street tree list
   
34.105   City's right to plant, prune, maintain and/or remove
   
34.106   Topping prohibited; exemptions
   
34.107   Responsibility of owners
   
34.108   Removal of dead or diseased trees from private property
   
34.109   Removal of stumps
   
34.110   Interference prohibited
   
34.111   City Council review
Diversity Committee
   
34.125   Establishment
   
34.126   Consultant
Veterans’ Commission
   
34.135   Establishment
   
34.136   Term
   
34.137   Recommendations; advice and assistance
 
   
34.999   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority to create joint recreation boards, see R.C. § 755.14
   City Planning Commission may preserve historic sites, objects and
facilities, see R.C. § 713.02
   Civil service law, see R.C. Ch. 124
   Corporations for preservation of historic sites, objects and facilities, see
R.C. § 1743.07
   Encouragement of local historical societies, see R.C. § 149.30
   Municipal civil service commissions, see R.C. §§ 124.40 et seq.
   Parks and recreation, see R.C. Ch. 755
   State Historical Society, see R.C. §§ 149.30 et seq.
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
§ 34.001 ADOPTION OF RULES; SCOPE; AMENDMENTS; VARIATIONS FROM STATE LAW.
   (A)   Council hereby adopts the rules of the Civil Service Commission as set
forth below. The rules of the Civil Service Commission provide for the
ascertainment of merit and fitness as the basis for appointment and promotion
in the service of the city and for appeals from actions of transfer, reduction
or removal of classified personnel under civil service provisions.
   (B)   Any future amendments to the rules of the Civil Service Commission
shall be adopted by an ordinance passed by Council.
   (C)   Any rule of the Civil Service Commission set forth below that is
different from, but not in conflict with, the civil service laws of the state
is hereby adopted by the city under its constitutional home rule authority.
   RULES OF THE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
   RULE 1 - AUTHORITY/PURPOSE
Section 1.1 - Authority
By ordinance of the Green City Council, in accordance with the Charter of the
City of Green, the following Rules of the Civil Service Commission governing
the classified service of the City of Green are hereby adopted.
Effective date:   12-3-1994
Amended:      5-22-2003
Amended:      9-21-2006
Amended:      6-27-2013
Amended:       , 2019
Section 1.2 - Purpose
The Civil Service Commission has been established to provide a merit system for
appointments and promotions without regard for political patronage, promote
standards for job performance and professional conduct and to safeguard
classified employees from unwarranted charges of misconduct, discrimination or
removal from the public service.
 Section 1.3 - Nondiscrimination
The Civil Service Commission of the City of Green provides equal employment
opportunity without regard to race, color, creed, national origin, sex, age,
veteran status, disability or other conditions protected by applicable Federal
or State laws. This applies to all employees, applicants and candidates in
connection with any action taken or administered by the Commission.
   RULE 2 - ORGANIZATION/STAFF
Section 2.1 - Organization
The Green Civil Service Commission will be composed of three (3) members who
will be appointed and serve in the manner specified under Section
7.3 of the Green City Charter.
Regular meetings of the Commission will be set by the Chairperson or by any two
(2) members of the Commission. Whenever possible, the meetings will be held at
the Green City Administration Offices.
At its first meeting in each calendar year, the Commission will elect a
Chairperson and Co-Chairperson in the manner specified under Section
7.2 of the Green City Charter.
Section 2.2 - Chairperson
The Chairperson will call all meetings as required, preside at Commission
meetings, sign meeting minutes and authorize all warrants or orders for payment
of monies. The Chairperson may call a special meeting with forty- eight (48)
hours prior notice.
Section 2.3 - Co-Chairperson
The Commission will elect a Co-Chairperson who will serve as Chairperson in the
absence of the Chairperson and perform other duties as from time to time may be
assigned by the Chairperson.
Section 2.4 - Secretary
The Commission will appoint a Secretary. The Secretary need not be a member of
the Commission and may hold another Municipal office or appointment. The
Secretary will record the activities of the Commission, file and maintain
copies of minutes and other official business of the Commission, provide
notification of Commission meetings, receive and disburse correspondence, sign
all warrants or orders for payment of monies as authorized and distribute to
applicable parties the official business, requests and motions of the
Commission.
Section 2.5 - Quorum
Two members of the Commission are required to constitute a quorum. Any motion
or resolution of the Commission requires a minimum affirmative vote of two
members for adoption.
Section 2.6 - Official Records
The Commission will include in its minutes a record of the official actions of
the Commission with regard to:
   (a)    Appointments
   (b)    Transfers, suspensions, removals and reinstatements
   (c)    All examinations, with dates
   (d)    Results of all requests for regradings
   (e)    Decisions on all appeals and reasons for each
   (f)    Position classifications and changes in classifications
   (g)    Appointments of special examiners
   (h)    Any other official business of the Commission
Section 2.7 - Classified Employees - Master Listing
A master listing of all classified employees will be kept in the City of Green
Human Resources Department. This master listing will include:
   (a)    Employee name
   (b)    Address
   (c)    Position/rank, full-time or part-time
   (d)    Date of each appointment and subsequent change in position/
classification
Section 2.8 - Status Change
The Civil Service Commission shall be informed of all appointments, promotions,
removals, transfers, layoffs, suspensions, reductions, reinstatements and
retirements involving classified positions/employees.
Section 2.9 - Retention of Documents
All applications, examination information and results, notices, certificates,
etc., are the property of the Commission. All such documents will be kept for
the times specified by the State retention requirements for Human Resources or
Green Civil Service Commission. Other documents, not so covered, will be kept
no less than two (2) years.
   RULE 3 - CLASSIFIED SERVICE
Section 3.1 - Establishment of Classified Service
The classified service has been established by the Green City Charter, Section
7.3, Subsection C.
Section 3.2 - Classification Specifications
The Mayor, in conjunction with the applicable city Directors and Human
Resources Department, will supply the Commission with a classification
specification of each position in the classified service. All classification
specification revisions and updates will be provided to the Commission. Each
classification specification will contain at least the following:
   (a)    Statement of duties
   (b)    Description of typical activities
   (c)    Supervisory responsibilities
   (d)    Qualifications required, special skills/licenses
   (e)   Essential job functions
   (f)   Equipment used
   (g)   Physical requirements
 Section 3.3 - Political Activity
No employee in the classified service of the city will directly or indirectly,
orally or by letter, solicit or receive, or be in any manner concerned in
soliciting or receiving, any assessment, subscription or contribution for any
political party or candidate.
Nor will any person solicit, directly or indirectly, orally or by letter, or be
in any manner concerned in soliciting, any such assessment, contribution or
payment from any employee in the classified service of the city, nor will any
employee in the classified service of the city be an officer in any partisan
political organization or take part in politics other than to vote as they
please and to express freely their political opinions.
   RULE 4 - APPLICATIONS/APPLICANTS
Section 4.1 - Applications
All applications must be completed using the form prescribed or provided by the
City of Green. All applicants must sign the applications in their own
handwriting. All applications must be received within the time prescribed by
the Commission.
 Section 4.2 - Specific Qualifications
The Commission will indicate in the announcement of each examination whether
specific qualifications and/or restrictions exist for the candidates for the
position.
Section 4.3 - Proof of Education and/or Experience
Copies of official college transcripts and/or high school diplomas are
required. Copies of special certificates and/or licenses, where applicable,
will be required.
Section 4.4 - Application Fees
Each applicant for a position in the classified service may be required to pay
a non-refundable fee upon filing an application for examination. Such a fee, if
any, is to be determined by the Commission.
 Section 4.5 - Disqualification
Any applicant who does not meet the minimum qualifications for the position
will be notified in writing and will be disqualified from taking the
examination.
   RULE 5 - ENTRY LEVEL EXAMINATIONS
Section 5.1 - Examination Composition
As determined by the Commission, examinations may be written and/or performance
based; and will assess the candidate’s ability to meet the essential job
functions of the position.
Section 5.2 - Notice of Vacancy
The Mayor or designated representative will determine when a vacancy or
potential vacancy exists and will notify the Commission. The Commission will
schedule an examination if an eligibility list does not exist. Notice of the
time and place of the examination will be given at least fourteen (14) calendar
days prior to date of the examination.
Examinations may be conducted in anticipation of vacant positions. The request
for an examination or the actual administration of an examination shall not
obligate the Mayor or designated representative to appoint an applicant to the
position for which the examination is being held.
Section 5.3 - Supervision of Examinations
Examinations will be conducted under the supervision of the Commission. Special
examiners may be designated to conduct such testing.
 Section 5.4 - Applicant Confidentiality
To assure objectivity and confidentiality, names of all applicants will remain
anonymous to testing consultants throughout the entire examination process
until the eligibility list is established.
Section 5.5 - Examination Scoring
All examination scoring will be in accordance with the weights assigned to each
of the areas tested. The examination will be rated on a scale of 100% as the
maximum possible attainment. A minimum score of 70% will be required for a
passing score on the examination.
 Section 5.6 - Bonus Point Adjustments
An applicant for an entry-level position must achieve a minimum passing score
of 70% or higher to be awarded bonus points. A maximum of ten (10) bonus points
will be added to the score for the following qualifiers:
   (a)   Two (2) points for current city of Green employees, including seasonal
employees who have worked the previous twelve (12) months from the examination
date; and
   (b)   Two (2) points, if the applicant has been a resident of the city of
Green for two (2) continuous years immediately prior to the date of the
examination; and
   (c)   Three (3) points, if the applicant has been honorably discharged from
military service. Proof of honorable discharge shall be supported by Form DD-
214.
Section 5.7 - Notification of Score
All applicants will be informed of their score by U.S. mail. Applicants will be
informed of their final score following the expiration of the appeal period.
Section 5.8 - Examination Appeal Period
Any applicant, upon making a written request with the Commission, will have the
right to review examination questions and answers within seven (7) calendar
days following the exam.
An appropriate time and place for the review will be scheduled. A review will
be by visual examination only. The applicant may not copy or obtain copies of
the examination questions and/or answers.
Section 5.9 - Final Score Appeal Period
After notification of the Final Score and rank, the applicant will have the
right to review the examination answers for scoring accuracy. Written notice
must be made within seven (7) calendar days from the date of notification. Name
certification from the eligibility list will occur only after the seven (7) day
appeal period or upon the Commission’s final determination when an objection
has been filed.
The Commission will schedule an appropriate time and place for this review.
Such review will be by visual examination only. The applicant may not copy or
obtain copies of the examination questions and/or answers.
Section 5.10 - Objections to Exam and/or Score
At the time of review, an applicant may make an objection to the exam answers
or the score. Objections must be made in writing and state the reasons for the
objection and the corrective action requested. After receipt of the objection
and within fourteen (14) calendar days, the Commission will issue its decision
and specify the action to be taken. The findings and action of the Commission
will be final.
   RULE 6 - ELIGIBILITY LIST
Section 6.1 - List and Duration of Eligible Candidates
The Commission will maintain an eligibility list of applicants who received a
passing score on the examination.
The eligibility list will contain the candidates’ name and/or identification
number and rank.
The eligibility list will be valid for one (1) year from the date it is
established. The Commission may, at its discretion, extend the list for up to a
maximum of one (1) additional year.
Once an eligibility list has expired, no additional hiring can be made from the
list unless the requisition for the position(s) was signed prior to the list
expiring. Any positions needing filled after a list has expired will require a
new entry-level exam to be held and a new eligibility list established.
 Section 6.2 - Tie Scores
When two (2) or more candidates have the same final score, the tie will be
broken using the candidate’s social security number starting with the last two
(2) digits with the higher value given first consideration on the list. Should
a tie exist after applying this rule, the last three (3) digits will be used
and so on until the tie is broken.
 Section 6.3 - Eligibility List Removal
Candidates may be removed from the eligibility list for the following reasons
(not all inclusive):
   (a)   Proof of unfit moral character
   (b)   Failure to meet agility requirements
   (c)   Conviction of a felony
   (d)   False statements or fraudulent conduct
   (e)   Cheating on the examination
   (f)   Failure to meet medical requirements
   (g)   Failure to report for any tests specified by the Commission
   (h)   Failure to notify the Commission of any change of circumstances
relevant to job qualifications, availability or eligibility, such as change of
address, medical condition or revocation of required license or certification
   (i)   After having been certified for appointment three (3) times and a
lower ranked candidate is appointed
   (j)   No longer meets minimum qualifications for position.
Section 6.4 - Notification of Removal
When a candidate is removed from the eligibility list, the Commission will
notify that person at the address specified by the candidate.
Section 6.5 - Reinstatement to Eligibility List
A candidate may be reinstated to the eligibility list upon proof of good cause
to the Commission. The ruling by the Commission will be final.
Section 6.6 - Posting of Eligibility List
The eligibility list will be posted for a period of thirty (30) calendar days
from the list establishment date.
   RULE 7 - ENTRY LEVEL CERTIFICATION PROCESS
Section 7.1 - Name Certification
Upon notice to the Civil Service Commission by the Mayor or designated
representative that a vacancy or potential vacancy exists the Commission will
certify the names of the highest scoring candidates (see Appendix A -
Certification Chart).
The Mayor will appoint candidate(s) to fill the vacancy(s) within sixty (60)
calendar days unless the position is no longer vacant, or an extension is
granted by the Commission.
Section 7.2 - Temporary Appointment
If an eligibility list cannot be provided in time to fill a vacancy, the Civil
Service Commission will notify the Mayor, who will consider a temporary
appointment pursuant to City of Green Charter Section
7.3C(5).
Section 7.3 - Candidates Remaining on Eligibility List
After an individual has been certified for appointment three (3) times and a
lower ranked candidate is appointed, the individual’s name will be removed from
the eligibility list.
   RULE 8 - APPOINTMENT
Section 8.1 - Notification of Appointment
Once appointed, the candidate’s name will be removed from the eligibility list
from which they were hired.
Section 8.2 - Failure to Respond
If the candidate fails to respond within seven (7) calendar days from the date
of the job offer, he/she will be considered as declining the appointment and
their name will be removed from the eligibility list. The candidate may,
however, petition the Commission and show cause why their name should not be
removed from the eligibility list. This petition must be received by the
Commission within seven (7) calendar days of receipt of notice of removal and
must show good cause regarding the candidate’s failure to respond to the
notification of appointment.
Section 8.3 - Declination of Appointment
When a candidate declines an appointment, the Mayor or designated
representative may request the name of another candidate from the eligibility
list. When a candidate declines an appointment, the candidate’s name will be
removed from the eligibility list.
Section 8.4 - Probationary Period
All new hires in the classified service will serve a probationary period of one
hundred eighty (180) calendar days from the date of hire (three hundred sixty-
five (365) calendar days for firemedics).
Section 8.5 - Evaluation During Probationary Period
During the probationary period, employees are subject to removal by the Mayor
without appeal to the Civil Service Commission. If the employee’s performance
is not acceptable, the employee will be dismissed prior to the end of the
probationary period.
   RULE 9 - PROMOTIONAL OPPORTUNITIES
Section 9.1 - Definition of Promotion
A promotion is the act of placing an employee into a job classification with a
higher pay than the position currently held. Pay refers to the entry level/base
pay for the classification.
Section 9.2 - Promotional Policy
Vacancies in the classified service must be filled by promotion whenever there
are a sufficient number of qualified internal candidates as defined in Rule 9.
Section 9.3 - Notice of Promotional Vacancy
The Mayor or designated representative will determine when a promotional
vacancy exists and will notify the Commission. The Commission will then
determine how many employees are available who have completed the applicable
probationary period and are eligible and willing to fill such a vacancy.
Section 9.4 - Three or More Eligible Employees
When the Commission finds there are three (3) or more employees eligible,
qualified and willing to fill such a vacancy, a promotional examination will be
conducted and an eligibility list established.
Section 9.5 - Less Than Three Eligible Employees
When the Commission finds that there are less than three (3) persons eligible,
qualified and willing to compete for the vacancy, the Commission may conduct an
examination pursuant to the provisions of Rule 5 for entry-level exams. The
Mayor shall have the right to make an appointment from those who are eligible
and qualified and have indicated an interest in the position.
Section 9.6 - Promotional Examination Composition
As determined by the Commission, the examination may be written and/or
performance based.
Section 9.7 - Notice of Promotional Opportunities
Notice of the time and place of the examination will be given at least fourteen
(14) calendar days prior to date of the examination.
Section 9.8 - Applying for Vacancy
Employees interested and qualified will submit a letter of interest to the
Commission within the time period specified on the posting.
Section 9.9 - Supervision of Examinations
Examinations will be conducted under the supervision of the Commission. Testing
consultants may be engaged to proctor the examination.
Section 9.10 - Applicant Confidentiality
To assure objectivity and confidentiality, names of all applicants will remain
anonymous to testing consultants throughout the entire examination process
until the eligibility list is established.
Section 9.11 - Examination Appeal Period
Any applicant, upon making a written request to the Commission, will have the
right to review examination questions and answers within seven (7) calendar
days following the examination.
An appropriate time and place for the review will be scheduled. A review will
be by visual examination only. The applicant may not copy or obtain copies of
the examination questions and/or answers.
Section 9.12 - Examination Scoring
All examination scoring will be in accordance with the weights assigned to each
of the areas tested. The examination will be rated on a scale of 100% as the
maximum possible attainment. A minimum score of 70% will be required for a
passing score.
Section 9.13 - Final Score Appeal Period
After notification of the final score and rank and upon written notice to the
Commission, the applicant will have the right to review their examination
answers for scoring accuracy. Written notice must be made within seven (7)
calendar days from the date of the notification. Certification of the
eligibility list will occur after the seven (7) day appeal period, or following
the Commission’s resolution on any appeal.
The Commission will schedule an appropriate time and place for this review.
Such review will be by visual examination only. The applicant may not copy or
obtain copies of the examination questions and/or answers.
Section 9.14 - Objections to Exam and/or Score
At the time of review, an applicant may make an objection to the examination
answers or the score. Objections must be made in writing and state the reasons
for the objection and the corrective action requested.
After receipt of the objection and within fourteen (14) calendar days, the
Commission will render its decision and specify the action to be taken. The
findings and action of the Commission will be final.
Section 9.15 - Promotional Eligibility List (Reference 6.1)
The Commission will maintain an eligibility list of applicants who received a
passing score on the examination. All names will appear on the list in
descending order by score and those candidates are eligible for appointment.
The eligibility list will contain the candidate’s’ name and/or identification
number and rank.
The eligibility list will be valid for one (1) year from the date it is
established. The Commission may, at its discretion, extend the list for up to a
maximum of one (1) additional year.
Once an eligibility list has expired, no additional hiring can be made from the
list unless the requisition for the position(s) was signed prior to the list
expiring. Any positions needing filled after a list has expired will require a
new exam to be held and a new eligibility list established.
Section 9.16 - Tie Scores
When two or more candidates have the same final score, the candidates will be
given the same rank on the eligibility list and certified as one (1).
Section 9.17 - Eligibility List Removal
Candidates may be removed from the eligibility list for the following reasons
(not all inclusive):
   (a)   proof of unfit moral character
   (b)   failure to meet agility requirements
   (c)   conviction of a felony
   (d)   false statements or fraudulent conduct
   (e)   cheating on the examination
   (f)   failure to meet medical requirements
   (g)   failure to report for any tests specified by the Commission
   (h)   failure to notify the Commission of any change of circumstances
relevant to job qualifications, availability or eligibility, such as change of
address, medical condition or revocation of required license or certification
   (i)   after having been certified for appointment three (3) times and a
lower ranked candidate is appointed
   (j)   no longer meets minimum qualifications for position.
Section 9.18 - Certification and Posting of Eligibility List
After the examination process has been completed, the Commission shall certify
the names of the persons with the top three (3) scores on the examination to
the Mayor.
The Mayor will appoint candidate(s) to fill the vacancy(s) within sixty (60)
calendar days unless the position is no longer vacant, or an extension is
granted by the Commission.
   RULE 10 - TRANSFERS
Section 10.1 - Incapacitation
When an employee becomes physically incapacitated and unable to perform the
duties of the job as determined by a licensed physician, the Mayor may transfer
the employee to a vacant position in an equal or lower pay grade for which the
employee has the ability to fill.
The position to which the incapacitated employee is transferred must be a
position which already exists in the classified service, or one which is
established prior to such transfer.
The transfer of an incapacitated employee may be permanent or temporary;
however, the Mayor will notify the Commission in writing of the initial status
of the incapacitated employee, and whenever the status of the employee changes.
Section 10.2 - Transfers
An employee may transfer to a vacant position of equal or lesser
classification, provided the employee meets the qualifications of the vacant
position.
Any such transfer must be approved by the Mayor with the consent of the Civil
Service Commission.
    RULE 11 - LAYOFFS
Section 11.1 - Order of Layoff
Layoffs are made when it becomes necessary to reduce the number of employees in
the city service. The Mayor shall determine the classifications and the
department or division to be reduced. Those employees who have been appointed
last will be the first to be laid off within each department or division
determined to have surplus employees.
 Section 11.2 - Layoff List
When layoffs become necessary, a layoff list by department/division seniority
will be provided to the Commission by the city’s Human Resource Department. The
first person to be laid off will be placed at the top of that list.
Section 11.3 - Bumping Rights
Any employee subject to layoff under the provisions of this Rule will have the
right to bump (displace) a less senior employee in the same or lower job
classification within the department or division.
The employee utilizing their bumping rights must have exhibited previous
satisfactory job performance and must meet the minimum qualifications of that
position.
Section 11.4 - Recall From Layoff
When the conditions necessitating a layoff have changed and rehires are
authorized, positions will be filled from the layoff list in order of
department/division seniority.
 Section 11.5 - Duration of Recall Eligibility
An employee who is laid off under these Rules will be entitled to reappointment
as provided above. The duration of the recall eligibility shall be the lesser
of service at the time of layoff or for a period of two (2) years from the
effective date of the layoff.
    RULE 12 - DISCIPLINARY ACTION
Section 12.1 - Cause for Discipline/Suspension/Termination
An employee may be disciplined/suspended/terminated by the Mayor for cause.
Such examples of cause include, but are not limited to, the following:
   (a)   Unsatisfactory job performance
   (b)   Dishonesty (including falsification of records, reports, etc.)
   (c)   Intoxication, addiction or possession of an illegal substance
   (d)   Immoral conduct
   (e)   Insubordination
   (f)   Discourtesy to others
   (g)   Violation of city Safety Rules and Procedures
   (h)   Violation of Ohio State Civil Service Laws, Standards of Performance
in the Employment Guide for the city of Green, Department Rules or Rules of the
Green Civil Service Commission
   (i)   Felony conviction
   (j)   Theft (including unauthorized removal of city property/assets)
   (k)   Excessive absenteeism, tardiness
   (l)   Unauthorized possession of firearms or weapons
   (m)   Unauthorized use of city property
   (n)   Engaging in any form of harassment
   (o)   Any other act of misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office
Section 12.2 - Disciplinary Action for up to Twenty-four (24) Hours
The Mayor or a designated representative may suspend an employee without pay
for up to twenty-four (24) hours without the right of appeal to the Commission.
The Mayor will file, in a timely manner, a written report to the Commission
stating the reason(s) for the suspension, the beginning date and the duration
of the suspension. The report will be placed in the employee’s file.
 Section 12.3 - Disciplinary Action in Excess of Twenty-four (24) Scheduled
Work Hours
Any disciplinary action in excess of twenty-four (24) scheduled work hours
requires notification of the right to appeal. This does not apply to temporary
or emergency appointments.
A written order of discipline will be served to the employee with a copy to the
applicable city director and the Commission for disciplinary actions in excess
of twenty-four (24) scheduled work hours.
The written order will contain (a) the reason for the discipline and (b) a
sufficient statement of the facts to enable the employee to understand the
charge and to provide an explanation.
    RULE 13 - APPEAL OF DISCIPLINARY ACTION
Section 13.1 - Appeal of Disciplinary Action in Excess of Twenty-four (24)
Scheduled Work Hours
Any employee who has completed the probationary period and who is subject to a
reduction in pay or position, suspended, discharged or otherwise disciplined
for a period in excess of twenty-four (24) scheduled work, may appeal the
Mayor’s decision to the Civil Service Commission.
The appeal must be made to the Commission in writing within seven (7) calendar
days from receipt of the Mayor’s notice of disciplinary action. The Commission
will schedule a hearing on the matter within thirty (30) calendar days after
the filing by the employee.
The Commission will notify the Mayor and the employee in writing within seven
(7) calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing date.
Section 13.2 - Disciplinary Action Appeal Procedure
In a hearing regarding disciplinary action in excess of twenty-four (24)
scheduled work hours, the Commission will consider the charges and explanation
(s) offered by the employee.
The order of business at such a hearing will be as follows:
    (a)   Any stipulations regarding presentation of evidence will be entered
into the minutes. (See Section 13.3).
   (b)   The Mayor or a designated representative will make a brief opening
statement in support of the facts and charges regarding the disciplinary
action.
   (c)   The employee or representative will make a brief statement of
explanation in support of the appeal.
   (d)   The Mayor or designated representative will present evidence in
support of the action.
   (e)   The employee will present evidence in support of the appeal.
   (f)   The Mayor or designated representative will present any rebuttal
evidence.
   (g)   The employee will present any rebuttal evidence.
Any further discussion will be permitted only when requested by the Commission.
Section 13.3 - Evidence
In any hearing regarding the appeal of a disciplinary action, any stipulations
regarding rules for the admission and exclusion of evidence will be raised
prior to the start of the hearing, and if all parties agree, such stipulations
will be made a part of the record of the proceedings.
Section 13.4 - Commission Decision
The Commission will, after due consideration, render its decision to affirm,
disaffirm or modify the action which was the subject of the appeal. If the
decision is to affirm, the previous action will be sustained. If the decision
is to disaffirm or modify, the employee will be treated in a manner consistent
with the judgment.
The decision and rationale of the Commission will be forwarded in writing to
the Mayor or designated representative and to the employee.
Section 13.5 - Failure to Appear-Employee
If the employee or the employee’s representative fails to appear for the appeal
hearing, the appeal will be dismissed by the Commission and the previous
actions will be sustained.
Section 13.6 - Failure to Appear-Mayor
If the Mayor or designated representative fails to appear for the appeal
hearing, or if the city fails to offer evidence in support of the charges, the
Commission may hear evidence offered by the employee and render its decision on
the merits of that evidence.
Section 13.7 - Resignation Prior to Judgment
The acceptance of the employee’s resignation by the Mayor or designated
representative, prior to a judgment by the Commission, will be considered a
withdrawal of the appeal. The appeal will then be dismissed.
The Commission will note only the employee’s resignation and the disposition of
the appeal, which will then become part of the employee’s file.
Section 13.8 - Appeal Rights of Collective Bargaining Employees
Notwithstanding the disciplinary action appeals procedure outlined in Rule 13,
employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement that includes grievance/
arbitration provisions as the exclusive remedy for the resolution of bargaining
unit, employment-related matters may not also appeal to the Civil Service
Commission to address discipline or discharge decisions pursuant to Chapter
4117 of the Ohio Revised Code.
In instances where there is a question as to whether the Civil Service
Commission has jurisdiction over the issue at hand, a jurisdictional
determination may be made prior to any further course of action. In this
instance, the sole function of the Commission is confined to the issue of
jurisdiction first, and not the merits of the case.
   RULE 14 - AMENDMENTS
Section 14.1 - Amendments Procedure
The Commission may recommend amendment, revocation or modification of these
Rules, or any part thereof, by a two-thirds vote of the Commission. Any
proposed amendment, revocation or modification to the Rules will be noted in
the minutes of the Commission meetings.
Changes to the Rules recommended by the Commission pursuant to Rule 14 will be
sent in writing by the Chairperson of the Commission to the Clerk of Green City
Council. The notification to the Clerk of Council will be treated as
correspondence to Green City Council and will be acted upon by Green City
Council in accordance with its adopted rules and procedures.
Section 14.2 - Posting
Proposed amendments to the Rules will be posted on the bulletin board at the
Green Administrative Offices for a minimum of seven (7) calendar days. The city
will also post copies in other city buildings and on bulletin boards normally
used to disseminate information to employees.
Section 14.3 - Public Hearing
A public hearing will be held on all proposed amendments to the Rules. Notice
of the public hearing and the amendments will be posted on the bulletin board
at the Green Administrative Offices. The public hearing will take place as soon
as possible after the seven (7) calendar-day posting period and prior to the
effective date of the amendments.
Section 14.4 - Green City Council Amendment Authority
Nothing in this Rule will serve to limit the statutory authority of the Green
City Council to amend these Rules in accordance with the Green city Charter and
the enabling ordinance, Green City Ordinance 94-7, passed November 1, 1994.
Section 14.5 - Effective Date
Amendments to these Rules will be effective upon approval by a simple majority
of Green City Council.
   RULE 15 - SEVERABILITY
Section 15.1 - Severability
If any Rule, section, part or amendments thereto are found to be invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment will not affect the validity of
any other Rule, section, part or amendment.
APPENDIX A -
Certification Chart
Multiple Certification Chart
Maximum Ranks to Be Certified
(Based on Number of Positions to Fill)
# of Openings New Hires
Multiple Certification Chart
Maximum Ranks to Be Certified
(Based on Number of Positions to Fill)
# of Openings New Hires
2             11
3             12
4             18
5             19
6             20
7             23
8             24
9             25
10            28
 
(Prior Code, § 260.01) (Ord. 94-7, passed 11-1-1994; Ord. 03-04, passed 4-22-
2003; Ord. 06-18, passed 8-22-2006; Ord. 2013-05, passed 5-28-2013; Ord. 2019-
03, passed 3-26-2019)
PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD
§ 34.015 ADOPTION OF RULES; SCOPE; AMENDMENTS; VARIATIONS FROM STATE LAW.
   (A)   Council hereby adopts the rules of the Parks and Recreation Board as
set forth below. The rules of the Parks and Recreation Board advise with
respect to the acquisition, development, maintenance and operation of the parks
and recreational facilities of the city. The Board shall solicit input from,
provide assistance to, and cooperate with, civic, historical and youth athletic
organizations in providing these services and facilities.
   (B)   Any future amendments to the rules of the Parks and Recreation Board
shall be adopted by an ordinance passed by Council.
   (C)   Any rule of the Parks and Recreation Board set forth below that is
different from, but not in conflict with, the parks and recreation laws of the
state are hereby adopted by the city under its constitutional home rule
authority.
City of Green
Parks and Recreation Board
Order of Business
   1.   Call meeting to order
   2.   Roll call by Secretary
   3.   Approval of minutes
   4.   Correspondence and/or announcements
   5.   Committee reports
   6.   Public input
   7.   Old business
   8.   New business
   9.   Date of next meeting
   10.   Adjournment
 
City of Green
Parks and Recreation Board
Rules
   1.   The Board shall annually establish the day and time of their regular
monthly meetings.
   2.   A majority of three members shall constitute a quorum to do business.
   3.   The Board shall adopt and publish, in printed form, its own rules.
   4.   The Board shall keep a journal of all proceedings.
   5.   Votes shall be by roll call and the vote of each member shall be
recorded.
   6.   At the January organizational meeting each year, a Chairperson and
Vice-Chairperson shall be elected.
   7.   These officers may serve two consecutive terms and, after a one-year
lapse, may serve again.
   8.   The Chairperson shall be the presiding officer.
   9.   In the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson shall preside.
   10.   Special meetings may be called by the Chairperson and Vice-
Chairperson, or by any three members.
   11.   Forty-eight hours notice to members, the news media and Council is
required for special meetings, and copies of minutes shall be distributed to
all members, the Mayor, Council, the Director of Public Service and the
Director of Planning.
   12.   Robert’s Rules of Order will be used when questions of order arise.
   13.   Any member who misses three consecutive meetings on an unexcused basis
may be removed by a simple majority vote of the Board.
(Prior Code, § 262.01) (Ord. 94-15, passed 3-28-1995; Ord. 01-8, passed 5-22-
2001)
§ 34.016 PROCEDURE FOR DETERMINING APPROPRIATENESS OF REAL PROPERTY FOR USE AS
A CITY PARK OR RECREATION AREA.
   (A)   The Mayor or members of Council shall submit to the Parks and
Recreation Board a request to review a specific property or properties that
could be used in the city’s parks and recreation system. The description of the
property shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the Director of Planning.
   (B)   Any request received by the Parks and Recreation Board shall be
forwarded to the Director of Planning for initial review. The Director of
Planning shall perform a preliminary assessment of the property to determine
its suitability for inclusion in the city’s parks and recreation system. Upon
completion of the review, the Director of Planning shall provide the Parks and
Recreation Board with a written assessment report and recommendation for the
property.
   (C)   Upon receipt of the report and recommendation of the Director of
Planning, the Parks and Recreation Board shall take action on the property
being reviewed. If the Parks and Recreation Board finds that the property has
potential for inclusion in the city’s parks and recreation system, a request
shall be made to the City Engineer by the Director of Planning to conduct a
preliminary site assessment to determine if the property is suitable for
inclusion in the parks and recreation system. The report and recommendation of
the City Engineer shall be submitted to the Parks and Recreation Board for its
review.
   (D)   Upon receipt of the report and recommendation of the City Engineer,
the Parks and Recreation Board shall act upon the property and shall make a
recommendation as to the property’s suitability. The recommendation of the
Parks and Recreation Board shall be in writing and shall be forwarded to the
Mayor and the President of Council.
   (E)   All costs associated with any Department of Planning or City Engineer
review conducted pursuant to this section shall be paid from the Parks and
Recreation Board account.
(Prior Code, § 262.02) (Res. 94-R35, passed 5-10-1994)
JOINT RECREATION BOARD
§ 34.030 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established in and for the city a Joint Recreation Board
with the Green Local School District.
(Prior Code, § 263.01) (Res. 92-R30, passed 7-14-1992)
§ 34.031 COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENTS.
   The Joint Recreation Board shall consist of five members, two of whom shall
be appointed by the Green School Board and three of whom shall be appointed by
the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 263.02) (Res. 92-R30, passed 7-14-1992)
§ 34.032 QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS; TERMS.
   All members of the Joint Recreation Board shall be residents of the city and
shall serve for terms of five years, except that the members first appointed
shall be appointed for such terms that the term of one member shall expire
annually thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 263.03) (Res. 92-R30, passed 7-14-1992)
§ 34.033 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Joint Recreation Board shall serve without pay.
(Prior Code, § 263.04) (Res. 92-R30, passed 7-14-1992)
§ 34.034 VACANCIES.
   Vacancies on the Joint Recreation Board, occurring otherwise than by
expiration of term, shall be for the unexpired term and shall be filled in the
same manner as original appointments.
(Prior Code, § 263.05) (Res. 92-R30, passed 7-14-1992)
§ 34.035 OFFICERS; RULES.
   The members of the Joint Recreation Board shall elect their own chairperson
and secretary and select all other necessary officers to serve for a period of
one year. The Joint Recreation Board may adopt rules for the conduct of all
business within its jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 263.06) (Res. 92-R30A, passed 7-28-1992)
BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION
§ 34.050 ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   A Beautification Commission is hereby established in and for the city.
   (B)   The members of the Beautification Commission shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of Council.
   (C)   There shall be six resident members of the Commission. The resident
members shall be appointed to three-year terms, to be staggered the first year,
with two appointed for full three-year terms, two appointed for two-year terms,
and two appointed for one-year terms. A vacancy shall be filled for the
remaining unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointment. The
volunteer Director of Keep Green Beautiful shall serve as a member. One member
of Council having responsibility for matters concerning city beautification
shall serve as an ex-officio member.
(Prior Code, § 276.01) (Ord. 94-20, passed 12-20-1994)
§ 34.051 RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The Beautification Commission shall be responsible for recommendations
to Council and organization of the following programs:
      (1)   Decisions dealing with the Keep Green Beautiful program;
      (2)   Clean-up and litter programs;
      (3)   Flower plantings, except in city parks;
      (4)   General beautification projects; and
      (5)   Such other duties as required by law or executive order.
   (B)   The Commission shall also make recommendations to the Mayor and
Council for additional legislation or programs to create a more beautiful city.
   (C)   The Beautification Commission shall have no spending authority.
(Prior Code, § 276.02) (Ord. 94-20, passed 12-20-1994)
§ 34.052 FUNDING.
   Beautification Commission programs shall be paid for from funds appropriated
by Council for such purposes. Public donations and grants will also be
utilized.
(Prior Code, § 276.03) (Ord. 94-20, passed 12-20-1994)
§ 34.053 OFFICERS; RULES AND REGULATIONS; MEETINGS.
   The Beautification Commission shall choose its own officers and make its own
rules and regulations for the conduct of its meetings. The Commission shall
elect a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and a corresponding secretary at its
first meeting each year for a one-year period. Meetings shall be held at least
once a month and shall be open to the public, and a record shall be kept
showing the vote of each member on each question. Copies of such records shall
be given to the Mayor, Council, the Clerk of Council and department heads with
responsibilities in these areas.
(Prior Code, § 276.04) (Ord. 94-20, passed 12-20-1994)
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
§ 34.065 PURPOSES.
   The purposes of the Historic Preservation Commission are:
   (A)   To preserve the distinctive character of the city;
   (B)   To safeguard the architectural integrity of the city’s designated
landmarks;
   (C)   To safeguard the heritage of the city by promotion of the use and
preservation of elements which reflect the city’s cultural, social, economic,
educational, political or architectural heritage;
   (D)   To discourage unsuitable demolitions or incompatible alterations to
designated landmarks or structures within historic districts;
   (E)   To foster economic vitality by publicly encouraging private investment
in the city’s older buildings and historic neighborhoods;
   (F)   To foster civic pride in the beauty and notable accomplishments of the
past; and
   (G)   To act as liaison on behalf of the city to individuals and groups
concerned with historic preservation.
(Prior Code, § 278.01) (Ord. 94-16, passed 2-14-1995; Ord. 2017-20, passed 10-
10-2017)
§ 34.066 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADAPTIVE RE-USE. To restore a dwelling or building, with some changes, so
that it can be utilized in a manner other than its original use.
   ALTERATION. Any material change in the external architectural features of
any designated landmark or to a structure within an historic district, or in
the interior of any such structure when and to the extent that its interior
features are specifically included in the relevant designation.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS. A certificate issued by the Historic
Preservation Commission authorizing and allowing an alteration, demolition or
new construction to a designated landmark or structure within an historic
district that is consistent with the property’s character and is in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
   DEMOLITION. The substantial deterioration or the removal or destruction, in
whole or in part, of any designated landmark or structure within an historic
district.
   DESIGNATED LANDMARK. Any historically significant building, structure or
archaeological site that has been designated as a landmark pursuant to the
procedures described herein and adopted by the Historic Preservation
Commission.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT. A specific, definable geographic area that possesses a
significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings,
structures, or objects united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical
development.
   HISTORIC SIGNIFICANCE.
      (1)   The attributes of a designated landmark or historic district that
possess integrity of design, location, setting, materials, workmanship and
association and:
         (a)   Are associated with events that have made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of the city’s history;
         (b)   Are associated with the lives of persons significant in the
city’s past;
         (c)   Embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or
method of construction;
         (d)   Represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinctions; or
         (e)   Have yielded or are likely to yield information in prehistory or
history.
      (2)   Cemeteries, birthplaces or graves of historical figures, properties
owned by religious institutions, or used for religious purposes, structures
that have been moved from their original locations, reconstructed historic
buildings, properties primarily commemorative in nature, and properties that
have achieved significance within the past 50 years, shall not be considered to
be of historic significance, unless they are integral parts of districts that
meet the above criteria or if they fall within the following categories:
         (a)   A religious property which is primarily significant for its
architecture or secular history;
         (b)   A relocated building which has a high degree of architectural
significance or which is the primary structure associated with an individual or
an event;
         (c)   The birthplace or gravesite of an historical figure, if no other
built feature survives which is directly associated with his or her productive
life;
         (d)   A cemetery primarily important because of its age, distinctive
design features or association with the graves of persons of transcendent
importance, or which is associated with historic events;
         (e)   A reconstructed building when accurately represented in a
suitable environment as part of a restoration master plan and when no other
building with the same association has survived;
         (f)   A property primarily commemorative in intent if design, age,
tradition or symbolic value have given it significance; or
         (g)   A property achieving significance within the past 50 years if it
is of exceptional importance or is unique in the city.
(Prior Code, § 278.02) (Ord. 94-16, passed 2-14-1995; Ord. 2017-20, passed 10-
10-2017)
§ 34.067 GREEN HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Historic Preservation Commission of the city is established. It
shall consist of five members who shall not hold any elective local office and
who shall be appointed for staggered terms of five years.
   (B)   Appointments to the Commission shall be by the Mayor and confirmed by
City Council. All appointed Commission members shall have a demonstrated
special interest, experience or knowledge in history, architecture or related
disciplines. At least two of the members shall have background in history,
historic preservation, architecture, historic and prehistoric archaeology,
landscape architecture, planning, folklore, cultural anthropology, curation, or
conservation to the extent available or willing to serve.
   (C)   The Mayor shall appoint, with the approval of Council, a Historic
Preservation Administrative Officer and shall, from time to time, establish the
duties to be performed by such Officer. The Historic Preservation
Administrative Officer shall assist the Commission and owners with the
implementation and enforcement of this chapter. It shall also be the duty of
all officials and employees of the city to assist such Officer and the
Commission. The Officer shall also act in an advisory role to other officials
on behalf of the city regarding the protection of local cultural resources and
organizations concerned with historic preservation.
   (D)   Within 60 days of an opening, the Mayor shall fill all vacancies for
the remainder of the term.
   (E)   At its first annual meeting, the Commission shall convene and select a
chairperson and vice-chairperson. It shall then adopt rules of procedure. The
secretary shall be a member of the city staff, as designated by the Planning
Department.
   (F)   The Commission shall establish its schedule of meeting times and
places, but shall meet at least four times a year.
   (G)   All Commission meetings shall comply with federal and state laws
regarding public meetings and for providing adequate advance notice of meetings
to the public. A written report of the Commission’s minutes shall be kept on
file and be available for public inspection.
   (H)   Commission members shall be subject to §§ 7.2 and 12.7 of the Charter
regarding board and commission general provisions, and ethical conduct and
conflicts of interest, as well as provisions on these subjects in the Ohio
Revised Code.
   (I)   The Commission shall prepare a written report at least once a year to
Council that summarizes its activities, cases, special projects and
recommendations. Such reports shall be available for public inspection.
   (J)   All Commission documents and materials shall generally be available
for public inspection and shall comply with state and city public record laws
and policies.
(Prior Code, § 278.03) (Ord. 94-16, passed 2-14-1995; Ord. 2013-01, passed 2-
12-2013; Ord. 2014-17, passed 12-9-2014; Ord. 2017-20, passed 10-10-2017)
§ 34.068 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the following functions,
powers and duties, exercisable in accordance with the procedures contained in
this code:
   (A)   It shall prepare a historic preservation plan for the city that
highlights historic areas and notes distinctive themes or patterns of
development significant to the city, and which shall chart a course for future
preservation activities in the community;
   (B)   It shall have exclusive power to determine the appropriateness of the
demolition of any structure or feature within historic districts or of any
designated landmark;
   (C)   It shall have power to determine the appropriateness, by application
of the property owner, the construction, preservation, restoration,
reconstruction or rehabilitation of any building, structure or object which is
a designated landmark or which is within the boundary of an historic district;
   (D)   It shall have the power to designate landmarks and to create historic
districts according to the procedures set forth for such action in §§
34.069 and
34.070;
   (E)   It shall keep a list of designated landmarks and historic districts
and shall furnish a list to the Director of Planning, and make the list
available to the public in accordance with the guidelines of the Secretary of
the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and the Advisory Council on
Historic Preservation’s Treatment of Archaeological Properties;
   (F)   It shall prepare design guidelines for renovations to historic
buildings, to nonhistoric buildings within historic districts and for new
construction in historic districts;
   (G)   It shall review all nominations to the National Register for the city
and shall seek to expand the National Register program in the city. When
requested by official action of the Historic Preservation Commission, Council
is hereby authorized and directed to employ a qualified, licensed archeologist
and/or architect to consult with and assist the Commission on any and all
matters set forth in this section;
   (H)   It shall work to record city landmarks through the Ohio Historic
Inventory, with duplicates available through the Ohio Historic Preservation
Office, which shall be updated periodically reflecting any changes, alterations
and demolitions;
   (I)   It may accept grants, gifts and bequests and may recommend to Council
that the city apply for such funds to advance its preservation work in the
community;
   (J)   It may employ technical consultants to assist it in performing its
functions as authorized by Council;
   (K)   It may seek to promote interest in preservation and to educate local
citizens by holding workshops and by preparing informational material as
appropriate;
   (L)   It shall encourage its members to attend workshops, seminars and other
educational programs on historic preservation; and
   (M)   It may do any other acts that are necessary and proper to assist it in
performing its duties under the terms of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 278.04) (Ord. 94-16, passed 2-14-1995; Ord. 2017-20, passed 10-
10-2017)
§ 34.069 DESIGNATION OF PROCEDURES FOR INDIVIDUAL LANDMARKS.
   (A)   A property (building, structure, place or object) may be nominated as
a historic landmark by an individual, group or by the Historic Preservation
Commission.
   (B)   When an application to designate an individual property or site as a
landmark is received or initiated by the Historic Preservation Commission, the
owner(s) of the property shall be notified. The property owner or owners will
then have 30 days to provide written comments and/or objections to the
property’s nomination. After the 30-day comment period, at the Commission’s
next regularly next scheduled meeting, the Commission will hold a public
hearing to review the local historic landmark application.
   (C)   The Historic Preservation Commission shall consider the proposal in
terms of the criteria defined in §
34.066. Properties shall be documented to meet at least one of the criteria
listed.
   (D)   If the nomination has no comments and/or objections, the Commission
may elect to formally designate the property.
   (E)   If there are objections to the nomination, the Commission may
recommend to rescind the nomination, table the nomination or schedule a hearing
for its next meeting to consider the application. At that hearing, if the
Commission votes in favor of designation, it must communicate its intent to the
Law Director for submission to City Council.
   (F)   After the designation of an individual property (building, structure,
place or object), the Commission shall notify the property owners of the
decision and shall add the new designations to its list, with a copy to the
Director of Planning.
   (G)   The Commission shall identify in writing all proposed designations
and, specifically, which interiors, if any, are covered under the designation.
If no interiors are specified, then only the exterior of a building shall be
considered to be designated.
 
   (H)   From the public hearing to review the local historic landmark
application and unless and until the Commission or Council shall fail to
designate the property, the property shall be subject to the conditions and
requirements as if it were a designated landmark.
(Prior Code, § 278.05) (Ord. 94-16, passed 2-14-1995; Ord. 2017-20, passed 10-
10-2017)
§ 34.070 PROCEDURES FOR DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS.
   (A)   For proposed historic districts, the Commission will notify all
property owners, in the proposed historic district, of its intent to designate
their property. Within 30 days after such notice, the Commission will conduct a
public hearing to explain why historic district status is being sought and the
effects of such designation, with all comments being recorded.
   (B)   After the public hearing, at which time public comments will have been
received, the Commission will communicate its final recommendation to City
Council, along with any comments made during the meeting.
   (C)   If City Council approves the historic district nomination by a
majority vote, the district will thereby be designated.
   (D)   If City Council fails to approve the nomination, the Commission may
revise and/or resubmit the nomination to City Council accompanied by any
supportive information.
   (E)   Once a designation has been obtained, the Commission will notify all
property owners of the decision and the designations will be added to its list,
with a copy forwarded to the Planning Director.
   (F)   The Commission will state on all proposed designations specifically
which interiors, if any, are covered under the designation. If none is
specified, the only the exterior of a building in the historic district will be
considered to be designated.
(Prior Code, § 278.06) (Ord. 2017-20, passed 10-10-2017)
§ 34.071 PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW OF PROPOSED ALTERATIONS, DEMOLITION OR NEW
CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   No person shall alter or demolish any historic structure which is a
designated landmark or which lies within an historic district, or begin new
construction within a historic district without first obtaining a certificate
of appropriateness.
   (B)   Applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be filed with
the Director of Planning in such form as may be prescribed by the Historic
Preservation Commission.
   (C)   The Commission shall make a determination on applications for
certificates of appropriateness within 30 days of the filing of the action or
within 60 days if a hearing is requested pursuant to this section, unless the
applicant requests a time extension. If the Commission fails to render its
determination within such time period, the application for the certificate of
appropriateness shall be deemed approved.
   (D)   In making such a determination, the Commission may refer to the
Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and to design
guidelines as adopted by the Historic Preservation Commission.
   (E)   The Commission may delegate to the Director of Planning the authority
to grant certificates of appropriateness without referral to the Commission and
without a public hearing in instances of minor alterations of types which the
Commission shall previously specify.
   (F)   For certificates of appropriateness regarding historic districts, the
Commission shall give notice of the application by regular mail to contiguous
property owners and shall make this information available to the general public
at least seven days in advance of the Commission’s acting on such application.
   (G)   On request of the property owner or upon receipt of objection to the
proposed change from the contiguous property owner or other property owner
within the historic district, the Commission shall act on the application only
after a public hearing is held.
   (H)   In the case of a denial of a certificate of appropriateness, the
Commission shall state the reasons for denial and shall suggest changes which
may result in approval. The Commission shall offer to continue to meet with the
owner to achieve a mutually satisfactory compromise.
(Prior Code, § 278.07) (Ord. 94-16, passed 2-14-1995; Ord. 2017-20, passed 10-
10-2017)
§ 34.072 MINIMUM MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The owner of a designated landmark or any structure within an historic
district, if such structure is vacant or inhabited, shall provide sufficient
maintenance and upkeep for such structure to ensure its perpetuation and to
prevent its destruction by deterioration.
   (B)   The Historic Preservation Commission, on its own initiative, may file
a petition with the Law Director requesting that the Law Director proceed to
take action against any owner who, in the opinion of the Commission, is in
violation of the above section.
(Prior Code, § 278.08) (Ord. 94-16, passed 2-14-1995; Ord. 2017-20, passed 10-
10-2017)
§ 34.073 VIOLATIONS.
   No person shall construct, reconstruct, alter, change or demolish any
exterior feature of any designated landmark, structure or any designated
interior in violation of any provision of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 278.09) (Ord. 94-16, passed 2-14-1995; Ord. 2017-20, passed 10-
10-2017)
AUDIT COMMITTEE
§ 34.085 ESTABLISHMENT; ADVISORY CAPACITY.
   There is hereby established in and for the city an Audit Committee to serve
in an advisory role to Council. The administration and Council shall remain
ultimately responsible for the fair presentation of the city’s financial
statements and for obtaining and monitoring the financial statement audit.
(Prior Code, § 284.01) (Ord. 00-5, passed 5-9-2000)
§ 34.086 QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.
   The members of the Audit Committee collectively shall possess the expertise
and experience in accounting, auditing and financial reporting necessary to
understand and resolve issues raised by the independent audit of the city’s
financial statements.
(Prior Code, § 284.02) (Ord. 00-5, passed 5-9-2000)
§ 34.087 MEMBERSHIP; TERMS.
   The Audit Committee shall consist of five members: the Mayor, the
chairperson of the Finance Committee of Council and three qualified electors of
the city appointed for staggered terms of six years, or until their successors
have been appointed. The general provisions of §
7.2 of the Charter shall apply to the Audit Committee. The appointed members of
the Audit Committee shall be established as follows: one member for an initial
term of two years and one member for an initial six-year term shall be
appointed by the Mayor, and one member for an initial term of four years shall
be appointed by Council.
(Prior Code, § 284.03) (Ord. 00-5, passed 5-9-2000)
§ 34.088 RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The primary responsibility of the Audit Committee shall be to oversee
the independent audit of the city’s financial statements.
   (B)   The Committee’s responsibilities shall include:
      (1)   The selection of the independent auditor;
      (2)   Consultation with the independent auditor regarding issues arising
from the audit;
      (3)   The resolution of any audit findings, including the implementation
of any corrective action necessary as a result of the audit; and
      (4)   The right to request the auditor to investigate particular areas or
issues identified by the Committee.
   (C)   The Audit Committee shall have access to the reports of any internal
auditors, as well as access to any annual internal audit work plans. The Audit
Committee shall annually present a written report to the Mayor and Council of
its actions during the past year.
(Prior Code, § 284.04) (Ord. 00-5, passed 5-9-2000)
CITY TREE ADVISORY COMMISSION
§ 34.100 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARK TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public
parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the
public has free access as a park, and/or open space.
   STREET TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land
that is within the city right-of-way be it an alley, street or easement for
transportation purposes.
(Prior Code, § 286.01) (Ord. 2018-25, passed 11-27-2018)
§ 34.101 COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.
   The City Council desires to create and establish a Tree Advisory Commission
as a subcommittee to the Living Green Task Force for the city. The Commission
shall consist of no more than three members from the Living Green Task Force.
The Commission will also include the Director of Public Service or designee and
the staff certified arborist. Ad hoc members may include a park board member
and a City Council member.
(Prior Code, § 286.02) (Ord. 2018-25, passed 11-27-2018)
§ 34.102 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
(Prior Code, § 286.03) (Ord. 2018-25, passed 11-27-2018)
§ 34.103 RESPONSIBILITY OF COMMISSION.
   It shall be the responsibility of the Commission to study, investigate, and
develop and/or update annually, and recommend a plan for the care,
preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, or disposition of trees
and shrubs in parks, along streets, and in other public areas.
(Prior Code, § 286.04) (Ord. 2018-25, passed 11-27-2018)
§ 34.104 STREET TREE LIST.
   No species of street trees other than those included on the official annual
tree list as on file in the Service Director’s office may be planted without
the permission of the Tree Advisory Commission. The planting of public trees
shall be regulated by the rules established by the Director of Public Service.
These regulations will be reviewed on an annual basis.
(Prior Code, § 286.05) (Ord. 2018-25, passed 11-27-2018)
§ 34.105 CITY’S RIGHT TO PLANT, PRUNE, MAINTAIN AND/OR REMOVE.
   The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and/or remove trees,
plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes,
squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to
preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public ground.
(Prior Code, § 286.06) (Ord. 2018-25, passed 11-27-2018)
§ 34.106 TOPPING PROHIBITED; EXEMPTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or city
department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property.
Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than
three inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to
remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by
storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical, may be exempted
from this chapter as recommended by the Tree Commission.
(Prior Code, § 286.07) (Ord. 2018-25, passed 11-27-2018)
§ 34.107 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS.
   Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the
city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the
light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and
so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the
street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous
trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of
the public. The city shall have the right after prior notifications to property
owner to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with
the proper spread of light along the street from a street light or interferes
with visibility of any traffic-control device or sign. Property owners may be
assessed for any necessary work.
(Prior Code, § 286.08) (Ord. 2018-25, passed 11-27-2018)
§ 34.108 REMOVAL OF DEAD OR DISEASED TREES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased
trees on private property within the city, when such trees constitute a hazard
to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential
threat to other trees within the city. The Director of Public Service will
notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said
owners at their own expense within 60 days after the date of service of notice.
In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city
shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on
the owner’s property tax notice.
(Prior Code, § 286.09) (Ord. 2018-25, passed 11-27-2018)
§ 34.109 REMOVAL OF STUMPS.
   All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of
the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of
the ground.
(Prior Code, § 286.10) (Ord. 2018-25, passed 11-27-2018)
§ 34.110 INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
Tree Advisory Commission, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the
planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street
trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 286.11) (Ord. 2018-25, passed 11-27-2018)
§ 34.111 CITY COUNCIL REVIEW.
   The City Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and
decisions of the Tree Advisory Commission. Any person may appeal from any
ruling or order of the Tree Commission to City Council who may hear the matter
and make a final decision.
(Prior Code, § 286.12) (Ord. 2018-25, passed 11-27-2018)
DIVERSITY COMMITTEE
§ 34.125 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The City Council establishes a committee to review the hiring practices and
workplace procedures, as well as the appointment process for city boards and
commissions of the city in order to prevent racial injustice and promote best
practices that are inclusive and equitable for all people. The Committee may
also review policies and practices relating to equitable compensation,
training, development, succession and advancement of employees, and other human
resource matters. The Committee membership shall include the Human Resource
Manager, Council chairperson for the Rules and Personnel Committee (who shall
serve for a period of one year, even if their appointment as chair expires
during this time), and a nominee from the Inclusion Committee, who acting
together, shall recommend to City Council no more than seven additional
Committee members in an effort to reflect the diverse components of the
community, including race, sex, age, sexual orientation, religion and other
pertinent characteristics. A member of the Civil Service Commission will be
invited to serve as one of the seven additional members, all of which shall be
confirmed by majority vote of City Council. The Mayor shall not serve on the
Committee but will receive monthly updates beginning no later than 60 days
after the Committee is formed and the Mayor will have the opportunity to
contribute suggestions to the Committee as part of the monthly update. The
Committee, who may choose to work in conjunction with a consultant (described
more fully in § 34.126), shall present its final recommendations to the Mayor
and City Council within one year of the date this legislation is passed.
(Prior Code, § 288.01) (Res. 2020-R59, passed 9-8-2020)
§ 34.126 CONSULTANT.
   The Committee described in §
34.125 may wish to hire a consultant with an expertise in diversity, equity,
and inclusion in hiring and workplace practice to assist the Committee. If the
Committee determines that the consultant would be beneficial to its review, the
consultant shall be chosen as follows: the Committee shall recommend three
consultants or consultant firms to the Mayor, who shall present his selection
of the preferred consultant(s) or firm(s) to Council for approval by resolution
for any expenditure that exceeds $10,000 pursuant to §
35.08 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 288.02) (Res. 2020-R59, passed 9-8-2020)
VETERANS’ COMMISSION
§ 34.135 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The City of Green desires to create and establish a Veterans' Commission.
The Commission shall consist of five voting members. Two members shall be
appointed by the City Council and three members shall be appointed by the
Mayor. Members shall be qualified and serve without compensation. Each member
shall be a resident of the municipality preceding the appointment and shall
remain a resident during that member's term. A City Council Member shall be
appointed to serve as liaison to and be a non-voting member of the Commission.
Each voting member shall have served, or shall be currently serving, in the
United States Armed Forces. Each veteran member shall have received either an
honorable discharge or shall be retired from service. The Commission may create
ad hoc committees of residents who need not have served in the armed forces.
(Ord. 2024-06, passed 4-23-2024)
§ 34.136 TERM.
   With the exception of the appointments of the Commission's initial members,
each member of the Commission shall serve a three-year term, with the term
expiring on December 31 of each year. The term of the Council Member serving as
liaison shall not exceed their term of office on Council. The initial members
shall be appointed for staggered terms of one, two, and three years. Members
shall serve no more than three consecutive full terms.
(Ord. 2024-06, passed 4-23-2024)
§ 34.137 RECOMMENDATIONS; ADVICE AND ASSISTANCE.
   The Commission shall make recommendations to the Mayor with respect to the
American military and veteran related issues, ceremonies, events and activities
that occur within the municipal limits of the City of Green. Upon request, the
Commission may provide advice and assistance to city residents regarding
resources available to the members of the United States Armed Forces, veterans,
and members of their respective families. The Commission shall act as a conduit
of communication and coordination between the local military and veteran
community and the City of Green.
(Ord. 2024-06, passed 4-23-2024)
§ 34.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, any impending change in
violation of this chapter may be subject to appropriate proceedings to prevent
such unlawful change.
(Prior Code, § 278.99) (Ord. 94-16, passed 2-14-1995; Ord. 2017-20, passed 10-
10-2017)
CHAPTER 35: CITY POLICIES
Section
Contracts and Purchasing
   
35.01   Continuation of existing contracts
   
35.02   Execution and review of contracts
   
35.03   Purchase of recycled materials
   
35.04   Participation in ODOT Cooperative Purchasing Program
   
35.05   Participation in Ohio’s Cooperative Purchasing Program
   
35.06   Capital improvement projects and acquisitions; bidding procedures;
alteration of contracts
   
35.07   Single aggregate bids
   
35.08   Contracts for professional service
Identity Theft Policy
   
35.20   Background
   
35.21   Purpose
   
35.22   Scope
   
35.23   Policy
   
35.24   Additional identity theft prevention program
   
35.25   Responding to red flags
   
35.26   Periodic updates to plan
   
35.27   Program administration
Credit Card Policy
   
35.40   Purpose
   
35.41   General guidelines
   
35.42   Finance Director responsibilities
   
35.43   Rules and procedures for use
   
35.44   Documentation requirements
   
35.45   Preventing fraud
   
35.46   Unauthorized purchases
   
35.47   Inappropriate use of cards
Statutory reference:
   Contracts for utility services without advertising for bids, see R.C. § 9.30
   Contracts for work in public buildings and improvements, see R.C. §§ 153.50
et seq.
   Public contracts generally, see R.C. §§ 735.05 et seq.
   Service contracts with county, see R.C. §§ 307.14 et seq.
CONTRACTS AND PURCHASING
§ 35.01 CONTINUATION OF EXISTING CONTRACTS.
   All the laws and contracts in effect within the Township of Green, Summit
County, Ohio, including, but not limited to, the following contracts: animal
control; County Sheriff; County Engineer; Society National Bank; County
Planning; County Building Department; Marks Cablevision; and employee
collective bargaining agreements, not expressly prohibited by the Ohio Revised
Code or amended by ordinance of the Council of the Village or City of Green,
shall be in effect within the city until modified, amended and/or terminated by
Council.
(Prior Code, § 210.01) (Ord. 91-2, passed 1-9-1991)
§ 35.02 EXECUTION AND REVIEW OF CONTRACTS.
   (A)   The Mayor shall be designated to co-sign contracts with the Finance
Director.
   (B)   The Council President shall also be authorized to co-sign contracts in
the event the Mayor is not available to do so.
   (C)   The Director of Law shall review for form and correctness all
contracts for the city prior to authorizing any officer to sign any such
contract.
(Prior Code, § 210.02) (Ord. 91-6, passed 1-9-1991)
§ 35.03 PURCHASE OF RECYCLED MATERIALS.
   The city administration and all departments will purchase products made from
recycled materials whenever feasible.
(Prior Code, § 210.03) (Res. 91-R26, passed 6-11-1991)
§ 35.04 PARTICIPATION IN ODOT COOPERATIVE PURCHASING PROGRAM.
   (A)   The Mayor hereby requests authority, in the name of the city, to
participate in contracts of the Ohio Department of Transportation, for the
purchase of machinery, materials, supplies or other articles, which the
Department has entered into pursuant to R.C. § 5513.01(B).
   (B)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to agree, in the name of the city, to
be bound by all terms and conditions as the Ohio Director of Transportation
prescribes.
   (C)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to agree, in the name of the city, to
directly pay the vendor, under each such contract of the Ohio Department of
Transportation in which the city participates, for items it receives pursuant
to the contract.
   (D)   The city agrees to hold the Ohio Director of Transportation and the
Ohio Department of Transportation harmless for any claim or dispute arising out
of participation in a contract pursuant to R.C. § 5513.01(B).
(Prior Code, § 210.04) (Res. 92-R41, passed 7-28-1992)
§ 35.05 PARTICIPATION IN OHIO’S COOPERATIVE PURCHASING PROGRAM.
   (A)   The Mayor hereby requests authority, in the name of the city, to
participate in state contracts which the Ohio Department of Administrative
Services, Office of State Purchasing, has entered into for the purchase of
supplies, services, equipment and certain materials pursuant to R.C. § 125.04.
   (B)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to agree, in the name of the city, to
be bound by all contract terms and conditions as the Ohio Department of
Administrative Services, Office of State Purchasing, prescribes. Such terms and
conditions may include a reasonable fee to cover the administrative costs which
the Ohio Department of Administrative Services incurs as a result of the city’s
participation in a contract. Further, the Mayor does hereby agree to be bound
by all such terms and conditions.
   (C)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to agree, in the name of the city, to
directly pay the vendor, under each such state contract in which it
participates, for items it receives pursuant to the contract, and the Mayor
does hereby agree to directly pay the vendor.
(Prior Code, § 210.05) (Res. 92-R58, passed 11-10-1992)
§ 35.06 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS AND ACQUISITIONS; BIDDING PROCEDURES;
ALTERATION OF CONTRACTS.
   (A)   (1)   Beginning the effective date of this section through calendar
year 2024, whenever a capital improvement project or other acquisition
involving the expenditure of appropriations is to be made by the city, and the
estimated cost is in excess of $75,000, the Mayor or the Mayor’s designee shall
advertise a notice to bidders in a newspaper of general circulation in
accordance with state law requirements. For each calendar year thereafter, the
amount for the previous calendar year shall increase by 3% to create the new
bidding threshold for that year as published by the Director of Commerce. The
Mayor or the Mayor’s designee shall advertise a notice to bidders in a
newspaper of general circulation once a week for two consecutive weeks
requesting bids for such purpose or construction or improvement, and shall
provide the Clerk of Council with a copy of the advertisement at the time it is
submitted for publication.
      (2)   When so authorized, the director of the department involved may
advertise a notice to bidders in a newspaper of general circulation once a week
for two consecutive weeks requesting bids for such project or acquisition.
   (B)   After receiving and opening the bids in the manner prescribed by law,
the Mayor or the Mayor’s designee shall transmit such bids with the
recommendation thereon to Council for consideration at a regular meeting of
Council. The information set forth therein shall be presented to Council by
resolution.
   (C)   If a resolution authorizing execution of a contract or an agreement
with a successful bidder is approved by Council in accordance with the
procedure outlined in divisions (A) and (B) of this section, and such agreement
is in fact executed by the city, and if, during the performance of an awarded
contract or agreement, it should become apparent that alterations are necessary
to the original agreement in an amount exceeding 10% of the original contract
amount, such alterations must first be authorized by Council. The need for
alterations shall be presented to Council by resolution.
   (D)   Any acquisition, construction or improvement which involves an
expenditure of less than the current bidding threshold, as determined above,
shall be made in accordance with the Department of Finance purchasing policy, a
copy of which shall remain on file in the Finance Department, on open order,
given in the same manner as purchase orders of like amount.
   (E)   If any necessary alterations to an existing contract are less than 10%
of the original contract amount, the Mayor is authorized to enter into such
supplemental agreement without Council’s authorization.
(Prior Code, § 210.06) (Ord. 99-6, passed 6-8-1999; Ord. 03-19, passed 11-25-
2003; Ord. 2012-26, passed 11-13-2012; Ord. 2017-15, passed 6-27-2017; Ord.
2023-11, passed 9-26-2023)
§ 35.07 SINGLE AGGREGATE BIDS.
   (A)   (1)   Pursuant to § 3, Article XVIII of the Ohio Constitution and the
City Charter, City Council hereby authorizes the Mayor to advertise for and
award single aggregate bids for the erection, repair, alteration or rebuilding
of a public building when the estimate for the improvement is under $500,000.
Nothing in this provision shall be deemed to eliminate the discretion of the
Mayor to advertise for and award separate bids for components of any
improvement that is under $500,000.
      (2)   When the estimate for the improvement is $500,000 or more, the
Mayor shall advertise for a single aggregate bid and separate bids for the
components set forth in R.C. § 153.50(B)(1) through (3) and then award the bid
to the lowest and best bidder or bidders.
   (B)   City Council hereby specifically finds and determines that R.C. §§
153.50 to 153.52 shall not be applicable to the city, insofar as they conflict
with the terms of this section.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the city from
advertising for and awarding separate bids for each separate trade or kind of
mechanical labor, employment or business, or for furnishing materials for the
erection, repair, alteration or rebuilding of a public building if the
combination of the necessary separate bids constitute the lowest and best bids
as determined by City Council.
(Prior Code, § 210.07) (Ord. 99-11, passed 9-28-1999)
§ 35.08 CONTRACTS FOR PROFESSIONAL SERVICE.
   (A)   The Mayor shall submit for Council approval, all future contracts for
the following professional services that exceed $10,000 or more to any one
individual or entity or to any related individual(s) and/or entity or entities
in the aggregate per year: attorneys, accountants, auditors, architects,
engineers, construction project managers, employment search firms, and
independent contractors providing public relations/communications services. The
Mayor shall notify all City Council members of any contracts entered into for
professional services that do not exceed $10,000 and include detail as to whom
the contract was awarded, the general purpose and the amount. This notification
shall be provided no later than 15 days after the contract is entered into by
the Mayor. Contracts covering any individuals involved in the production,
recording and broadcasting of any meetings for the Mayor or his or her
designee, City Council, and the various commissions and boards of the city,
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section, insofar as the contract
covers these specific acts.
   (B)   Upon the Mayor’s submission of a request to award and execute a
contract for professional services that involve services identified in division
(A) of this section, the request shall be submitted in the form of a resolution
and placed before Council, where the resolution shall be read and debated in
accordance with Council rules. A majority affirmative vote of Council is
required before the Mayor is permitted to award or execute any contract that
has been identified in division (A) of this section. In the event of a disaster
that poses an immediate threat to the safety and health of the citizens of the
city, the Mayor’s adherence to the requirements of this section may be
temporarily suspended.
(Prior Code, § 210.08) (Ord. 2010-04, passed 6-8-2010; Ord. 2017-15, passed 6-
27-2017; Ord. 2018-16, passed 8-14-2018)
IDENTITY THEFT POLICY
§ 35.20 BACKGROUND.
   The risk to the city, its employees and customers from data loss and
identity theft is a significant concern to the city and can be reduced only
through the combined efforts of every employee and contractor.
(Prior Code, § 216.01) (Res. 2008-R63, passed 11-25-2008)
§ 35.21 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The city adopts this sensitive information policy to help protect
employees, customers, contractors and the city from damages related to the loss
or misuse of sensitive information.
   (B)   This policy will:
      (1)   Define sensitive information;
      (2)   Describe the physical security of data when it is printed on paper;
      (3)   Describe the electronic security of data when stored and
distributed; and
      (4)   Place the city in compliance with state and federal law regarding
identity theft protection.
   (C)   This policy enables the city to protect existing customers, reducing
risk from identity fraud and minimize potential damage to the city from
fraudulent new accounts. The program will help the city:
      (1)   Identify risks that signify potentially fraudulent activity within
new or existing covered accounts;
      (2)   Detect risks when they occur in covered accounts;
      (3)   Respond to risks to determine if fraudulent activity has occurred
and act if fraud has been attempted or committed; and
      (4)   Update the program periodically, including reviewing the accounts
that are covered and the identified risks that are part of the program.
(Prior Code, § 216.02) (Res. 2008-R63, passed 11-25-2008)
§ 35.22 SCOPE.
   This policy and protection program applies to employees, contractors,
consultants, temporary workers and other workers at the city, including all
personnel affiliated with third parties.
(Prior Code, § 216.03) (Res. 2008-R63, passed 11-25-2008)
§ 35.23 POLICY.
   (A)   Definition of sensitive information. Sensitive information includes
the following items whether stored in electronic or printed format:
      (1)   Credit card information, including any of the following:
         (a)   Credit card number (in part or whole);
         (b)   Credit card expiration date;
         (c)   Cardholder name; and
         (d)   Cardholder address.
      (2)   Tax identification numbers, including:
         (a)   Social Security number;
         (b)   Business identification number; and
         (c)   Employer identification numbers.
      (3)   Payroll information, including, among other information:
         (a)   Paychecks; and
         (b)   Pay stubs.
      (4)   Cafeteria plan check requests and associated paperwork;
      (5)   Medical information for any employee or customer, including, but
not limited to:
         (a)   Doctor names and claims;
         (b)   Insurance claims;
         (c)   Prescriptions; and
         (d)   Any related personal medical information.
      (6)   Other personal information belonging to any customer, employee or
contractor, examples of which include:
         (a)   Date of birth;
         (b)   Address;
         (c)   Phone numbers;
         (d)   Maiden name;
         (e)   Names; and
         (f)   Customer number.
      (7)   Municipal personnel are encouraged to use common sense judgment in
securing confidential information to the proper extent. Furthermore, this
section should be read in conjunction with the Ohio Public Records Act, being
R.C. § 149.43, and the city’s open records policy. If an employee is uncertain
of the sensitivity of a particular piece of information, he or she should
contact their supervisor. In the event that the city cannot resolve a conflict
between this policy and the Ohio Public Records Act, the city will consult with
legal counsel.
   (B)   Hard copy distribution. Each employee and contractor performing work
for the city will comply with the following policies.
      (1)   File cabinets, desk drawers, overhead cabinets and any other
storage space containing documents with sensitive information will be locked
when not in use.
      (2)   Storage rooms containing documents with sensitive information and
record retention areas will be locked at the end of each workday or when
unsupervised.
      (3)   Desks, workstations, work areas, printers and fax machines, and
common shared work areas will be cleared of all documents containing sensitive
information when not in use.
      (4)   Whiteboards, dry-erase boards, writing tablets and the like in
common shared work areas will be erased, removed or shredded when not in use.
      (5)   When documents containing sensitive information are discarded, they
will be placed inside a locked shred bin or immediately shredded using a
mechanical cross cut or Department of Defense (DOD)-approved shredding device.
Locked shred bins are labeled “Confidential paper shredding and recycling.”
Municipal records, however, may only be destroyed in accordance with the city’s
records retention policy.
   (C)   Electronic distribution. Each employee and contractor performing work
for the city will comply with the following policies.
      (1)   Internally, sensitive information may be transmitted using approved
municipal e-mail. All sensitive information must be encrypted when stored in an
electronic format.
      (2)   Any sensitive information sent externally must be encrypted and
password protected and only to approved recipients. Additionally, a statement
such as this should be included in the e-mail:
         “This message may contain confidential and/or proprietary information
and is intended for the person/entity to whom it was originally addressed. Any
use by others is strictly prohibited.”
(Prior Code, § 216.04) (Res. 2008-R63, passed 11-25-2008)
§ 35.24 ADDITIONAL IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM.
   (A)   Covered accounts. A covered account includes any account that involves
or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions. Every new and
existing customer account that meets the following criteria is covered by this
program:
      (1)   Business, personal and household accounts for which there is a
reasonably foreseeable risk of identity theft; or
      (2)   Business, personal and household accounts for which there is a
reasonably foreseeable risk to the safety or soundness of the city from
identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation or
litigation risks.
   (B)   Red flags.
      (1)   The following red flags are potential indicators of fraud. Any time
a red flag, or a situation closely resembling a red flag, is apparent, it
should be investigated for verification.
         (a)   Alerts, notifications or warnings from a consumer reporting
agency;
         (b)   A fraud or active duty alert included with a consumer report;
         (c)   A notice of credit freeze from a consumer reporting agency in
response to a request for a consumer report; or
         (d)   A notice of address discrepancy from a consumer reporting agency
as defined in the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003, being 15
U.S.C. § 1681a(f), and further defined in 12 C.F.R. § 1022.82(b).
      (2)   Red flags also include consumer reports that indicate a pattern of
activity inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an
applicant or customer, such as:
         (a)   A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries;
         (b)   An unusual number of recently established credit relationships;
         (c)   A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect
to recently established credit relationships; or
         (d)   An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of
account privileges by a financial institution or creditor.
      (3)   Suspicious documents:
         (a)   Documents provided for identification that appear to have been
altered or forged;
         (b)   The photograph or physical description on the identification is
not consistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer presenting the
identification;
         (c)   Other information on the identification is not consistent with
information provided by the person opening a new covered account or customer
presenting the identification;
         (d)   Other information on the identification is not consistent with
readily accessible information that is on file with the city, such as a
signature card or a recent check; or
         (e)   An application appears to have been altered or forged, or gives
the appearance of having been destroyed and reassembled.
      (4)   Suspicious personal identifying information:
         (a)   Personal identifying information provided is inconsistent when
compared against external information sources used by the city. For example:
            1.   The address does not match any address in the consumer report;
            2.   The Social Security number (SSN) has not been issued or is
listed on the Social Security Administration’s Death Master File; or
            3.   Personal identifying information provided by the customer is
not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the
customer. For example, there is a lack of correlation between the SSN range and
date of birth.
         (b)   Personal identifying information provided is associated with
known fraudulent activity as indicated by internal or third-party sources used
by the city. For example, the address on an application is the same as the
address provided on a fraudulent application;
         (c)   Personal identifying information provided is of a type commonly
associated with fraudulent activity as indicated by internal or third-party
sources used by the city. For example:
            1.   The address on an application is fictitious, a mail drop or a
prison; or
            2.   The phone number is invalid or is associated with a pager or
answering service.
         (d)   The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other persons
opening an account or other customers;
         (e)   The address or telephone number provided is the same as or
similar to the address or telephone number submitted by an unusually large
number of other customers or other persons opening accounts;
         (f)   The customer or the person opening the covered account fails to
provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in
response to notification that the application is incomplete;
         (g)   Personal identifying information provided is not consistent with
personal identifying information that is on file with the city; or
         (h)   When using security questions (mother’s maiden name, pet’s name
and the like), the person opening the covered account or the customer cannot
provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be
available from a wallet or consumer report.
      (5)   Unusual use of, or suspicious activity related to, the covered
account:
         (a)   Shortly following the notice of a change of address for a
covered account, the city receives a request for new, additional, or
replacement goods or services, or for the addition of authorized users on the
account;
         (b)   A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly
associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example, the customer
fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent
payments;
         (c)   A covered account is used in a manner that is not consistent
with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example:
            1.   Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed
payments; or
            2.   A material change in purchasing or usage patterns.
         (d)   A covered account that has been inactive for a reasonably
lengthy period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account,
the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors);
         (e)   Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as
undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with
the customer’s covered account;
         (f)   The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper
account statements;
         (g)   The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in
connection with a customer’s covered account;
         (h)   The city receives notice from customers, victims of identity
theft, law enforcement authorities or other persons regarding possible identity
theft in connection with covered accounts held by the city; or
         (i)   The city is notified by a customer, a victim of identity theft,
a law enforcement authority or any other person that it has opened a fraudulent
account for a person engaged in identity theft.
(Prior Code, § 216.05) (Res. 2008-R63, passed 11-25-2008)
§ 35.25 RESPONDING TO RED FLAGS.
   (A)   Once potentially fraudulent activity is detected, an employee must act
quickly as a rapid appropriate response to protect customers and the city from
damages and loss.
      (1)   Once potentially fraudulent activity is detected, gather all
related documentation and write a description of the situation. Present this
information to the designated authority for determination.
      (2)   The designated authority will complete additional authentication to
determine whether the attempted transaction was fraudulent or authentic.
   (B)   If a transaction is determined to be fraudulent, appropriate actions
must be taken immediately. Actions may include:
      (1)   Canceling the transaction;
      (2)   Notifying and cooperating with appropriate law enforcement;
      (3)   Determining the extent of liability of the city; and
      (4)   Notifying the actual customer that fraud has been attempted.
(Prior Code, § 216.06) (Res. 2008-R63, passed 11-25-2008)
§ 35.26 PERIODIC UPDATES TO PLAN.
   (A)   At periodic intervals established in the program, or as required, the
program will be re-evaluated to determine whether all aspects of the program
are up to date and applicable in the current business environment.
   (B)   Periodic reviews will include an assessment of which accounts are
covered by the program.
   (C)   As part of the review, red flags may be revised, replaced or
eliminated. Defining new red flags may also be appropriate.
   (D)   Actions to take in the event that fraudulent activity is discovered
may also require revision to reduce damage to the city and its customers.
(Prior Code, § 216.07) (Res. 2008-R63, passed 11-25-2008)
§ 35.27 PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Involvement of management.
      (1)   The identity theft prevention program shall not be operated as an
extension to existing fraud prevention programs, and its importance warrants
the highest level of attention.
      (2)   The identity theft prevention program is the responsibility of the
governing body. Approval of the initial plan must be appropriately documented
and maintained.
      (3)   Operational responsibility of the program is delegated to the Human
Resources Department.
   (B)   Staff training.
      (1)   Staff training shall be conducted for all employees, officials and
contractors for whom it is reasonably foreseeable that they may come into
contact with accounts or personally identifiable information that may
constitute a risk to the city or its customers.
      (2)   The Human Resources Department is responsible for ensuring identity
theft training for all requisite employees and contractors.
      (3)   Employees must receive annual training in all elements of this
policy.
      (4)   To ensure maximum effectiveness, employees may continue to receive
additional training as changes to the program are made.
   (C)   Oversight of service provider arrangements.
      (1)   It is the responsibility of the city to ensure that the activities
of all service providers are conducted in accordance with reasonable policies
and procedures designed to detect, prevent and mitigate the risk of identity
theft.
      (2)   A service provider that maintains its own identity theft prevention
program, consistent with the guidance of the red flag rules and validated by
appropriate due diligence, may be considered to be meeting these requirements.
      (3)   Any specific requirements should be specifically addressed in the
appropriate contract arrangements.
(Prior Code, § 216.08) (Res. 2008-R63, passed 11-25-2008)
CREDIT CARD POLICY
§ 35.40 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this policy is to ensure that any city issued credit card
and/or purchase card are closely monitored to provide for maximum security and
to guard against misuse and/or losses for which the city may be held liable.
This policy is meant to comply with the mandates of Sub House Bill 312 enacted
by the 132nd General Assembly. City use of these cards include circumstances
where a purchase order is not accepted for the needed service, supplies and/or
materials, or are purchased from a vendor who issues a purchase card to be used
in conjunction with a purchase order. The city issued cards are not for
personal use and will not be permitted to be carried by personnel on a regular
basis for any reason.
(Prior Code, § 218.01) (Ord. 2018-27, passed 11-27-2018)
§ 35.41 GENERAL GUIDELINES.
   (A)   The cards are to be kept in the control of the Finance Director or his
or her designee and will be supplied by the Finance Department. The Finance
Director or designee will secure the cards in a safe or in a locked cash box in
a secure drawer.
   (B)   The Finance Director or his or her designee must keep a master list of
all employees who are permitted to use city cards, along with each employee’s
title, a master list of cards and the names that appear on each card, if
applicable, within the department. Both lists must be updated, and the Finance
Director or his or her assignee notified, whenever changes are made. A copy of
both master lists must be on file in the Finance Department and must remain
current.
   (C)   Individuals wanting to use a card must contact the Finance Director or
designee. A log with the card name, date of sign in/out time, signature of
individual using the card and a valid purchase order number is to be kept by
the Finance Director or designee. The Finance Director or designee must initial
each entry on the log indicating approval of the card’s use and the purchase.
   (D)   Regular purchase order policy and procedures must be followed whenever
an individual anticipates using the card. Every purchase using any card must
have a valid purchase order assigned to it before the purchase is legal. The
purchase order must contain the vendor name, the description, account number
and estimated dollar amount. No purchase shall exceed a spending limit of
$1,000 without the express written consent of the Finance Director or designee.
This will assure that sufficient appropriations exist to cover the anticipated
charges. Once an invoice is received, return a copy of the purchase order and
the receipt(s) to the Finance Department to complete the transaction.
   (E)   It is the responsibility of the purchaser to request a receipt with
every purchase and return the receipt with the credit card to the Finance
Department. If the card is used for an internet purchase, the purchaser must
print the confirmation, invoice and billing information at the time of the
purchase and return to the Finance Department.
   (F)   The user must immediately advise the Finance Director if the card is
damaged, lost or stolen.
   (G)   Please be conscious of the sales tax exempt status, particularly on
lodging and other major expenses. The Finance Department will print the tax
exempt forms as needed.
(Prior Code, § 218.02) (Ord. 2018-27, passed 11-27-2018)
§ 35.42 FINANCE DIRECTOR RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Determining who should receive a card. The Finance Director or
designee shall review, approve and determine when a credit card or purchase
card account will be opened. Cards will be issued to city employees only.
   (B)   Retrieving cards from employees. The Finance Director or designee will
retrieve cards from employees who resign from the city, change departments or
transfer to a position which no longer requires the use of a card.
   (C)   Overseeing appropriate use of a card. The Finance Director or
designees will:
      (1)   Review all card transactions and management reports to ensure that
the card is being used appropriately; and
      (2)   Ensure all transactions are marked “Viewed” and “Approved” prior to
recording in the general ledger.
   (D)   Ensuring documentation requirements are met. The Finance Director or
designees will:
      (1)   Ensure necessary detail and documentation are provided on all
transactions;
      (2)   Ensure that itemized receipts and card statements are retained and
kept in accordance with the city’s records retention schedule; and
      (3)   Make an annual report to the legislative authority to the city for
all rewards received based on the use of the card.
(Prior Code, § 218.03) (Ord. 2018-27, passed 11-27-2018)
§ 35.43 RULES AND PROCEDURES FOR USE.
   (A)   The card is for city business expenses only. It must not be used for
personal purchases. The card is not transferable. It may be used by the
cardholder only. Itemized receipts must be obtained for all transactions.
   (B)   Dividing one purchase into two or more, in order to stay within your
transaction limit, is not permitted. Cardholders may not receive cash advances.
   (C)   Cardholders are responsible for resolving discrepancies for that
transaction(s) and ensuring credits are received in a timely manner. Any
discrepancies must be reported to the Finance Director or designee. Cardholders
may not receive cash back or in-store credits for any refunds or exchanges. The
refund amount must be a credit applied to the card account. If a supplier
mistakenly issues a refund check, it must be submitted to the Finance
Department.
   (D)   The city is exempt from Ohio sales tax. Cardholders should not pay
Ohio sales tax. The cardholder shall supply a tax exempt form to the supplier
before the card is charged. A copy of the city’s tax exempt form is available
for the supplier.
   (E)   If grant funds are being charged, cardholders are responsible for
completing the requirements for the grant agency.
   (F)   Cardholders may not make purchases that violate the city’s policy for
restricting business transactions that may be perceived as a conflict of
interest (purchases from a business in which individuals or their relatives
have a financial interest).
(Prior Code, § 218.04) (Ord. 2018-27, passed 11-27-2018)
§ 35.44 DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Itemized receipts. Employees must obtain an itemized receipt for every
transaction. If a cash register receipt does not have a description, the
individual must write the description on the receipt. Any transaction without a
properly substantiated receipt is subject to reimbursement to the city by the
employee.
   (B)   Receipts defined. A receipt is defined as an invoice, cash register
receipt, sales slip or packing slip which contains an itemized list of goods
purchased, with dollar amounts, and the name and location of the supplier. An
employee of the supplier must sign handwritten receipts.
   (C)   Purchases made in person. Retain the itemized receipt, in addition to,
the card copy to properly substantiate the purchase.
   (D)   Faxed or mailed purchases. Retain a copy of the order, as faxed or
mailed, and the fax confirmation (if available) for your records.
   (E)   Internet purchases.
      (1)   At least one of the following types of documentation is required:
         (a)   Print out of the completed online order form;
         (b)   Print out of the online order confirmation; or
         (c)   Print out of the e-mail confirmation.
      (2)   The user must immediately advise the Finance Director if a card is
damaged, lost, stolen or the subject of suspected fraudulent activity.
(Prior Code, § 218.05) (Ord. 2018-27, passed 11-27-2018)
§ 35.45 PREVENTING FRAUD.
   The cardholder should use basic security measures, as outlined below, to
guard against fraud:
   (A)   Keep the card in a secure location; guard the card number carefully;
   (B)   Save receipts and statements in a secure area (these may contain the
card number);
   (C)   Keep the card in view during the transaction and retrieve it as soon
as possible;
   (D)   Know where the card is at all times. If the individual cannot locate
the card, notify the Finance Director or designee to cancel that card
immediately;
   (E)   Be aware of what you are signing. Your signature can copy through to
other papers that could be deliberately placed underneath for signature fraud;
   (F)   Audit your monthly statement closely. Make sure all charges shown are
legitimate charges;
   (G)   Visit reputable and familiar merchants whenever possible;
   (H)   Report possible fraud immediately;
   (I)   Do not discard credit card transaction receipts in public areas or
discard the receipt in whole form. Thieves can acquire the card number from
transaction receipts and statements;
   (J)   Do not lend the card to anyone; and
   (K)   Do not give the card number to anyone over the phone unless you know
they are a reputable vendor.
(Prior Code, § 218.06) (Ord. 2018-27, passed 11-27-2018)
§ 35.46 UNAUTHORIZED PURCHASES.
   City credit and/or purchase card accounts may not be used to purchase the
following items:
   (A)   Personal items;
   (B)   Alcohol and entertainment;
   (C)   Controlled substances requiring a DEA license;
   (D)   Employee relocation and relocation-related expenses;
   (E)   Purchases that involve signing an agreement, license or contract
(e.g., leases);
   (F)   Long-term rentals (one year or longer);
   (G)   Contracted or personal service providers, specific to unincorporated
1099 service providers (i.e., photographic studios, dry cleaners, physicians,
medical labs, auto towing or repair and the like);
   (H)   Weapons or ammunition;
   (I)   Donations; and
   (J)   Fuel for a privately-owned vehicle or aircraft.
(Prior Code, § 218.07) (Ord. 2018-27, passed 11-27-2018)
§ 35.47 INAPPROPRIATE USE OF CARDS.
   (A)   Employees using city-issued cards are responsible for safeguarding the
card. If inappropriate use of the card is discovered, disciplinary action, up
to and including discharge from employment, is possible. In the event of
fraudulent use, the city may pursue legal prosecution.
   (B)   Improper costs associated with prohibited purchases will be collected
by requesting the employee to voluntarily repay the city; or, by the employee
voluntarily agreeing to a payroll deduction; or, by the necessary legal action
available to the city.
   (C)   Upon the first notice of suspected credit card abuse, the Department
Director shall immediately advise the Finance Director who will then consult
with the Law Director. The Finance Director will initiate and coordinate an
investigation of the suspected credit card abuse. The employee shall be given
an opportunity to respond to the allegations being investigated.
   (D)   Following an interview with the employee, and the completion of an
investigation, the Finance Director shall issue a final written report to the
Law Director, the Human Resources Manager and the individual’s Director.
(Prior Code, § 218.08) (Ord. 2018-27, passed 11-27-2018)
CHAPTER 36: EARNED INCOME TAX EFFECTIVE
THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2015
Section
   
36.01   Purposes
   
36.02   Definitions
   
36.03   Imposition of tax
   
36.04   Return and payment of tax
   
36.05   Collection at source
   
36.06   Declarations
   
36.07   Duties of the Tax Administrator
   
36.08   Income Tax Division; establishment; duties
   
36.09   Investigative powers of the Tax Administrator; divulging confidential
information
   
36.10   Interest and penalties
   
36.11   Collection of unpaid taxes; refunds of overpayments
   
36.12   Violations
   
36.13   Board of Review
   
36.14   Allocation of funds
   
36.15   Credit for tax paid to another municipality or to a joint economic
development district
   
36.16   Effective period of credit for joint economic development district tax;
annual review
   
36.17   Tax credit for residents who are full-time students in a post-secondary
education program and who also owe municipal income tax
   
36.18   Collection of tax after termination of chapter
   
36.19   Separability
 
   
36.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Earned income taxes, see R.C. Ch. 718
Editor’s note:
The provisions in this chapter apply to taxes due for periods prior to January
1, 2016. Continuation of the authority to tax a shareholder’s distributive
share of the net profits of an “S” corporation to the same extent currently
permitted by the city was approved by the voters on November 2, 2004.
§ 36.01 PURPOSES.
   To provide funds for the purposes of general municipal operation,
maintenance, new equipment, extensions and enlargement of municipal services
and facilities, capital improvements of the city, community learning centers
and paying debt charges on securities issued and public obligations incurred to
pay costs related to the above-mentioned purposes, there is levied a tax on
salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation, and on other net profits,
as provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 880A.01) (Ord. 92-11, passed 7-1-1991; Res. 03-R31, passed 6-24-
2003)
§ 36.02 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning. In addition to the definitions provided in this
section, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the neuter.
   ADMINISTRATOR or TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The individual designated by this
chapter to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   ASSOCIATION. A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise, owned by two or more persons.
   BOARD OF REVIEW. The Board created and constituted as provided in §
36.13.
   BUSINESS. An enterprise, activity, profession or undertaking of any nature
conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit, whether by an
individual, partnership, association, corporation or any other entity,
including, but not limited to, the renting or leasing of property, real,
personal or mixed.
   CORPORATION. A corporation or joint stock association organized under the
laws of the United States, the state or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency. For purposes of taxation, a CORPORATION (C-corporation)
is any corporation that is not an S-corporation (§ 1361(a)(2) of the Internal
Revenue Code).
   EMPLOYEE. One who works for a wage, salary, commission or other type of
compensation in the service of an employer.
   EMPLOYER. An individual, partnership, association, corporation, governmental
body, unit or agency, or any other entity, whether or not organized for profit,
who or which employs one or more persons on a salary, wage, commission or other
compensation basis.
   FISCAL YEAR. An accounting period of 12 months or less ending on any day
other than December 31.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. The total income from any source whatsoever.
   NET LOSS. The excess of ordinary and necessary expenses either paid or
accrued in accordance with the accounting system used by the taxpayer for
federal income tax purposes, and, in the case of an unincorporated entity,
without deduction of salaries paid to partners or other owners, or for the
taxes imposed by this chapter and federal and other taxes based on income, over
the gross receipts adjusted for returns and allowances, trade discounts, sales
taxes and excise taxes based on sales.
   NET PROFITS. The net gain from the operation of a business, profession,
enterprise or other activity after provision for all ordinary and necessary
expenses either paid or accrued in accordance with the accounting system used
by the taxpayer for federal income tax purposes, and, in the case of an
unincorporated entity, without deduction of salaries paid to partners or to
other owners, or of taxes imposed by this chapter and federal and other taxes
based on income.
   NONRESIDENT UNINCORPORATED BUSINESS ENTITY. An unincorporated business
entity not having an office or place of business within the city.
   PERSON. Every natural person, partnership, fiduciary, association or any
corporation. Whenever used in any section, phrase or clause prescribing a
violation and imposing a penalty, the term PERSON, as applied to any
unincorporated entity, shall mean the owner, partners or members thereof; as
applied to S-corporations, the stockholders thereof; and as applied to C-
corporations, any of its officers, employees or trustees charged with the
responsibility of filing returns and making payments to the city.
   PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any bona fide office (other than a mere statutory
office), factory, warehouse or other space which is occupied and used by the
taxpayer in carrying on any business activity individually or through one or
more of his or her regular employees regularly in attendance.
   RESIDENT. A person, whether an individual, partnership, association,
corporation or other entity, domiciled in the city.
   RESIDENT UNINCORPORATED BUSINESS ENTITY. An unincorporated business entity
having an office or place of business within the city.
   S-CORPORATION. A small business corporation which has made an election to be
taxed as a pass-through entity similar to a partnership (§ 1361(a)(1) of the
Internal Revenue Code). All rules and regulations, for tax purposes, pertaining
to partnerships shall apply to S-CORPORATIONS.
   TAXABLE INCOME. Salaries, wages, commissions or any other compensation paid
by an employer before any deductions, and/or the net profits from the operation
of a business, profession or other enterprise or activity, including the
renting of property. The term OTHER COMPENSATION includes all forms of earned
income, including, but not limited to, tips, tax shelter plans, gifts of any
type for services rendered, vacation and holiday pay, wage continuation
benefits, director’s fees, jury duty fees, stock options granted in connection
with the performance of service and not designated as capital gains, property
in lieu of cash, sick pay, bonuses, incentive payments in whatever form,
company closing benefits, supplemental unemployment benefits, earnings
designated as deferred compensation or compensation paid by an employer in
whatever form for services rendered, employer paid premiums for group-term
insurance in excess of $50,000, strike benefits, depreciation recapture,
ordinary income shown on Federal Form 4797, and a resident partner’s or
stockholder’s distributive share of a nonresident partnership’s or S-
corporation’s net profits (whether received as wages paid or a draw from a
drawing or capital account, and whether received or accrued). The term OTHER
COMPENSATION shall also include income reported on federal tax returns as
earned or derived from gaming, wagering, lotteries (including the Ohio or any
other state lottery) or schemes of chance effective during the tax year in
which such income from gaming, wagering, lotteries or schemes of chance is
received.
   TAXABLE YEAR. The calendar year or fiscal year ending during such calendar
year, upon the basis of which the net profits are to be computed under this
chapter and, in the case of a return for a fractional part of a year, the
period for which such return is required to be made. Unless approved by the Tax
Administrator of the city, the TAXABLE YEAR of an individual shall be a
calendar year.
   TAXPAYER. A person, whether an individual, partnership, association,
corporation or other entity, required under this chapter to file a return or
pay a tax.
(Prior Code, § 880A.02) (Ord. 92-11, passed 7-1-1991)
§ 36.03 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   (A)   Rate; income taxed.
      (1)   For the purposes specified in §
36.01, an annual tax shall be imposed on and after January 1, 2004, at the rate
of 2% per annum upon the following:
         (a)   On all salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation
earned or paid during the effective period of this chapter by residents of the
city;
         (b)   On all salaries and wages earned through employment with the
city during the effective period of this chapter;
         (c)   On all salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation
earned for work performed on city property when the property is located in a
governmental subdivision where there is no municipal or joint economic
development district income tax levied;
         (d)   On all salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation
earned or paid during the effective period of this chapter by nonresidents for
work done or services performed or rendered in the city;
         (e)   On the portion attributable to the city of the net profits
earned during the effective period of this chapter by all resident
unincorporated businesses, professions or other entities, derived from sales
made, work done, services performed or rendered and business or other
activities conducted in the city;
         (f)   On the portion of the distributive share of the net profits
earned during the effective period of this chapter by a resident, partner or
owner of a resident unincorporated business entity, or a resident stockholder
of a resident S-corporation not attributable to the city and not levied against
such unincorporated business entity or S-corporation;
         (g)   On the portion attributable to the city of the net profits
earned during the effective period of this chapter by all nonresident
unincorporated businesses, professions or other entities, derived from sales
made, work done or services performed or rendered, and business or other
activities conducted in the city, whether or not such unincorporated business
entity has any office or place of business in the city;
         (h)   On the portion of the distributive share of the net profits
earned during the effective period of this chapter by a resident partner or
owner of a nonresident unincorporated business entity or a resident stockholder
of a nonresident S-corporation, not attributable to the city and not levied
against such unincorporated business entity or S-corporation, whether or not
such business entities have an office or place of business in the city; and
         (i)   On the portion attributable to the city of the net profits
earned during the effective period of this chapter by all corporations, derived
from sales made, work done, services performed or rendered and business or
other activities conducted in the city, whether or not such corporations have
an office or place of business in the city.
      (2)   Rental income received by a taxpayer shall be included in the
computation of net profits from business activities under divisions (A)(1)(e),
(A)(1)(f), (A)(1)(g), (A)(1)(h) and (A)(1)(i) of this section. All persons
engaged in the rental of real estate shall, when filing their annual return,
complete and file with the Tax Administrator a form obtainable at the income
tax office specifying their tenants’ names, addresses and such other
information as requested, if known.
   (B)   Determination of taxable net profits. The portion of the net profits
attributable to the city of a taxpayer conducting a business, profession or
other entity, both within and without the boundaries of the city, shall be
determined as provided in R.C. § 718.02 and in accordance with the rules and
regulations adopted by the Tax Administrator of the city pursuant to this
chapter.
   (C)   Operating loss carried forward.
      (1)   The portion of a net operating loss (including rental losses)
sustained in any taxable year subsequent to August 1, 1992, allocable to the
city may be applied against the portion of the profit of succeeding years
allocable to the city until exhausted, but in no event for more than five
taxable years. No portion of a net operating loss shall be carried back against
net profits of any prior year or applied against any wages, salaries or other
compensation earned as an employee of any employer. A loss in one city may
never off-set the gain in another city. However, a loss in one city may off-set
a business or rental gain in the same city. Failure to allocate an operating
loss or failure to file a return on or before the end of the twelfth month
following the tax year in which a net operating loss was sustained, nullifies
the loss carry-forward privilege.
      (2)   The portion of a net operating loss sustained shall be allocated to
the city in the same manner as provided herein for allocating net profits to
the city.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator shall provide, by rules and regulations, the
manner in which such net operating loss carry-forward shall be determined.
   (D)   Consolidated returns.
      (1)   Filing of consolidated returns may be permitted, required or denied
in accordance with rules and regulations prescribed by the city.
      (2)   In the case of a corporation that carried on transactions with its
stockholders or with other corporations related by stock ownership,
interlocking directorates or some other method, or in case any person operates
a division, branch, factory, office, laboratory or activity within the city
constituting a portion only of its total business, the Tax Administrator shall
require such additional information as he or she may deem necessary to
ascertain whether net profits are properly allocated to the city. If the Tax
Administrator finds that net profits are not properly allocated to the city by
reason of transactions with stockholders or with other corporations related by
stock ownership, interlocking directorates or transactions with such division,
branch, factory, office, laboratory or activity, or by some other method, he or
she shall make such allocations as he or she deems appropriate to produce a
fair and proper allocation of net profits to the city.
   (E)   Exceptions.
      (1)   The tax provided for herein shall not be levied upon the military
pay or allowances of members of the Armed Forces of the United States, or upon
the net profits of any civic, charitable, religious, fraternal or other
organization exempted from the payment of property or income tax under the
provisions of R.C. § 718.01.
      (2)   No provision of this chapter shall be construed as levying this
income tax upon any form of personal or business income, other than those forms
listed in division (A) of this section, or additionally and specifically
exempted in this section.
(Prior Code, § 880A.03) (Ord. 92-11, passed 7-1-1991; Ord. 95-4, passed 4-11-
1995; Res. 03-R31, passed 6-24-2003; Ord. 2003-23, passed 12-9-2003; Ord. 2004-
15, passed 8-10-2004)
§ 36.04 RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX.
   (A)   Return required. Each taxpayer, 18 years of age and older, whether or
not a tax is due thereon, must make and file a return on or before April 30 of
each year. When the return is made for a fiscal year, or other period different
from the calendar year, the return shall be filed within 120 days from the end
of such fiscal year or period.
   (B)   Information required. The return shall be filed with the Tax
Administrator on a form or forms furnished by or obtainable upon request from
the Tax Administrator setting forth:
      (1)   The aggregate amounts of salaries, wages, commissions and other
compensation earned by him or her, and/or gross income from businesses or
professions, or gross income earned during the preceding year and subject to
such tax;
      (2)   The amount of tax imposed by this chapter on such earnings and
profits; and
      (3)   Such other pertinent statements, information, returns or other
information as the Tax Administrator may require, including copies of the
schedules used for federal income tax or a complete copy of the federal income
tax return.
   (C)   Extension of filing time. The Tax Administrator may extend the time
for filing of the annual return, upon the request of the taxpayer, for a period
not to exceed six months, or three months beyond any extension requested or
granted by the Internal Revenue Service for the filing of the federal income
tax return. The Tax Administrator may require a tentative return accompanied by
payment of the amount of tax shown to be due thereon by the date the return is
normally due and the final tax paid within the period as extended.
   (D)   Payment of tax; deductions. The taxpayer making a return shall, at the
time of filing thereof, pay to the Income Tax Division the amount of taxes
shown as due thereon; provided, however, that where any portion of the tax so
due shall have been deducted at the source pursuant to the provisions of §
36.05, or where any portion of such tax shall have been paid by the taxpayer
pursuant to the provisions of §
36.06, or where an income tax has been paid to another municipality or to a
joint economic development district, credit for the amount so paid in
accordance with §
36.15 shall be deducted from the amount shown to be due and only the balance,
if any, shall be due and payable at the time of filing of such return.
   (E)   Overpayment. A taxpayer who has overpaid the amount of tax to which
the city is entitled under the provisions of this chapter may have such
overpayment applied against any subsequent liability hereunder or, at his or
her election indicated on the return, such overpayment (or part thereof) shall
be refunded; provided that no additional taxes or refunds of less than $5 shall
be collected or refunded. However, such refund request will first satisfy any
previous year’s delinquent liability (including assessments) in the order in
which such taxes and assessments became due, with any balance remaining being
refunded.
   (F)   Amended returns.
      (1)   Where necessary, an amended return must be filed in order to report
additional income and pay any additional tax due, or claim a refund of tax
overpaid, subject to the requirements and/or limitations contained in §§
36.11 and
36.15. Such amended returns shall be on a form obtainable on request from the
Tax Administrator. A taxpayer may not change the method of accounting or
apportionment of net profits after the due date for filing the original return.
      (2)   Within three months from the final determination of any federal tax
liability affecting the taxpayer’s city tax liability, such taxpayer shall make
and file an amended city return showing income subject to the city tax based
upon such final determination of federal tax liability, and pay any additional
tax shown due thereon, or make claim for refund of any overpayment.
   (G)   Income from multiple sources. Any person who receives compensation for
services performed for any employer, in whatsoever form, and in addition
receives income from any business activity (including rental property) or
occupation not subject to withholding under the chapter, must file a
declaration of estimated tax (according to the provisions of § 36.06) and a
final return; provided that a business loss or other activity (including rental
property) may not be applied against income earned as an employee (W-2 income).
   (H)   Building permit applications. At the time a contractor or
subcontractor applies for a building permit, he or she must supply a city tax
identification number to the Zoning Department as evidence of registration with
the Income Tax Division.
   (I)   Income for services performed in other municipalities. Any resident
who receives compensation for services performed for any employer, in
whatsoever form, in another municipality or joint economic development district
whose tax rate is lower than that of the city must file a declaration of
estimated tax (according to the provisions of § 36.06) and a final return.
   (J)   Occupancy permit applications. At the time a deed holder signs for an
occupancy permit in the city, he or she shall be required to complete a form as
prescribed by the Tax Administrator, giving all information necessary to
determine the city income tax status for all persons living or working at that
address.
(Prior Code, § 880A.04) (Ord. 92-11, passed 7-1-1991; Ord. 95-4, passed 4-11-
1995)
§ 36.05 COLLECTION AT SOURCE.
   (A)   In accordance with rules and regulations prescribed by the Tax
Administrator, each employer within or doing business within the city who
employs one or more persons on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation
basis, shall deduct (on a calendar-year basis) at the time of payment of such
salary, wage, commission or other compensation, the tax of 1% per annum of the
gross salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation due by such employer
to such employee, and shall, on or before the last day of the month following
the month in which the tax was deducted, make a return and pay to the city the
amount of taxes so deducted, except that if said withholding amounts to less
than $100 per month, payment may be made quarterly, as required by the Tax
Administrator. Such returns shall be on a form or forms prescribed by or
acceptable to the Tax Administrator and shall be subject to the rules and
regulations prescribed therefor by the Tax Administrator. Such employer shall
be liable for the payment of the tax required to be deducted and withheld
whether or not such taxes have in fact been withheld. The Tax Administrator,
for good cause, may require immediate returns and payment to be submitted to
his or her office.
   (B)   Such employer, in collecting such tax, shall be deemed to hold the
same until payment is made by such employer to the city, as a trustee for the
benefit of the city, and any such tax collected by such employer from his or
her employees shall, until the same is paid to the city, be deemed a trust fund
in the hands of such employer; provided, however, that no person shall be
required to withhold the tax on the wages or other compensation paid domestic
servants employed exclusively in or about such person’s residence.
   (C)   On or before January 31 of each year, each employer shall file a
withholding return in a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator, setting forth
the names and addresses of all employees from whose compensation the tax was
withheld during the preceding calendar year, the amount of tax withheld from
his or her employees and such other information as may be required by the rules
and regulations adopted by the Tax Administrator.
   (D)   On or before February 28 of each year, each individual, business or
business entity who files forms 1099-MISC with the Internal Revenue Service
must also file a copy of such return with the City Income Tax Division.
(Prior Code, § 880A.05) (Ord. 92-11, passed 7-1-1991)
§ 36.06DECLARATIONS.
   (A)   Every person who anticipates any taxable income which is not subject
to §
36.05 or who engages in any business, profession, enterprise or activity
(including rental property) subject to the tax imposed by §
36.03, and whose tax on such income amounts to $50 or more, must file a
declaration setting forth such estimated income or the estimated profit or loss
from such business activity, together with the estimated tax due thereon.
However, if a person’s income is wholly from salaries or wages from which the
tax will be withheld and remitted to the city in accordance with §
36.05, such person need not file a declaration.
   (B)   Residents of the city who are employed by an employer located in
another municipality or in a joint economic development district, where the tax
being withheld and paid to such municipality or joint economic development
district is based on a rate less than the tax rate of the city, must file a
declaration setting forth the difference in tax due, if such tax due is $50 or
more, and must make quarterly payments to the city according to division (G) of
this section.
   (C)   Such declaration shall be filed on or before April 30 of each year
during the effective period of this chapter, or within 120 days of the date the
taxpayer becomes subject to the tax for the first time.
   (D)   Those taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a
declaration within 120 days after the beginning of each fiscal year or period
accompanied by a payment equal to one-fourth of the estimated annual tax (if
such tax amounts to $50 or more) shown due thereon, and shall make quarterly
payments of equal amounts according to division (G) of this section.
   (E)   Such declarations shall be filed upon a form furnished by or
obtainable from the Tax Administrator. However, credit shall be taken for the
city tax to be withheld from any portion of such income. In accordance with the
provisions of §
36.15, credit may be taken for tax to be paid to or to be withheld and remitted
to another taxing municipality or to a joint economic development district.
   (F)   The original declaration (or any subsequent amendment thereof) may be
increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment date as
provided for herein.
   (G)   Such declaration of estimated tax to be paid the city shall be
accompanied with a payment equal to one-fourth of the estimated annual tax, and
payments of equal amount shall be made on or before July 31, October 31 and
January 31; provided, however, that in case an amended declaration has been
filed, the unpaid balance shown to be due thereon shall be paid in equal
installments on or before the remaining payment dates.
   (H)   An amended declaration must be filed on or before January 31 of any
year or, in the case of a taxpayer on a fiscal year accounting basis, on or
before the date fixed by regulations of the Tax Administrator, if it appears
that the original declaration made for such year underestimated the taxpayer’s
income by 20% or more. At such time, a payment, which, together with prior
payments is sufficient to pay the taxpayer’s entire estimated liability, shall
be made. If, upon the filing of the return required by §
36.04, it appears that the taxpayer did not pay 80% of such taxpayer’s
liability on or before January 31, or the date fixed by regulations, whichever
is applicable, the difference between 80% of such taxpayer’s liability and the
amount of estimated tax he or she actually paid on or before January 31, or the
date fixed by regulations, whichever is applicable, shall be subject to the
interest and penalty provisions of §§
36.10 and
36.99. However, any taxpayer whose declared and paid tax is equal to or greater
than the tax paid in the previous year shall not be assessed any interest or
penalty for any increased taxes found to be due in the current year.
   (I)   On or before April 30 of the year following that for which such
declaration or amended declaration was filed, an annual return shall be filed,
and any balance which may be due to the city shall be paid therewith in
accordance with the provisions of §
36.04.
(Prior Code, § 880A.06) (Ord. 92-11, passed 7-1-1991; Ord. 95-4, passed 4-11-
1995)
§ 36.07 DUTIES OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Tax Administrator to receive the tax
imposed by this chapter in the manner prescribed herein from the taxpayers and
to keep an accurate record thereof.
   (B)   All moneys collected by the Income Tax Administrator shall be
deposited into an account to be established by the Treasurer of the city, and a
copy of the deposit slip shall be forwarded to the Treasurer daily.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Tax Administrator to enforce payment of
all taxes owing the city, to keep accurate records for a minimum of five years
showing the amount due from each taxpayer required to file a declaration and/or
make any return, including taxes withheld, and to show the dates and amounts of
payment thereof.
   (D)   (1)   The Tax Administrator is hereby charged with the enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter, and is hereby empowered to adopt, promulgate
and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter or thing pertaining to
the collection of taxes and the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter, including provisions for the re-examination and
correction of returns and payments.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator is authorized to arrange for the payment of
unpaid taxes, interest and penalties on a schedule of installment payments,
when the taxpayer has proved to the Tax Administrator that due to certain
hardship conditions he or she is unable to pay the full amount of the tax due.
Such authorization shall not be granted until proper returns are filed by the
taxpayer for all amounts owed by him or her under the chapter.
      (3)   Failure to make any deferred payment when due shall cause the total
unpaid amount, including penalty and interest, to become payable on demand, and
the provisions of §§
36.11 and
36.12 shall apply.
   (E)   In any case where a taxpayer has failed to file a return or has filed
a return which does not show the proper amount of tax due, the Tax
Administrator may determine the amount of tax appearing to be due the city from
the taxpayer, and shall send to such taxpayer a written statement showing the
amount of tax so determined, together with interest and penalties thereon, if
any.
   (F)   The Tax Administrator shall have the power to compromise any interest
or penalty, or both, imposed by § 880.10.
(Prior Code, § 880A.07) (Ord. 92-11, passed 7-1-1991)
§ 36.08 INCOME TAX DIVISION; ESTABLISHMENT; DUTIES.
   An Income Tax Division is hereby established within the Department of
Finance. Such Income Tax Division shall have such officers, deputies, clerks
and other employees as may be from time to time determined by Council, and
shall receive such salary as may be determined from time to time by Council.
The Tax Administrator shall make all appointments of personnel and purchase all
supplies for the Income Tax Division, subject to such rules as may be imposed
by Council. The Income Tax Division shall be charged with the administration
and enforcement of this chapter under the direction of the Tax Administrator.
The Tax Administrator shall prescribe the forms and method of accounts and
reports to be rendered by the Income Tax Division to his or her office, and
shall examine and audit all such accounts and exhibit accurate records showing
the amount received from each taxpayer and the date of such receipt. The Tax
Administrator shall also make a written report to Council quarterly of all
moneys collected hereunder during the preceding 12-month period.
(Prior Code, § 880A.08)
§ 36.09 INVESTIGATIVE POWERS OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR; DIVULGING CONFIDENTIAL
INFORMATION.
   (A)   The Tax Administrator, or any authorized employee, is hereby
authorized to examine the books, papers, records and federal income tax returns
of any employer or of any taxpayer or person subject to, or whom the Tax
Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter, for the
purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made, or, if no return was
made, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter. Every such employer,
supposed employer, taxpayer or supposed taxpayer is hereby directed and
required to furnish, within ten days after written request by the Tax
Administrator, or his or her duly authorized agent or employee, the means,
facilities and opportunity for making such examinations and investigations as
are hereby authorized.
   (B)   The Tax Administrator, or his or her authorized representative, is
hereby authorized to enter into agreements with the United States Commissioner
of the Internal Revenue Service, or the Internal Revenue Service District
Director, the State Tax Commissioner and the heads of other state and local
taxing authorities, providing for the disclosure and exchange, for the purposes
of tax collection only, of returns or return information in their respective
jurisdictions.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator is hereby authorized to order any person
presumed to have knowledge of the facts to appear before him or her and may
examine such person, under oath, concerning any income which was or should have
been reported for taxation, or any transaction tending to affect such income,
and for this purpose may compel the production of books, papers, records and
federal income tax returns and the attendance of all persons before him or her,
whether as parties or witnesses, whenever he or she believes such persons have
knowledge of such income or information pertinent to such inquiry.
   (D)   The refusal to produce books, papers, records and federal income tax
returns, or the refusal to submit to such examinations, by any employer or
person subject or presumed to be subject to the tax, or by any officer, agent
or employee of a person subject to the tax or required to withhold tax, or the
failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this section, or with an
order or subpoena of the Tax Administrator authorized hereby, shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter. The penalty shall be as provided in §
36.99.
   (E)   Any information gained as a result of any returns, investigations,
hearings or verifications required or authorized by this section shall be
confidential, except for official tax collection purposes, or in accordance
with a proper judicial order, or in accordance with division (B) of this
section. Any person divulging such information in violation of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty provided in §
36.99.
   (F)   Every taxpayer shall retain all records necessary to compute his or
her tax liability for a period of five years from the date his or her return is
filed or the withholding taxes are paid.
(Prior Code, § 880A.09) (Ord. 92-11, passed 7-1-1991)
§ 36.10 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, all taxes imposed
and all moneys withheld or required to be withheld by employers under the
provisions of this chapter and remaining unpaid after they have become due
shall bear interest at the rate of 1.5% per month or fraction thereof.
   (B)   In addition to interest as provided in division (A) of this section,
penalties are hereby imposed as follows:
      (1)   For failure to pay taxes due (other than taxes withheld), 1.5% per
month, or fraction thereof, or $25, whichever is greater;
      (2)   (a)   For failure to remit taxes withheld from employees, 10% per
month, or fraction thereof, up to a maximum of 100% of the tax due, or $25,
whichever is greater.
         (b)   If an employer required to withhold city taxes as required by
this chapter fails, neglects or refuses to withhold city taxes from employees,
a penalty shall be imposed equal to the sum of the amount of the tax which
should have been withheld, plus 10% per month, or fraction thereof, or $25,
whichever is greater.
      (3)   For failure to file an annual return by the due date of such
return, a penalty of $25 shall be imposed, even if no tax is shown to be due on
such return.
   (C)   No penalty shall be assessed on additional taxes found to be due as
the result of an audit by the City Tax Administrator when a return was timely
filed in good faith and the tax paid thereon within the prescribed time.
   (D)   In the absence of fraud, neither penalty nor interest shall be
assessed on any additional taxes resulting from a federal audit for federal
income tax purposes; provided that an amended return is filed and the
additional tax paid within three months after final determination of the
federal tax liability.
   (E)   The Tax Administrator may abate penalty or interest or both. A
taxpayer may appeal to the Board of Review if abatement is refused.
   (F)   If the taxpayer refuses or neglects to make estimated tax payments as
required, the penalty assessed will be 15% of the actual tax liability due the
city. If the taxpayer makes estimated tax payments, but the total amount paid
is less than 80% of the actual tax liability, the penalty assessed will be 15%
of the difference between 80% of the actual tax liability and the amount paid.
   (G)   If penalty and interest charges have been assessed according to this
section, all payments made will first be applied towards such assessment and
then towards the amount of tax due.
(Prior Code, § 880A.10) (Ord. 92-11, passed 7-1-1991)
§ 36.11 COLLECTION OF UNPAID TAXES; REFUNDS OF OVERPAYMENTS.
   (A)   All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be collectable, together with
any interest and penalties thereon, by suit, as other debts of like amount are
recoverable. Except in cases of fraud, omission of a substantial portion of
income subject to this tax or failure to file a return, an additional
assessment shall not be made after three years from the time of payment of any
tax due hereunder provided; however, that in those cases in which the
Commissioner of Internal Revenue and the taxpayer have executed a waiver of the
federal statute of limitations, the period within which an additional
assessment may be made by the Tax Administrator shall be three years from the
time of the final determination of the federal tax liability.
   (B)   Taxes erroneously paid shall not be refunded unless a claim for refund
is made. Claims for refund of municipal income taxes must be brought within the
time limitation provided in division (A) of this section.
(Prior Code, § 880A.114) (Ord. 92-11, passed 7-1-1991)
§ 36.12 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or declaration required
by this chapter;
      (2)   Make any incomplete, false or fraudulent return;
      (3)   Fail, neglect or refuse to pay the tax, penalties or interest
imposed by this chapter to the Tax Administrator;
      (4)   Fail, neglect or refuse to withhold the tax from his or her
employees or to remit such withholding to the Tax Administrator;
      (5)   Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator, or any duly authorized
agent or employee, to examine his or her books, records, papers and federal
income tax returns relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (6)   Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to produce his or
her books, records, papers or federal income tax returns relating to the income
or net profits of a taxpayer upon order or subpoena of the Tax Administrator;
      (7)   Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any information with
respect to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (8)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator authorized hereby;
      (9)   Give to an employer false information as to his or her true name,
correct Social Security number and residence address, or fail to promptly
notify an employer of any change in residence address and the date thereof;
      (10)   Fail to use ordinary diligence in maintaining proper records of
employees’ residence addresses, total wages paid and city tax withheld, or
knowingly give the Tax Administrator false information; or
      (11)   Attempt to do anything whatever to avoid the payment of the whole
or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter.
   (B)   All prosecutions under this section must be commenced within three
years from the time of the offense complained of, except in the case of failure
to file a return or in the case of filing a false or fraudulent return, in
which event the limitation of time within which prosecution must be commenced
shall be six years from the date the return was due or the date the false or
fraudulent return was filed.
   (C)   The failure of an employer or person to receive or procure a return,
declaration or other required form shall not excuse him or her from mailing any
information return, annual return or declaration, from filing such form or from
paying the tax.
(Prior Code, § 880A.12) (Ord. 92-11, passed 7-1-1991)
§ 36.13 BOARD OF REVIEW.
   (A)   A Board of Review, consisting of the Law Director as an ex-officio
member, two members appointed by the Mayor with the consent of Council and a
third member to be selected by the two so appointed, is hereby established. The
term for members of the Board of Review shall be four years. All rules and
regulations, and amendments or changes thereto, which are adopted by the Tax
Administrator under the authority conferred by this chapter are subject to
appeal to the Board of Review. After adoption, such rules, regulations,
amendments and changes shall be open to public inspection.
   (B)   A majority of the members of the Board of Review shall constitute a
quorum. The Board of Review shall adopt its own procedural rules and shall keep
a record of its transactions.
   (C)   All hearings by the Board may be conducted privately or publicly with
waiver of confidentiality at the request of the taxpayer whose case is being
heard. The provisions of §
36.09 with reference to the confidential character of the information required
to be disclosed by this chapter shall apply to such matters as may be heard
before the Board of Review on appeal unless waived by the taxpayer.
   (D)   Any person dissatisfied with any ruling or decision of the Tax
Administrator which is made under the authority conferred by this chapter may
appeal therefrom to the Board of Review within 30 days from the announcement of
such ruling or decision by the Tax Administrator, and the Board of Review
shall, on hearing, having jurisdiction to affirm, reverse or modify any such
ruling or decision or any part thereof.
   (E)   Any person dissatisfied with any ruling or decision of the Board of
Review may appeal therefrom to a court of competent jurisdiction within 30 days
from the announcement of such ruling or decision.
(Prior Code, § 880A.13) (Ord. 92-11, passed 7-1-1991)
§ 36.14 ALLOCATION OF FUNDS.
   The funds collected under the provisions of the within chapter shall be
deposited in a special fund known as the Income Tax Revenue Fund, and such
funds shall be disbursed in the following manner.
   (A)   First, such part thereof as shall be necessary to defray all expense
of collecting the tax and of administering and enforcing the provisions of this
chapter shall be paid.
   (B)   Second, a minimum of 10% of the net income tax revenues shall be
allocated and assigned to parks and recreation.
   (C)   Third, such part of the balance thereof as shall be necessary to
defray all expenses of the General Fund shall be allocated and assigned to such
Fund.
(Prior Code, § 880A.14) (Ord. 92-11, passed 7-1-1991)
§ 36.15 CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO ANOTHER MUNICIPALITY OR TO A JOINT ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
   (A)   Where a resident of the city is subject to a municipal income tax in
another municipality or an income tax in a joint economic development district,
he or she shall not pay a total combined municipal income tax and joint
economic development district income tax on the same income greater than the
municipal income tax or the joint economic development district income tax
imposed at the higher rate.
   (B)   Every individual taxpayer who resides in the city who received net
profits, salaries, wages, commissions or other personal service compensation
for work done or services performed or rendered outside of the city, if it is
shown that he or she has paid municipal or joint economic development district
income tax on the same income taxable under this chapter, shall receive a
credit of the amount so paid by him or her or in his or her behalf to such
other municipality or joint economic development district. The credit shall not
exceed the tax assessed by this chapter on such income earned or paid in such
other municipality or municipalities or joint economic development district or
districts where such tax is paid.
   (C)   A claim for refund or credit under this section shall be made in such
manner as the Tax Administrator may, by regulations, provide before the date
for filing the taxpayer’s final return unless such taxpayer’s employer files
with the Tax Administrator a list showing the tax withheld from such taxpayer’s
wages, salaries or commissions for other municipalities or joint economic
development districts.
(Prior Code, § 880A.15) (Ord. 95-4, passed 4-11-1995)
§ 36.16 EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF CREDIT FOR JOINT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT TAX;
ANNUAL REVIEW.
   (A)   The amendments to §§
36.03,
36.04,
36.06 and
36.15, adopted by Council on April 11, 1995, through Ordinance 95-4, are hereby
extended for a period of one year. The purpose of the extension is to allow
city residents a credit for joint economic development district income taxes
paid by those residents for the year ending December 31, 1996.
   (B)   The extension of the amendments set forth in division (A) of this
section for city citizens who pay a joint economic development district tax
will be subject to Council review yearly. If a majority of Council fails to
pass legislation to repeal such amendments by July 15 of each year, then such
amendments shall be automatically renewed for the following calendar year.
(Prior Code, § 880A.155) (Ord. 95-19, passed 10-24-1995)
§ 36.17 TAX CREDIT FOR RESIDENTS WHO ARE FULL-TIME STUDENTS IN A POST-SECONDARY
EDUCATION PROGRAM AND WHO ALSO OWE MUNICIPAL INCOME TAX.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      FULL-TIME ENROLLMENT. The period established by the qualifying post-
secondary institution as full-time status for students in attendance.
      QUALIFYING POST-SECONDARY INSTITUTION. A college, university, technical
school, vocational school or training program whose students are eligible to
receive grants and loans through programs established by the United States
Department of Education.
   (B)   Tax credit. A tax credit not to exceed $300 per year is created for
residents of the city who work in the city or owe municipal income tax to the
city and are enrolled full-time at least nine calendar months of the year in
which the credit is requested at a qualifying post-secondary institution.
Students shall also be eligible to receive the credit if they are enrolled at
least four calendar months of the year and continue enrollment as a full-time
student the following calendar year. This tax credit shall be calculated by
taking 2% of the first $15,000 of the taxable income if the municipal income
tax rate is 2%, or 1% of the first $30,000 if the municipal income tax rate is
1%. Residents applying for the tax credit shall be required to complete and
sign a disclosure and authorization form similar to Exhibit A attached to
original Ordinance 04-05, passed February 24, 2004. No person shall receive
this tax credit for more than five years. No person shall receive this tax
credit if their college tuition is reduced by employer tuition reimbursements,
or employer tuition assistance programs. Further, residents applying for the
tax credit shall be required to disclosure any such employer tuition
reimbursements received that reduce their tuition costs as full-time students.
   (C)   Effective date. The tax credit shall become effective for the tax year
commencing January 1, 2004.
(Prior Code, § 880A.157) (Ord. 04-03, passed 2-10-2004; Ord. 04-05, passed 2-
24-2004)
§ 36.18 COLLECTION OF TAX AFTER TERMINATION OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   This chapter shall continue effective, insofar as the levy of taxes is
concerned, until repealed, and insofar as the collection of taxes levied
hereunder, actions or proceedings for collecting any tax so levied, and
enforcing any provision of this chapter are concerned, it shall continue
effective until all of such taxes levied hereunder are fully paid and any and
all suits and prosecutions for the collection of such taxes or for the
punishment of violations of this chapter shall have been fully terminated,
subject to the limitations contained in §§
36.11 and
36.12.
   (B)   Annual returns due for all or part of the last effective year of this
chapter shall be due on the date provided in §§
36.04 and
36.05 as though the same were continuing.
(Prior Code, § 880A.16) (Ord. 92-11, passed 7-1-1991)
§ 36.19 SEPARABILITY.
   If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter, or any tax against
any individual or any of the several groups specified herein, is found to be
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or
invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section or part of this
chapter and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this chapter. It is hereby
declared to be the intention of Council that this chapter would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section
or part thereof not been included herein.
(Prior Code, § 880A.17) (Ord. 92-11, passed 7-1-1991)
§ 36.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter, for which no
penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree
and shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or
both, for each offense.
   (B)   Whoever violates §
36.09(E) of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and
shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both,
for each offense. Each disclosure shall constitute a separate offense. In
addition, any employee of the city who violates §
36.09(E) of this chapter, relative to the disclosure of confidential
information, shall be guilty of an offense punishable by immediate dismissal.
(Prior Code, § 880A.99) (Ord. 92-11, passed 7-1-1991)
CHAPTER 37: EARNED INCOME TAX
BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2016
Section
Authority to Levy Tax; Purposes of Tax; Rate
   
37.001   Authority to levy tax
   
37.002   Purposes of tax; rate
   
37.003   Allocation of funds
   
37.004   Statement of procedural history; state mandated changes to municipal
income tax
General Provisions
   
37.015   Effective date
   
37.016   Definitions
Income Subject to Tax for Individuals
   
37.030   Determining municipal taxable income for individuals
   
37.031   Domicile
   
37.032   Exemption for member or employee of general assembly and certain
judges
Collection at Source
   
37.045   Collection at source; withholding from wages
   
37.046   Collection at source; withholding from wages
   
37.047   Collection at source; occasional entrant
   
37.048   Collection at source; casino and VLT
Income Subject to Net Profit Tax
   
37.060   Determining municipal taxable income for taxpayers who are not
individuals
   
37.061   Net profit; income subject to net profit tax; alternative
apportionment
   
37.062   Consolidated Federal income tax return
   
37.063   Tax credit for businesses that foster new jobs in Ohio
   
37.064   Tax credits to foster job retention
Declaration of Estimated Tax
   
37.075   Declaration of estimated tax
Credit for Tax Paid
   
37.090   Credit for tax paid to another municipality
   
37.091   Refundable credit for qualifying loss
   
37.092   Credit for person working in Joint Economic Development District
   
37.093   Credit for tax beyond statute for obtaining refund
   
37.094    Tax credit for residents who are full-time students in a Post-
secondary education program and who also owe municipal income tax
Annual Return
   
37.105   Return and payment of tax
   
37.106   Return and payment of tax; individuals serving in combat zone
   
37.107   Use of Ohio Business Gateway; types of filings authorized
   
37.108   Extension of time to file
   
37.109   Amended returns
   
37.110   Refunds
Interest; Audit; Rounding
   
37.125   Penalty, interest, fees and charges
   
37.126   Audit
   
37.127   Rounding
Authority and Powers of the Tax Administrator
   
37.140   Authority of Tax Administrator; administrative powers of the Tax
Administrator
   
37.141   Authority of Tax Administrator; compromise of claim and payment over
time
   
37.142   Authority of Tax Administrator; right to examine
   
37.143   Authority of Tax Administrator; requiring identifying information
General Regulations
   
37.155   Confidentiality
   
37.156   Criminal records check
   
37.157   Fraud
   
37.158   Opinion of the Tax Administrator
   
37.159   Assessment; appeal based on presumption of delivery
   
37.160   Local Board of Tax Review; appeal to Local Board of Tax Review
   
37.161   Actions to recover; statute of limitations
   
37.162   Adoption of rules
   
37.163   Miscellaneous provisions
   
37.164   Election to be subject to R.C. §§ 718.80 to 718.95
   
37.165   Collection of tax after termination of chapter
   
37.166   Savings clause
 
   
37.999   Penalty
AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX; PURPOSES OF TAX; RATE
§ 37.001 AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX.
   (A)   The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this chapter
are authorized by Article XVIII, § 3 of the Ohio Constitution. The tax on
income and the withholding tax established by this chapter are deemed to be
levied in accordance with, and to be consistent with, the provisions and
limitations of R.C. Ch. 718. This chapter is deemed to incorporate the
provisions of R.C. Ch. 718.
   (B)   The tax is an annual tax levied on the income of every person residing
in or earning or receiving income in the municipal corporation, and shall be
measured by municipal taxable income. The municipality shall tax income at a
uniform rate. The tax is levied on municipal taxable income, as defined herein.
(Prior Code, § 880B.011) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.002 PURPOSES OF TAX; RATE.
   (A)   To provide funds for the purposes of general municipal operation,
maintenance, new equipment, extensions and enlargement of municipal services
and facilities, capital improvements of the city, community learning centers,
and paying debt charges on securities issued and public obligations occurred to
pay costs related to the above-mentioned purposes, there is levied a tax on
salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation, and on other net profits
as provided in this chapter.
   (B)    For the purposes specified in this section, an annual tax shall be
imposed on and after January 1, 2016 at the rate of 2% per annum.
(Prior Code, § 880B.012) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.003 ALLOCATION OF FUNDS.
   The funds collected under the provisions of any municipal income tax in the
city shall be deposited in a special fund known as the Income Tax Revenue Fund.
Disbursements of moneys from this fund shall be made as follows.
   (A)   First, funds shall be allocated to defray all expenses of collection,
administration and enforcement of the income tax and the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Second, a minimum of 7% of the tax revenues shall be allocated and
assigned to the city parks and recreation program. Such funds shall be
appropriated first to capital expenditures, that is, the purchase of property,
building construction or other improvements with a life of five years or
longer; provided that if the total expended funds for such capital expenditures
are less than the total funds available for capital expenditures, up to 15% of
the 7% of income tax revenues available annually may be expended for the city’s
parks and recreation special events and programming. Any unused funds shall, on
an annual basis, be assigned to a fund for use only for future capital
expenditures, special events and programming in support of the city’s parks and
recreation program on the same allocation basis set forth in this section. This
provision shall be reviewed by the Charter Review Commission as specified in
the time period mandated in §
9.2 of the Charter.
   (C)   Third, funds shall be allocated as required to defray expenses of the
general fund of the city.
(Prior Code, § 880B.013) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.004 STATEMENT OF PROCEDURAL HISTORY; STATE MANDATED CHANGES TO MUNICIPAL
INCOME TAX.
   (A)   Significant and wide-ranging amendments to R.C. Ch. 718 were enacted
by Am. Sub. H.B. 5, passed by the 130th General Assembly, and signed by
Governor Kasich on December 19, 2014, and H.B. 5 required municipal
corporations to conform to and adopt the provisions of R.C. Ch. 718 in order to
have the authority to impose, enforce, administer and collect a municipal
income tax.
   (B)   As mandated by H.B. 5, municipal income tax Ordinance 2015-15,
effective January 1, 2016, comprehensively amends Ch. 880 in accordance with
the provisions of R.C. Ch. 718 to allow the municipality to continue the income
tax and withholding tax administration and collection efforts on behalf of the
municipality.
(Prior Code, § 880B.014) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 37.015 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   (A)   Ordinance 2015-15, effective January 1, 2016, and corresponding
changes to R.C. Ch. 718, apply to municipal taxable years beginning on or after
January 1, 2016. All provisions of this chapter apply to taxable years
beginning 2016 and succeeding taxable years.
   (B)   Ordinance 2015-15 does not repeal the existing sections of this
chapter for any taxable year prior to 2016, but rather amends this chapter
effective January 1, 2016. For municipal taxable years beginning before January
1, 2016, the municipality shall continue to administer, audit and enforce the
income tax of the municipality under R.C. Ch. 718 and ordinances and
resolutions of the municipality as that chapter and those ordinances and
resolutions existed before January 1, 2016.
(Prior Code, § 880B.02) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.016 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Any term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this
chapter has the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in laws of
the United States relating to federal income taxation or in R.C. Title LVII,
unless a different meaning is clearly required. Except as provided in R.C. § a
person required to file as a C corporation or for a person that has elected to
be taxed as a C corporation, means a C corporation’s federal taxable income
before net operating losses and special deductions as determined under the
Internal Revenue Code, being 26 U.S.C., adjusted as follows:
         (a)   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal
taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the
intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held
for the production of income;
         (b)   Add an amount equal to 5% of intangible income deducted, but
excluding that portion of intangible income directly related to the sale,
exchange or other disposition of property described in § 1221 of the Internal
Revenue Code;
         (c)   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of
federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange or
other disposition of an asset described in §§ 1221 or 1231 of the Internal
Revenue Code;
         (d)   1.   Except as provided division (d)2. of this definition,
deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the
income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange or other disposition of
an asset described in §§ 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code; and
            2.   Division (d)1. of this definition does not apply to the extent
the income or gain is income or gain described in §§ 1245 or 1250 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
         (e)   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in
the computation of federal taxable income;
         (f)   In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated
investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions
to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and
allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income;
         (g)   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in
computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement
or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under R.C. § 4313.02;
         (h)   Deduct exempt income to the extent not otherwise deducted or
excluded in computing adjusted federal taxable income;
         (i)   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s federal taxable
income, unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in
the group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
37.062(E)(3)(b); and
         (j)   1.   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned
directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s federal
taxable income, unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss
in the group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
37.062(E)(3)(b).
            2.   If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded
entity that has made the election described in this division (C), is not a
publicly traded partnership that has made the election described in this
division (C), and is not an individual, the taxpayer shall compute adjusted
federal taxable income under this section as if the taxpayer were a C
corporation, except guaranteed payments and other similar amounts paid or
accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member
or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible expense, unless such
payments are in consideration for the use of capital and treated as payment of
interest under § 469 of the Internal Revenue Code or United States Treasury
regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified self-employed retirement
plan with respect to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former
shareholder, member or former member of the taxpayer, amounts paid or accrued
to or for health insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former
shareholder, member or former member, and amounts paid or accrued to or for
life insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder,
member or former member shall not be allowed as a deduction.
            3.   Nothing in this definition shall be construed as allowing the
taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be construed as
allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for purposes of
federal self-employment tax.
      ASSESSMENT.
         (a)   Any of the following:
            1.   A written finding by the Tax Administrator that a person has
underpaid municipal income tax, or owes penalty and interest, or any
combination of tax, penalty or interest, to the municipal corporation;
            2.   A full or partial denial of a refund request issued under §
37.110(B)(2);
            3.   A Tax Administrator’s denial of a taxpayer’s request for use
of an alternative apportionment method, issued under §
37.061(B)(2) of this chapter;
            4.   A Tax Administrator’s requirement for a taxpayer to use an
alternative apportionment method, issued under §
37.061(B)(3) of this chapter; or
            5.   For purposes of this definition, an assessment shall commence
the person’s time limitation for making an appeal to the Local Board of Tax
Review pursuant to §
37.160, and shall have ASSESSMENT written in all capital letters at the top of
such finding.
         (b)   ASSESSMENT does not include notice(s) denying a request for
refund issued under §
37.110(B)(3), a billing statement notifying a taxpayer of current or past-due
balances owed to the municipal corporation, a Tax Administrator’s request for
additional information, a notification to the taxpayer of mathematical errors,
or a Tax Administrator’s other written correspondence to a person or taxpayer
that does not meet the criteria prescribed above.
      AUDIT. The examination of a person or the inspection of the books,
records, memoranda or accounts of a person, ordered to appear before the Tax
Administrator, for the purpose of determining liability for a municipal income
tax.
      BOARD OF REVIEW. The same meaning as LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW.
      CALENDAR QUARTER. The three-month period ending March 31, June 30,
September 30 or December 31.
      CASINO OPERATOR and CASINO FACILITY. The same meanings as in R.C. §
3772.01.
      CERTIFIED MAIL, EXPRESS MAIL, UNITED STATES MAIL and POSTAL SERVICE. Any
delivery service authorized pursuant to R.C. § 5703.056.
      COMPENSATION. Any form of remuneration paid to an employee for personal
services.
      DISREGARDED ENTITY. A single member limited liability company, a
qualifying subchapter S subsidiary, or another entity if the company,
subsidiary, or entity is a disregarded entity for federal income tax purposes.
      DOMICILE. The true, fixed and permanent home of the taxpayer to which,
whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return.
      EXEMPT INCOME. All of the following:
         (a)   The military pay or allowances of members of the Armed Forces of
the United States or members of their reserve components, including the
National Guard of any state;
         (b)   1.   Except as provided in division (b)2. of this definition,
intangible income; and
            2.   A municipal corporation that taxed any type of intangible
income on March 29, 1988, pursuant to § 3 of S.B. 238 of the 116th General
Assembly, may continue to tax that type of income if a majority of the electors
of the municipal corporation voting on the question of whether to permit the
taxation of that type of intangible income after 1988 voted in favor thereof at
an election held on November 8, 1988.
         (c)   Social security benefits, railroad retirement benefits,
unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments, payments from
annuities and similar payments made to an employee or to the beneficiary of an
employee under a retirement program or plan, disability payments received from
private industry, or local, state or federal governments, or from charitable,
religious or educational organizations, and the proceeds of sickness, accident
or liability insurance policies. As used in this division (c), unemployment
compensation does not include supplemental unemployment compensation described
in § 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code;
         (d)   The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific,
literary or educational institutions to the extent such income is derived from
tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible property, or tax-
exempt activities;
         (e)   Compensation paid under R.C. §§ 3501.28 or 3501.36 to a person
serving as a precinct election official to the extent that such compensation
does not exceed $1,000 for the taxable year. Such compensation in excess of
$1,000 for the taxable year may be subject to taxation by a municipal
corporation. A municipal corporation shall not require the payer of such
compensation to withhold any tax from that compensation;
         (f)   Dues, contributions and similar payments received by charitable,
religious, educational, or literary organizations, or labor unions, lodges and
similar organizations;
         (g)   Alimony and child support received;
         (h)   Awards for personal injuries or for damages to property from
insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid for lost salaries
or wages or awards for punitive damages;
         (i)   Income of a public utility when that public utility is subject
to the tax levied under R.C. §§ 5727.24 or 5727.30. This division (i) does not
apply for purposes of R.C. Ch. 5745;
         (j)   Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on federal
obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the state and that a
municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing, and income
of a decedent’s estate during the period of administration, except such income
from the operation of a trade or business;
         (k)   Compensation or allowances excluded from federal gross income
under § 107 of the Internal Revenue Code;
         (l)   Employee compensation that is not QUALIFYING WAGES as defined in
this section;
         (m)   Compensation paid to a person employed within the boundaries of
a United States Air Force base under the jurisdiction of the United States Air
Force that is used for the housing of members of the United States Air Force
and is a center for Air Force operations, unless the person is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile. If the compensation is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile, tax on such income shall be payable
only to the municipal corporation of residence or domicile;
         (n)   All of the municipal taxable income earned by individuals under
18 years of age;
         (o)   1.   Except as provided in subsections (o)2., (o)3. and (o)4.
below, qualifying wages described in of §
37.047(B)(1) or (E) to the extent the qualifying wages are not subject to
withholding for the municipality under either of those divisions.
            2.   The exemption provided in subsection (o)1. above does not
apply with respect to the municipal corporation in which the employee resided
at the time the employee earned the qualifying wages.
            3.   The exemption provided in subsection (o)1. above does not
apply to qualifying wages that an employer elects to withhold under §
37.047(D)(2).
            4.   The exemption provided in subsection (o)1. above does not
apply to qualifying wages if both of the following conditions apply:
               a.   For qualifying wages described in §
37.047(B)(1), the employee’s employer withholds and remits tax on the
qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employee’s principal
place of work is situated, or, for qualifying wages described in §
37.047(E), the employee’s employer withholds and remits tax on the qualifying
wages to the municipal corporation in which the employer’s fixed location is
located; and
               b.   The employee receives a refund of the tax described in
subsection (o)4.a. above on the basis of the employee not performing services
in that municipal corporation.
         (p)   1.   Except as provided in subsection (p)2. or (p)3. below,
compensation that is not qualifying wages paid to a nonresident individual for
personal services performed in the municipality on not more than 20 days in a
taxable year.
            2.   The exemption provided in subsection (p)1. above does not
apply under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual’s base of operation is located in the
municipality; and
               b.   The individual is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer or public figure, and the compensation is paid for the performance
of services in the individual’s capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer or public figure. For purposes of this subsection
(p)2.b., PROFESSIONAL ATHLETE, PROFESSIONAL ENTERTAINER and PUBLIC FIGURE have
the same meanings as in §
37.047.
            3.   Compensation to which this subsection applies shall be treated
as earned or received at the individual’s base of operation. If the individual
does not have a base of operation, the compensation shall be treated as earned
or received where the individual is domiciled.
            4.   For purposes of this subsection, BASE OF OPERATION means the
location where an individual owns or rents an office, storefront or similar
facility to which the individual regularly reports and at which the individual
regularly performs personal services for compensation.
         (q)   Compensation paid to a person for personal services performed
for a political subdivision on property owned by the political subdivision,
regardless of whether the compensation is received by an employee of the
subdivision or another person performing services for the subdivision under a
contract with the subdivision, if the property on which services are performed
is annexed to a municipal corporation pursuant to R.C. § 709.023 on or after
March 27, 2013, unless the person is subject to such taxation because of
residence. If the compensation is subject to taxation because of residence,
municipal income tax shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of
residence.
         (r)   All of the following:
            1.   Income derived from disaster work conducted in this state by
an out-of-state disaster business during a disaster response period pursuant to
a qualifying solicitation received by the business;
            2.   Income of a qualifying employee described in R.C. § 5703.94(A)
(14)(a), to the extent such income is derived from disaster work conducted in
this state by the employee during a disaster response period pursuant to a
qualifying solicitation received by the employee’s employer; and
            3.   Income of a qualifying employee described in R.C. § 5703.94(A)
(14)(b), to the extent such income is derived from disaster work conducted in
this state by the employee during a disaster response period on critical
infrastructure owned or used by the employee’s employer.
         (s)   1.   Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the
constitution or laws of the United States.
            2.   Any item of income that is exempt income of a pass-through
entity under this section is exempt income of each owner of the pass-through
entity to the extent of that owner’s distributive or proportionate share of
that item of the entity’s income.
      FORM 2106. The Internal Revenue Service Form 2106 filed by a taxpayer
pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      GENERIC FORM. An electronic or paper form that is not prescribed by a
particular municipal corporation and that is designed for reporting taxes
withheld by an employer, agent of an employer or other payer, estimated
municipal income taxes, or annual municipal income tax liability, including a
request for refund.
      INCOME. The following:
         (a)   1.   For residents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages,
commissions and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by
the resident, including the resident’s distributive share of the net profit of
pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the resident and any net
profit of the resident, except as provided in subsection E. of the definition
of NET PROFIT.
            2.   For the purposes of subsection (a)1. above:
               a.   Any net operating loss of the resident incurred in the
taxable year and the resident’s distributive share of any net operating loss
generated in the same taxable year and attributable to the resident’s ownership
interest in a pass-through entity shall be allowed as a deduction, for that
taxable year and the following five taxable years, against any other net profit
of the resident or the resident’s distributive share of any net profit
attributable to the resident’s ownership interest in a pass-through entity
until fully utilized, subject to subsection (a)4. below; and
               b.   The resident’s distributive share of the net profit of each
pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the resident shall be
calculated without regard to any net operating loss that is carried forward by
that entity from a prior taxable year and applied to reduce the entity’s net
profit for the current taxable year.
            3.   Subsection (a)2. above does not apply with respect to any net
profit or net operating loss attributable to an ownership interest in an S
corporation, unless shareholders’ distributive shares of net profits from S
corporations are subject to tax in the municipal corporation as provided in
subsection N. of the definition of EXEMPT INCOME or subsection (e) below.
            4.   Any amount of a net operating loss used to reduce a taxpayer’s
net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount of net operating loss
that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for use by that taxpayer. In
no event shall the cumulative deductions for all taxable years with respect to
a taxpayer’s net operating loss exceed the original amount of that net
operating loss available to that taxpayer.
         (b)   In the case of nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying
wages, commissions and other compensation from whatever source earned or
received by the nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or
activities conducted in the municipality, including any net profit of the
nonresident, but excluding the nonresident’s distributive share of the net
profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by
the nonresident;
         (c)   For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit of the
taxpayer;
         (d)   Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports winnings, winnings
from games of chance, and prizes and awards. If the taxpayer is a professional
gambler for federal income tax purposes, the taxpayer may deduct related
wagering losses and expenses to the extent authorized under the Internal
Revenue Code and claimed against such winnings. Credit for tax withheld or paid
to another municipal corporation on such winnings paid to the municipal
corporation where winnings occur is limited to the credit as specified in §
37.090; and
         (e)   For residents, an S corporation shareholder’s distributive share
of net profits of an S corporation to the extent the distributive share would
be allocated or apportioned to this state under R.C. § 5733.05(B)(1) and (2) if
the S corporation were a corporation subject to taxes imposed under R.C. Ch.
5733, and the tax shall apply to the distributive share of a shareholder of an
S corporation in the hands of the shareholder of the S corporation.
      INTANGIBLE INCOME. Income of any of the following types: income yield,
interest, capital gains, dividends, or other income arising from the ownership,
sale, exchange, or other disposition of intangible property including, but not
limited to, investments, deposits, money, or credits as those terms are defined
in R.C. Ch. 5701, and patents, copyrights, trademarks, trade names, investments
in real estate investment trusts, investments in regulated investment
companies, and appreciation on deferred compensation. INTANGIBLE INCOME does
not include prizes, awards or other income associated with any lottery
winnings, gambling winnings or other similar games of chance.
      INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended,
found at 26 U.S.C. For example, where reference is made to “§ 1221 of the
Internal Revenue Code,” the complete citation would then be, 26 U.S.C. § 1221.
      LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY. A limited liability company formed under R.C.
Ch. 1705 or 1706 or under the laws of another state.
      LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW and BOARD OF TAX REVIEW. The entity created
under §
37.160.
      MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. A status conferred upon a local government unit,
by state law giving the unit certain autonomous operating authority, such as
the power of taxation, power of eminent domain, police power and regulatory
power, and includes a joint economic development district or joint economic
development zone that levies an income tax under R.C. §§ 715.691, 715.70,
715.71 or 715.72.
      MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME.
         (a)   The following:
            1.   For a person other than an individual, income apportioned or
sitused to the municipality under §
37.061, as applicable, reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward
available to the person for the municipality;
            2.   a.   For an individual who is a resident of a municipality
other than a qualified municipal corporation, income reduced by exempt income
to the extent otherwise included in income, then reduced as provided in
subsection b. below, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss
carry-forward available to the individual for the municipality; and
               b.   For an individual who is a resident of a qualified
municipal corporation, state adjusted gross income reduced by income exempted
and increased by deductions excluded, by the qualified municipal corporation
from the qualified municipal corporation’s tax on or before December 31, 2013.
If a qualified municipal corporation, on or before December 31, 2013, exempts
income earned by individuals who are not residents of the qualified municipal
corporation and net profit of persons that are not wholly located within the
qualified municipal corporation, such individual or person shall have no
municipal taxable income for the purposes of the tax levied by the qualified
municipal corporation and may be exempted by the qualified municipal
corporation from the requirements of R.C. § 718.03.
            3.   For an individual who is a nonresident of the municipality,
income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and
then, as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the municipality under §
37.061, then reduced as provided in subsection B. below, and further reduced by
any pre-2017 net operating loss carry-forward available to the individual for
the municipality.
         (b)   In computing the municipal taxable income of a taxpayer who is
an individual, the taxpayer may subtract, as provided in subsection (a)2.a. or
(a)3. above, the amount of the individual’s employee business expenses reported
on the individual’s Form 2106 that the individual deducted for federal income
tax purposes for the taxable year, subject to the limitation imposed by § 67 of
the Internal Revenue Code. For the municipal corporation in which the taxpayer
is a resident, the taxpayer may deduct all such expenses allowed for federal
income tax purposes. For a municipal corporation in which the taxpayer is not a
resident, the taxpayer may deduct such expenses only to the extent the expenses
are related to the taxpayer’s performance of personal services in that
nonresident municipal corporation.
      MUNICIPALITY. The City of Green.
      NET OPERATING LOSS. A loss incurred by a person in the operation of a
trade or business. NET OPERATING LOSS does not include unutilized losses
resulting from basis limitations, at-risk limitations or passive activity loss
limitations.
      NET PROFIT.
         (a)   For a person who is an individual, means the individual’s NET
PROFIT required to be reported on Schedule C, Schedule E or Schedule F reduced
by any net operating loss carried forward. For the purposes of this definition,
the net operating loss carried forward shall be calculated and deducted in the
same manner as provided in subsection (c) below.
         (b)   NET PROFIT for a person other than an individual, means adjusted
federal taxable income reduced by any net operating loss incurred by the person
in a taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2017, subject to the
limitations of subsection (c) below.
         (c)   1.   The amount of such net operating loss shall be deducted
from NET PROFIT to the extent necessary to reduce municipal taxable income to
zero, with any remaining unused portion of the net operating loss carried
forward to not more than five consecutive taxable years following the taxable
year in which the loss was incurred, but in no case for more years than
necessary for the deduction to be fully utilized.
            2.   No person shall use the deduction allowed by this subsection
(c) to offset qualifying wages.
            3.   a.   For taxable years beginning in 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021 or
2022, a person may not deduct, for purposes of an income tax levied by a
municipal corporation that levies an income tax before January 1, 2016, more
than 50% of the deduction otherwise allowed by this subsection (c).
               b.   For taxable years beginning in 2023 or thereafter, a person
may deduct, for purposes of an income tax levied by a municipal corporation
that levies an income tax before January 1, 2016, the full amount allowed by
this subsection (c) without regard to the limitation of subsection (c)3.a
above.
            4.   Any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward deduction that is
available may be utilized before a taxpayer may deduct any amount pursuant to
this subsection (c).
            5.   Nothing in subsection (c)3.a. above precludes a person from
carrying forward, for use with respect to any return filed for a taxable year
beginning after 2018, any amount of net operating loss that was not fully
utilized by operation of subsection (c)3.a. above. To the extent that an amount
of net operating loss was not fully utilized in one or more taxable years by
operation of subsection C.3.a. above is carried forward for use with respect to
a return filed for a taxable year beginning in 2019, 2020, 2021 or 2022, the
limitation described in subsection (c)3.a. above shall apply to the amount
carried forward.
         (d)   For the purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding subsection
(b) above, NET PROFIT of a disregarded entity shall not be taxable as against
that disregarded entity, but shall instead be included in the net profit of the
owner of the disregarded entity.
         (e)   1.   For purposes of this chapter, PUBLICLY TRADED PARTNERSHIP
means any partnership, an interest in which is regularly traded on an
established securities market. A PUBLICLY TRADED PARTNERSHIP may have any
number of partners.
            2.   For the purposes of this chapter and notwithstanding any other
provision of this chapter, the NET PROFIT of a publicly traded partnership that
makes the election described in this subsection shall be taxed as if the
partnership were a C corporation, and shall not be treated as the NET PROFIT or
income of any owner of the partnership.
            3.   A publicly traded partnership that is treated as a partnership
for federal income tax purposes and that is subject to tax on its NET PROFITS
in one or more municipal corporations in this state, may elect to be treated as
a C corporation for municipal income tax purposes. The publicly traded
partnership shall make the election in every municipal corporation in which the
partnership is subject to taxation on its NET PROFITS. The election shall be
made on the annual tax return filed in each such municipal corporation. Once
the election is made, the election is binding for a five-year period beginning
with the first taxable year of the initial election. The election continues to
be binding for each subsequent five-year period, unless the taxpayer elects to
discontinue filing municipal income tax returns as a C corporation for
municipal purposes under subsection (e)4. below.
            4.   An election to discontinue filing as a C corporation must be
made in the first year following the last year of a five-year election period
in effect under subsection (e)3. above. The election to discontinue filing as a
C corporation is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first
taxable year of the election and continues to be binding for each subsequent
five-year period, unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing municipal
income tax returns as a partnership for municipal purposes. An election to
discontinue filing as a partnership must be made in the first year following
the last year of a five-year election period.
            5.   The publicly traded partnership shall not be required to file
the election with any municipal corporation in which the partnership is not
subject to taxation on its net profits, but this subsection applies to all
municipal corporations in which an individual owner of the partnership resides.
            6.   The individual owners of the partnership not filing as a C
Corporation shall be required to file with their municipal corporation of
residence and report partnership distribution of NET PROFIT.
      NONRESIDENT. An individual that is not a resident of the municipality.
      OHIO BUSINESS GATEWAY. The online computer network system, created under
R.C. § 125.30, that allows persons to electronically file business reply forms
with state agencies and includes any successor electronic filing and payment
system.
      OTHER PAYER. Any person, other than an individual’s employer or the
employer’s agent, that pays an individual any amount included in the federal
gross income of the individual. OTHER PAYER includes casino operators and video
lottery terminal sales agents.
      OUT-OF-STATE DISASTER BUSINESS, QUALIFYING SOLICITATION, QUALIFYING
EMPLOYEE, DISASTER WORK, CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE and DISASTER RESPONSE PERIOD.
The same meanings as in R.C. § 5703.94.
      PASS-THROUGH ENTITY. A partnership not treated as an association taxable
as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, a limited liability company
not treated as an association taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax
purposes, an S corporation or any other class of entity from which the income
or profits of the entity are given pass-through treatment for federal income
tax purposes. PASS-THROUGH ENTITY does not include a trust, estate, grantor of
a grantor trust or disregarded entity.
      PENSION. A retirement benefit plan, regardless of whether the plan
satisfies the qualifications described under § 401(a) of the Internal Revenue
Code, including amounts that are taxable under the Federal Insurance
Contributions Act, Ch. 21 of the Internal Revenue Code, excluding employee
contributions and elective deferrals, and regardless of whether such amounts
are paid in the same taxable year in which the amounts are included in the
employee’s wages, as defined by § 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code (this
definition goes into effect for taxable years on and after January 1,2020).
      PERSON. Individuals, firms, companies, joint stock companies, business
trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited liability partnerships, limited
liability companies, associations, C corporations, S corporations, governmental
entities and any other entity.
      POSTAL SERVICE. The United States Postal Service, or private delivery
service delivering documents and packages within an agreed upon delivery
schedule, or any other carrier service delivering the item.
      POSTMARK DATE and DATE OF POSTMARK. The date recorded and marked by a
delivery service and recorded electronically to a database kept in the regular
course of its business and marked on the cover in which the payment or document
is enclosed, the date on which the payment, or document was given to the
delivery service for delivery.
      PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRY-FORWARD.
         (a)   Any net operating loss incurred in a taxable year beginning
before January 1, 2017, to the extent such loss was permitted, by a resolution
or ordinance of the municipality that was adopted by the municipality before
January 1, 2016, to be carried forward and utilized to offset income or net
profit generated in such municipality in future taxable years.
         (b)   For the purpose of calculating municipal taxable income, any
pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward may be carried forward to any taxable
year, including taxable years beginning in 2017 or thereafter, for the number
of taxable years provided in the resolution or ordinance or until fully
utilized, whichever is earlier.
      QUALIFIED MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. A municipal corporation that, by
resolution or ordinance adopted on or before December 31, 2011, adopted state
adjusted gross income, as defined by R.C. § 5747.01, as the income subject to
tax for the purposes of imposing a municipal income tax.
      QUALIFYING WAGES. Wages, as defined in § 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue
Code, without regard to any wage limitations, adjusted as follows.
         (a)   Deduct the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes
compensation attributable to a plan or program described in § 125 of the
Internal Revenue Code;
            2.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes payment
on account of a disability related to sickness or an accident paid by a party
unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer or other payer; and
            3.   Any amount included in wages that is exempt income.
         (b)   Add the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount not included in wages solely because the employee
was employed by the employer before April 1, 1986;
            2.   Any amount not included in wages because the amount arises
from the sale, exchange or other disposition of a stock option, the exercise of
a stock option, or the sale, exchange or other disposition of stock purchased
under a stock option. This subsection section applies only to those amounts
constituting ordinary income;
            3.   Any amount not included in wages if the amount is an amount
described in §§ 401(k), 403(b) or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code. This
subsection applies only to employee contributions and employee deferrals;
            4.   Any amount that is supplemental unemployment compensation
benefits described in § 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and not
included in wages;
            5.   Any amount received that is treated as self-employment income
for federal tax purposes in accordance with § 1402(a)(8) of the Internal
Revenue Code; and
            6.   Any amount not included in wages if all of the following
apply:
               a.   For the taxable year, the amount is employee compensation
that is earned outside of the United States and that either is included in the
taxpayer’s gross income for federal income tax purposes or would have been
included in the taxpayer’s gross income for such purposes if the taxpayer did
not elect to exclude the income under § 911 of the Internal Revenue Code;
               b.   For no preceding taxable year did the amount constitute
wages as defined in § 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code;
               c.   For no succeeding taxable year will the amount constitute
wages; and
               d.   For any taxable year, the amount has not otherwise been
added to wages pursuant to either this subsection or R.C. § 718.03, as that
section existed before the effective date of H.B. 5 of the 130th General
Assembly, March 23, 2015.
      RELATED ENTITY.
         (a)   An individual stockholder or a member of the stockholder’s
family enumerated in § 318 of the Internal Revenue Code, if the stockholder and
the members of the stockholder’s family own directly, indirectly, beneficially
or constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the
taxpayer’s outstanding stock;
         (b)   A stockholder or a stockholder’s partnership, estate, trust or
corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder’s partnerships, estates,
trusts or corporations own directly, indirectly, beneficially or
constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the taxpayer’s
outstanding stock;
         (c)   A corporation or a party related to the corporation in a manner
that would require an attribution of stock from the corporation to the party or
from the party to the corporation under subsection (d) below; provided the
taxpayer owns directly, indirectly, beneficially or constructively, at least
50% of the value of the corporation’s outstanding stock; and
         (d)   The attribution rules described in § 318 of the Internal Revenue
Code apply for the purpose of determining whether the ownership requirements in
subsections (a) to (c) above have been met.
      RELATED MEMBER. A person that, with respect to the taxpayer during all or
any portion of the taxable year, is either a related entity, a component member
as defined in § 1563(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a person to or from
whom there is attribution of stock ownership in accordance with § 1563(e) of
the Internal Revenue Code except, for purposes of determining whether a person
is a related member under this definition, 20% shall be substituted for 5%
wherever 5% appears in § 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      RESIDENT. An individual who is domiciled in the municipality as
determined under §
37.031.
      RETIREMENT BENEFIT PLAN. An arrangement whereby an entity provides
benefits to individuals either on or after their termination of service because
of retirement or disability. RETIREMENT BENEFIT PLAN does not include wage
continuation payments, severance payments or payments made for accrued personal
or vacation time (this definition goes into effect for taxable years on and
after January 1, 2020).
      S CORPORATION. A person that has made an election under subchapter S of
Ch. 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code for its taxable year.
      SCHEDULE C. Internal Revenue Service Schedule C (Form 1040) filed by a
taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      SCHEDULE E. Internal Revenue Service Schedule E (Form 1040) filed by a
taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      SCHEDULE F. Internal Revenue Service Schedule F (Form 1040) filed by a
taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      SINGLE MEMBER LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY. A limited liability company that
has one direct member.
      SMALL EMPLOYER. Any employer that had total revenue of less than $500,000
during the preceding taxable year. For purposes of this definition, TOTAL
REVENUE means receipts of any type or kind, including, but not limited to,
sales receipts; payments; rents; profits; gains, dividends and other investment
income; commissions; premiums; money; property; grants; contributions;
donations; gifts; program service revenue; patient service revenue; premiums;
fees, including premium fees and service fees; tuition payments; unrelated
business revenue; reimbursements; any type of payment from a governmental unit,
including grants and other allocations; and any other similar receipts reported
for federal income tax purposes or under generally accepted accounting
principles. SMALL EMPLOYER does not include the federal government; any state
government, including any state agency or instrumentality; any political
subdivision; or any entity treated as a government for financial accounting and
reporting purposes.
      TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
         (a)   The individual charged with direct responsibility for
administration of an income tax levied by a municipal corporation in accordance
with this chapter and also includes the following:
            1.   A municipal corporation acting as the agent of another
municipal corporation;
            2.   A person retained by a municipal corporation to administer a
tax levied by the municipal corporation, but only if the municipal corporation
does not compensate the person in whole or in part on a contingency basis; or
            3.   The Central Collection Agency (CCA) or the Regional Income Tax
Agency (RITA) or their successors in interest, or another entity organized to
perform functions similar to those performed by the Central Collection Agency
and the Regional Income Tax Agency.
         (b)   TAX ADMINISTRATOR does not include the Tax Commissioner.
      TAX COMMISSIONER. The Tax Commissioner appointed under R.C. § 121.03.
      TAX RETURN PREPARER. Any individual described in § 7701(a)(36) of the
Internal Revenue Code and 26 C.F.R. § 301.7701-15.
      TAXABLE YEAR. The corresponding tax reporting period as prescribed for
the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.
      TAXPAYER.
         (a)   A person subject to a tax levied on income by a municipal
corporation in accordance with this chapter. TAXPAYER does not include a
grantor trust or, except as provided in division subsection (b)1. below, a
disregarded entity.
         (b)   1.   A single member limited liability company that is a
disregarded entity for federal tax purposes may be a separate taxpayer from its
single member in all state municipal corporations in which it either filed as a
separate taxpayer or did not file for its taxable year ending in 2003, if all
of the following conditions are met:
               a.   The limited liability company’s single member is also a
limited liability company;
               b.   The limited liability company and its single member were
formed and doing business in one or more state municipal corporations for at
least five years before January 1, 2004;
               c.   Not later than December 31, 2004, the limited liability
company and its single member each made an election to be treated as a separate
taxpayer under R.C. § 718.01(L) as this section existed on December 31, 2004;
               d.   The limited liability company was not formed for the
purpose of evading or reducing state municipal corporation income tax liability
of the limited liability company or its single member; and
               e.   The Ohio municipal corporation that was the primary place
of business of the sole member of the limited liability company consented to
the election.
            2.   For purposes of subsection (b)1.e. above, a municipal
corporation was the primary place of business of a limited liability company
if, for the limited liability company’s taxable year ending in 2003, its income
tax liability was greater in that municipal corporation than in any other
municipal corporation in the state, and that tax liability to that municipal
corporation for its taxable year ending in 2003 was at least $400,000.
      TAXPAYERS’ RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The rights provided to taxpayers
in R.C. §§ 718.11, 718.12, 718.19, 718.23, 718.36, 718.37, 718.38, 5717.011,
and 5717.03 and any corresponding ordinances of the municipality, and the
responsibilities of taxpayers to file, report, withhold, remit, and pay
municipal income tax and otherwise comply with R.C. Ch. 718 and resolutions,
ordinances, and rules adopted by a municipal corporation for the imposition and
administration of a municipal income tax.
      VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL. The same meaning as in R.C. § 3770.21.
      VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL SALES AGENT. A lottery sales agent licensed under
R.C. Ch. 3770 to conduct video lottery terminals on behalf of the state
pursuant to R.C. § 3770.21.
(Prior Code, § 880B.03) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015; Ord. 2017-28, passed
12-12-2017; Ord. 2018-04, passed 3-13-2018; Ord. 2019-16, passed 10-22-2019)
INCOME SUBJECT TO TAX FOR INDIVIDUALS.
§ 37.030 DETERMINING MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME FOR INDIVIDUALS.
   (A)   Municipal taxable income for a resident of the municipality is
calculated as follows. Income reduced by exempt income to the extent such
exempt income is otherwise included in income, reduced by allowable employee
business expense deduction as found in §
37.016, further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carry-forward equals
municipal taxable income.
      (1)   INCOME is defined in §
37.016.
         (a)   QUALIFYING WAGES is defined in §
37.016.
         (b)   NET PROFIT is included in INCOME and is defined in §
37.016. This section also provides that the net operating loss carryforward
shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in §
37.016. Treatment of net profits received by an individual taxpayer from rental
real estate is provided in §
37.061(E).
         (c)   Section
37.016 provides the following: offsetting and net operating loss carryforward
treatment in §
37.016; resident’s distributive share of net profit from pass through entity
treatment in §
37.016; treatment of S corporation distributive share of net profit in the
hands of the shareholder in §
37.016; and restriction of amount of loss permitted to be carried forward for
use by taxpayer in a subsequent taxable year in §
37.016.
         (d)   PASS THROUGH ENTITY is defined in §
37.016.
      (2)   EXEMPT INCOME is defined in §
37.016.
      (3)   Allowable employee business expense deduction is described in §
37.016 and is subject to the limitations provided in that section.
      (4)   PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRY-FORWARD is defined in §
37.016.
   (B)   Municipal taxable income for a nonresident of the municipality is
calculated as follows. Income reduced by exempt income to the extent such
exempt income is otherwise included in income, as applicable, apportioned or
sitused to the municipality as provided in §
37.061, reduced by allowable employee business expense deduction as found in §
37.016, further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carry-forward equals
municipal taxable income.
      (1)   INCOME is defined in §
37.016.
         (a)   QUALIFYING WAGES is defined in §
37.016.
         (b)   NET PROFIT is included in INCOME, and is defined in §
37.016. This section also provides that the net operating loss carry-forward
shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in §
37.016. NET PROFIT for a nonresident individual includes any net profit of the
nonresident, but excludes the distributive share of net profit or loss of only
pass through entity owned directly or indirectly by the nonresident.
         (c)   PASS THROUGH ENTITY is defined in §
37.016.
      (2)   EXEMPT INCOME is defined in §
37.016.
      (3)   Apportioned or sitused to the municipality as provided in §
37.061 includes the apportionment of net profit income attributable to work
done or services performed in the municipality. Treatment of net profits
received by an individual taxpayer from rental real estate is provided in §
37.061(E).
      (4)   Allowable employee business expense deduction as described in §
37.016, is subject to the limitations provided in that section. For a
nonresident of the municipality, the deduction is limited to the extent the
expenses are related to the performance of personal services by the nonresident
in the municipality.
      (5)   PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRY-FORWARD is defined in §
37.016.
(Prior Code, § 880B.041) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.031 DOMICILE.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      (1)   DOMICILE means the true, fixed and permanent home of the taxpayer
to which whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return.
      (2)   An individual is presumed to be domiciled in the municipality for
all or part of a taxable year if the individual was domiciled in the
municipality on the last day of the immediately preceding taxable year or if
the Tax Administrator reasonably concludes that the individual is domiciled in
the municipality for all or part of the taxable year.
      (3)   An individual may rebut the presumption of domicile described in
division (A)(1) of this section if the individual establishes by a
preponderance of the evidence that the individual was not domiciled in the
municipality for all or part of the taxable year.
   (B)   For the purpose of determining whether an individual is domiciled in
the municipality for all or part of a taxable year, factors that may be
considered include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The individual’s domicile in other taxable years;
      (2)   The location at which the individual is registered to vote;
      (3)   The address on the individual’s driver’s license;
      (4)   The location of real estate for which the individual claimed a
property tax exemption or reduction allowed on the basis of the individual’s
residence or domicile;
      (5)   The location and value of abodes owned or leased by the individual;
      (6)   Declarations, written or oral, made by the individual regarding the
individual’s residency;
      (7)   The primary location at which the individual is employed;
      (8)   The location of educational institutions attended by the
individual’s dependents as defined in § 152 of the Internal Revenue Code, to
the extent that tuition paid to such educational institution is based on the
residency of the individual or the individual’s spouse in the municipal
corporation, or state where the educational institution is located; and
      (9)   The number of contact periods the individual has with the
municipality. For the purposes of this division (B), an individual has one
contact period with the municipality if the individual is away overnight from
the individual’s abode located outside of the municipality and while away
overnight from that abode spends at least some portion, however minimal, of
each of two consecutive days in the municipality. For purposes of this section,
the state’s contact period test or bright-line test and resulting determination
have no bearing on municipal residency or domicile.
   (C)   All applicable factors are provided in R.C. § 718.012.
(Prior Code, § 880B.042) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.032 EXEMPTION FOR MEMBER OR EMPLOYEE OF GENERAL ASSEMBLY AND CERTAIN
JUDGES.
   (A)   Only the municipal corporation of residence shall be permitted to levy
a tax on the income of any member or employee of the Ohio General Assembly,
including the Lieutenant Governor, whose income is received as a result of
services rendered as such member or employee, and is paid from appropriated
funds of this state.
   (B)   Only the municipal corporation of residence and the City of Columbus
shall levy a tax on the income of the Chief Justice or a Justice of the Supreme
Court received as a result of services rendered as the Chief Justice or
Justice. Only the municipal corporation of residence shall levy a tax on the
income of a judge sitting by assignment of the Chief Justice or on the income
of a district court of appeals judge sitting in multiple locations within the
district, received as a result of services rendered as a judge.
(Prior Code, § 880B.043) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
COLLECTION AT SOURCE
§ 36.045 COLLECTION AT SOURCE.
   (A)   In accordance with rules and regulations prescribed by the Tax
Administrator, each employer within or doing business within the city who
employs one or more persons on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation
basis, shall deduct (on a calendar-year basis) at the time of payment of such
salary, wage, commission or other compensation, the tax of 1% per annum of the
gross salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation due by such employer
to such employee, and shall, on or before the last day of the month following
the month in which the tax was deducted, make a return and pay to the city the
amount of taxes so deducted, except that if said withholding amounts to less
than $100 per month, payment may be made quarterly, as required by the Tax
Administrator. Such returns shall be on a form or forms prescribed by or
acceptable to the Tax Administrator and shall be subject to the rules and
regulations prescribed therefor by the Tax Administrator. Such employer shall
be liable for the payment of the tax required to be deducted and withheld
whether or not such taxes have in fact been withheld. The Tax Administrator,
for good cause, may require immediate returns and payment to be submitted to
his or her office.
   (B)   Such employer, in collecting such tax, shall be deemed to hold the
same until payment is made by such employer to the city, as a trustee for the
benefit of the city, and any such tax collected by such employer from his or
her employees shall, until the same is paid to the city, be deemed a trust fund
in the hands of such employer; provided, however, that no person shall be
required to withhold the tax on the wages or other compensation paid domestic
servants employed exclusively in or about such person’s residence.
   (C)   On or before January 31 of each year, each employer shall file a
withholding return in a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator, setting forth
the names and addresses of all employees from whose compensation the tax was
withheld during the preceding calendar year, the amount of tax withheld from
his or her employees and such other information as may be required by the rules
and regulations adopted by the Tax Administrator.
   (D)   On or before February 28 of each year, each individual, business or
business entity who files forms 1099-MISC with the Internal Revenue Service
must also file a copy of such return with the City Income Tax Division.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 7-1-1991)
§ 37.046 COLLECTION AT SOURCE; WITHHOLDING FROM QUALIFYING WAGES.
   (A)   (1)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer located or
doing business in the municipality shall withhold from each employee an amount
equal to the qualifying wages of the employee earned by the employee in the
municipality multiplied by the applicable rate of the municipality’s income
tax, except for qualifying wages for which withholding is not required under §
37.047 or division (D) or (F) of this section. An employer, agent of an
employer, or other payer shall deduct and withhold the tax from qualifying
wages on the date that the employer, agent, or other payer directly,
indirectly, or constructively pays the qualifying wages to, or credits the
qualifying wages to the benefit of, the employee.
      (2)   In addition to withholding the amounts required under division (A)
(1) of this section, an employer, agent of an employer or other payer may also
deduct and withhold, on the request of an employee, taxes for the municipal
corporation in which the employee is a resident.
   (B)   (1)   An employer, agent of an employer or other payer shall remit to
the Tax Administrator of the municipality the greater of the income taxes
deducted and withheld or the income taxes required to be deducted and withheld
by the employer, agent or other payer, along with any report required by the
Tax Administrator to accompany such payment, according to the following
schedule:
         (a)   Any employer, agent of an employer or other payer not required
to make payments under division (B)(1)(b) of this section of taxes required to
be deducted and withheld shall make quarterly payments to the Tax Administrator
not later than the last day of the month following the last day of each
calendar quarter; and
          (b)   Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall be remitted
monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and withheld or
required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent or other payer on
behalf of the municipal corporation in the preceding calendar year exceeded
$2,399, or if the total amount of taxes deducted and withheld or required to be
deducted and withheld on behalf of the municipality in any month of the
preceding calendar quarter exceeded $200. Payments under this division shall be
made to the Tax Administrator not later than 15 days after the last day of each
month.
   (C)   An employer, agent of an employer or other payer shall make and file a
return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer, agent or other payer
from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted to the Tax
Administrator. A return filed by an employer, agent or other payer under this
division shall be accepted by the municipality as the return required of an
employee whose sole income subject to the tax under this chapter is the
qualifying wages reported by the employee’s employer, agent of an employer or
other payer, unless the municipality requires all resident individual taxpayers
to file a tax return under §
37.105.
   (D)   An employer, agent of an employer or other payer is not required to
withhold municipal income tax with respect to an individual’s disqualifying
disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the disqualifying
disposition, the individual is not an employee of either the corporation with
respect to whose stock the option has been issued or of such corporation’s
successor entity.
   (E)   (1)   An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax by the
failure of the employer, agent of an employer or other payer to withhold the
tax as required under this chapter or by the employer’s, agent’s, or other
payer’s exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax.
      (2)   The failure of an employer, agent of an employer or other payer to
remit to the municipality the tax withheld relieves the employee from liability
for that tax, unless the employee colluded with the employer, agent or other
payer in connection with the failure to remit the tax withheld.
   (F)   Compensation deferred before June 26, 2003, is not subject to any
municipal corporation income tax or municipal income tax withholding
requirement to the extent the deferred compensation does not constitute
qualifying wages at the time the deferred compensation is paid or distributed.
   (G)   Each employer, agent of an employer or other payer required to
withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required to be
withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount shall
be deemed to be held in trust for the municipality until such time as the
withheld amount is remitted to the Tax Administrator.
   (H)   On or before the last day of February of each year, an employer shall
file a withholding reconciliation return with the Tax Administrator listing the
names, addresses and social security numbers of all employees from whose
qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have been withheld for the
municipality during the preceding calendar year, the amount of tax withheld, if
any, from each such employee’s qualifying wage, the total amount of qualifying
wages paid to such employee during the preceding calendar year, the name of
every other municipal corporation for which tax was withheld or should have
been withheld from such employee during the preceding calendar year, any other
information required for federal income tax reporting purposes on Internal
Revenue Service Form W-2 or its equivalent form with respect to such employee,
and other information as may be required by the Tax Administrator.
   (I)   The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged with the
responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and making
payments as required by this section, shall be personally liable for a failure
to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The
dissolution of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer does not
discharge the officer’s or employee’s liability for a failure of the employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer to file returns or pay any tax due.
   (J)   An employer is required to deduct and withhold municipal income tax on
tips and gratuities received by the employer’s employees and constituting
qualifying wages only to the extent that the tips and gratuities are under the
employer’s control. For the purposes of this division, a tip or gratuity is
under the employer’s control if the tip or gratuity is paid by the customer to
the employer for subsequent remittance to the employee, or if the customer pays
the tip or gratuity by credit card, debit card, or other electronic means.
   (K)   A Tax Administrator shall consider any tax withheld by an employer at
the request of an employee when such tax is not otherwise required to be
withheld by this chapter to be tax required to be withheld and remitted for the
purposes of this section.
(Prior Code, § 880B.051) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015; Ord. 2016-15, passed
12-13-2016)
§ 37.047 COLLECTION AT SOURCE; OCCASIONAL ENTRANT.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      EMPLOYEE. A person that is a related member to or of an employer.
      FIXED LOCATION. A permanent place of doing business in this state, such
as an office, warehouse, storefront, or similar location owned or controlled by
an employer.
      PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK.
         (a)   The fixed location to which an employee is required to report
for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not
required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a
fixed location, PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means the worksite location in this
state to which the employee is required to report for employment duties on a
regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not required to report for
employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location or
worksite location, PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means the location in this state at
which the employee spends the greatest number of days in a calendar year
performing services for or on behalf of the employee’s employer.
         (b)   If there is not a single municipal corporation in which the
employee spent the greatest number of days in a calendar year performing
services for or on behalf of the employer, but instead there are two or more
municipal corporations in which the employee spent an identical number of days
that is greater than the number of days the employee spent in any other
municipal corporation, the employer shall allocate any of the employee’s
qualifying wages subject to this section among those two or more municipal
corporations. The allocation shall be made using any fair and reasonable
method, including, but not limited to, an equal allocation among such municipal
corporations or an allocation based upon the time spent or sales made by the
employee in each such municipal corporation. A municipal corporation to which
qualifying wages are allocated under this division shall be the employee’s
PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK with respect to those qualifying wages for the purposes
of this section.
         (c)   For the purposes of this division, the location at which an
employee spends a particular day shall be deemed in accordance with this
section, except that location shall be substituted for municipal corporation
wherever municipal corporation appears in that division.
      PROFESSIONAL ATHLETE. An athlete who performs services in a professional
athletic event for wages or other remuneration.
      PROFESSIONAL ENTERTAINER. A person who performs services in the
professional performing arts for wages or other remuneration on a per-event
basis.
      PUBLIC FIGURE. A person of prominence who performs services at discrete
events, such as speeches, public appearances, or similar events, for wages or
other remuneration on a per-event basis.
      WORKSITE LOCATION. A construction site or other temporary worksite in
this state at which the employer provides services for more than 20 days during
the calendar year. WORKSITE LOCATION does not include the home of an employee.
   (B)   (1)   Subject to divisions (C), (E), (F) and (G) of this section, an
employer is not required to withhold municipal income tax on qualifying wages
paid to an employee for the performance of personal services in a municipal
corporation that imposes such a tax if the employee performed such services in
the municipal corporation on 20 or fewer days in a calendar year, unless one of
the following conditions applies:
         (a)   The employee’s principal place of work is located in the
municipality;
         (b)   The employee performed services at one or more presumed worksite
locations in the municipality. For the purposes of this division, PRESUMED
WORKSITE LOCATION means a construction site or other temporary worksite in this
state at which the employer provides services that can reasonably be expected
by the employer to last more than 20 days in a calendar year. Services can
reasonably be expected by the employer to last more than 20 days if either of
the following applies at the time the services commence:
            1.   The nature of the services are such that it will require more
than 20 days of actual services to complete the services; or
            2.   The agreement between the employer and its customer to perform
services at a location requires the employer to perform actual services at the
location for more than 20 days.
         (c)   The employee is a resident of the municipality and has requested
that the employer withhold tax from the employee’s qualifying wages as provided
in §
37.046; and
         (d)   The employee is a professional athlete, professional entertainer
or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid for the performance of
services in the employee’s capacity as a professional athlete, professional
entertainer or public figure within the municipality.
      (2)   For the purposes of division (B)(1) of this section, an employee
shall be considered to have spent a day performing services in a municipal
corporation only if the employee spent more time performing services for or on
behalf of the employer in that municipal corporation than in any other
municipal corporation on that day. For the purposes of determining the amount
of time an employee spent in a particular location, the time spent performing
one or more of the following activities shall be considered to have been spent
at the employee’s principal place of work:
         (a)   Traveling to the location at which the employee will first
perform services for the employer for the day;
         (b)   Traveling from a location at which the employee was performing
services for the employer to any other location;
         (c)   Traveling from any location to another location in order to pick
up or load, for the purpose of transportation or delivery, property that has
been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated, repaired, refurbished, processed,
remanufactured, or improved by the employee’s employer;
         (d)   Transporting or delivering property described in division (B)(2)
(c) above; provided that, upon delivery of the property, the employee does not
temporarily or permanently affix the property to real estate owned, used or
controlled by a person other than the employee’s employer; and
         (e)   Traveling from the location at which the employee makes the
employee’s final delivery or pick-up for the day to either the employee’s
principal place of work or a location at which the employee will not perform
services for the employer.
   (C)   If the principal place of work of an employee is located in a
municipal corporation that imposes an income tax in accordance with this
chapter, the exception from withholding requirements described in division (B)
(1) of this section shall apply only if, with respect to the employee’s
qualifying wages described in that division, the employer withholds and remits
tax on such qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the
employee’s principal place of work is located.
   (D)   (1)   Except as provided in division (D)(2) of this section, if,
during a calendar year, the number of days an employee spends performing
personal services in a municipal corporation exceeds the 20-day threshold
described in division (B)(1) of this section, the employer shall withhold and
remit tax to that municipal corporation for any subsequent days in that
calendar year on which the employer pays qualifying wages to the employee for
personal services performed in that municipal corporation.
      (2)   An employer required to begin withholding tax for a municipal
corporation under division (D)(1) of this section may elect to withhold tax for
that municipal corporation for the first 20 days on which the employer paid
qualifying wages to the employee for personal services performed in that
municipal corporation.
      (3)   If an employer makes the election described in division (D)(2) of
this section, the taxes withheld and paid by such an employer during those
first 20 days to the municipal corporation in which the employee’s principal
place of work is located are refundable to the employee.
   (E)   Without regard to the number of days in a calendar year on which an
employee performs personal services in any municipal corporation, an employer
shall withhold municipal income tax on all of the employee’s qualifying wages
for a taxable year and remit that tax only to the municipal corporation in
which the employer’s fixed location is located if the employer qualifies as a
small employer as defined in §
37.016. To determine whether an employer qualifies as a small employer for a
taxable year, a Tax Administrator may require the employer to provide the Tax
Administrator with the employer’s federal income tax return for the preceding
taxable year.
   (F)   Divisions (B)(1) and (D) of this section shall not apply to the extent
that a Tax Administrator and an employer enter into an agreement regarding the
manner in which the employer shall comply with the requirements of §
37.046.
   (G)   (1)   In the case of a person performing personal services at a
petroleum refinery located in a municipal corporation that imposes a tax on
income, an employer is not required to withhold municipal income tax on the
qualifying wages of such a person if the person performs those services on 12
or fewer days in a calendar year, unless the principal place of work of the
employer is located in another municipal corporation in this state that imposes
a tax applying to compensation paid to the person for services performed on
those days, and the person is not liable to that other municipal corporation
for tax on the compensation paid for such services. For the purposes of this
division (G), a petroleum refinery is a facility with a standard industrial
classification code facility classification of 2911, petroleum refining.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (D) of this section, if, during a calendar
year, the number of days an individual performs personal services at a
petroleum refinery exceeds 12, the employer shall withhold tax for the
municipal corporation for the first 12 days for which the employer paid
qualifying wages to the individual and for all subsequent days in the calendar
year on which the individual performed services at the refinery.
(Prior Code, § 880B.052) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.048 COLLECTION AT SOURCE; CASINO AND VLT.
    (A)   The municipality shall require a casino facility or a casino
operator, as defined in § 6(C)(9) of Article XV, Ohio Constitution, and R.C. §
3772.01, respectively, or a lottery sales agent conducting video lottery
terminals (VLT) sales on behalf of the state to withhold and remit municipal
income tax with respect to amounts other than qualifying wages as provided in
this section.
   (B)   If a person’s winnings at a casino facility are an amount for which
reporting to the Internal Revenue Service of the amount is required by § 6041
of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, the casino operator shall deduct and
withhold municipal income tax from the person’s winnings at the rate of the tax
imposed by the municipal corporation in which the casino facility is located.
   (C)   Amounts deducted and withheld by a casino operator are held in trust
for the benefit of the municipal corporation to which the tax is owed.
      (1)   On or before the tenth day of each month, the casino operator shall
file a return electronically with the Tax Administrator of the municipality;
providing the name, address and Social Security number of the person from whose
winnings amounts were deducted and withheld, the amount of each such deduction
and withholding during the preceding calendar month, the amount of the winnings
from which each such amount was withheld, the type of casino gaming that
resulted in such winnings, and any other information required by the Tax
Administrator. With this return, the casino operator shall remit electronically
to the municipality all amounts deducted and withheld during the preceding
month.
      (2)   Annually, on or before January 31, a casino operator shall file an
annual return electronically with the Tax Administrator of the municipal
corporation in which the casino facility is located, indicating the total
amount deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar year. The casino
operator shall remit electronically with the annual return any amount that was
deducted and withheld and that was not previously remitted. If the name,
address or Social Security number of a person or the amount deducted and
withheld with respect to that person was omitted on a monthly return for that
reporting period, that information shall be indicated on the annual return.
      (3)   Annually, on or before January 31, a casino operator shall issue an
information return to each person with respect to whom an amount has been
deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar year. The information
return shall show the total amount of municipal income tax deducted from the
person’s winnings during the preceding year. The casino operator shall provide
to the Tax Administrator a copy of each information return issued under this
division. The Administrator may require that such copies be transmitted
electronically.
      (4)   A casino operator that fails to file a return and remit the amounts
deducted and withheld shall be personally liable for the amount withheld and
not remitted. Such personal liability extends to any penalty and interest
imposed for the late filing of a return or the late payment of tax deducted and
withheld.
      (5)   If a casino operator sells the casino facility or otherwise quits
the casino business, the amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties
and interest thereon are immediately due and payable. The successor shall
withhold an amount of the purchase money that is sufficient to cover the
amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties and interest thereon
until the predecessor casino operator produces either of the following:
         (a)   A receipt from the Tax Administrator showing that the amounts
deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon have been paid; and
         (b)   A certificate from the Tax Administrator indicating that no
amounts are due. If the successor fails to withhold purchase money, the
successor is personally liable for the payment of the amounts deducted and
withheld and penalties and interest thereon.
      (6)   The failure of a casino operator to deduct and withhold the
required amount from a person’s winnings does not relieve that person from
liability for the municipal income tax with respect to those winnings.
   (D)   If a person’s prize award from a video lottery terminal is an amount
for which reporting to the Internal Revenue Service is required by § 6041 of
the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, the video lottery sales agent shall
deduct and withhold municipal income tax from the person’s prize award at the
rate of the tax imposed by the municipal corporation in which the video lottery
terminal facility is located.
   (E)   Amounts deducted and withheld by a video lottery sales agent are held
in trust for the benefit of the municipal corporation to which the tax is owed.
      (1)   The video lottery sales agent shall issue to a person from whose
prize award an amount has been deducted and withheld a receipt for the amount
deducted and withheld, and shall obtain from the person receiving a prize award
the person’s name, address and Social Security number in order to facilitate
the preparation of returns required by this section.
      (2)   On or before the tenth day of each month, the video lottery sales
agent shall file a return electronically with the Tax Administrator of the
municipality; providing the names, addresses and Social Security numbers of the
persons from whose prize awards amounts were deducted and withheld, the amount
of each such deduction and withholding during the preceding calendar month, the
amount of the prize award from which each such amount was withheld, and any
other information required by the Tax Administrator. With the return, the video
lottery sales agent shall remit electronically to the Tax Administrator all
amounts deducted and withheld during the preceding month.
      (3)   A video lottery sales agent shall maintain a record of all receipts
issued under division (E) of this section and shall make those records
available to the Tax Administrator upon request. Such records shall be
maintained in accordance with R.C. § 5747.17 and any rules adopted pursuant
thereto.
      (4)   Annually, on or before January 31, each video lottery terminal
sales agent shall file an annual return electronically with the Tax
Administrator of the municipal corporation in which the facility is located
indicating the total amount deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar
year. The video lottery sales agent shall remit electronically with the annual
return any amount that was deducted and withheld and that was not previously
remitted. If the name, address or Social Security number of a person or the
amount deducted and withheld with respect to that person was omitted on a
monthly return for that reporting period, that information shall be indicated
on the annual return.
      (5)   Annually, on or before January 31, a video lottery sales agent
shall issue an information return to each person with respect to whom an amount
has been deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar year. The
information return shall show the total amount of municipal income tax deducted
and withheld from the person’s prize award by the video lottery sales agent
during the preceding year. A video lottery sales agent shall provide to the Tax
Administrator of the municipal corporation a copy of each information return
issued under this division. The Tax Administrator may require that such copies
be transmitted electronically.
      (6)   A video lottery sales agent who fails to file a return and remit
the amounts deducted and withheld is personally liable for the amount deducted
and withheld and not remitted. Such personal liability extends to any penalty
and interest imposed for the late filing of a return or the late payment of tax
deducted and withheld.
   (F)   If a video lottery sales agent ceases to operate video lottery
terminals, the amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties and
interest thereon are immediately due and payable. The successor of the video
lottery sales agent that purchases the video lottery terminals from the agent
shall withhold an amount from the purchase money that is sufficient to cover
the amounts deducted and withheld, and any penalties and interest thereon until
the predecessor video lottery sales agent operator produces either of the
following:
      (1)   A receipt from the Tax Administrator showing that the amounts
deducted and withheld, and penalties and interest thereon have been paid; and
      (2)   A certificate from the Tax Administrator indicating that no amounts
are due. If the successor fails to withhold purchase money, the successor is
personally liable for the payment of the amounts deducted and withheld, and
penalties and interest thereon.
   (G)   The failure of a video lottery sales agent to deduct and withhold the
required amount from a person’s prize award does not relieve that person from
liability for the municipal income tax with respect to that prize award.
   (H)   If a casino operator or lottery sales agent files a return late, fails
to file a return, remits amounts deducted and withheld late, or fails to remit
amounts deducted and withheld as required under this section, the Tax
Administrator of a municipal corporation may impose the following applicable
penalty:
      (1)   For the late remittance of, or failure to remit, tax deducted and
withheld under this section, a penalty equal to 50% of the tax deducted and
withheld; and
      (2)   For the failure to file, or the late filing of, a monthly or annual
return, a penalty of $500 for each return not filed or filed late. Interest
shall accrue on past due amounts deducted and withheld at the rate prescribed
in R.C. § 5703.47.
   (I)   Amounts deducted and withheld on behalf of a municipal corporation
shall be allowed as a credit against payment of the tax imposed by the
municipal corporation and shall be treated as taxes paid for purposes of §
37.075. This division applies only to the person for whom the amount is
deducted and withheld.
   (J)   The Tax Administrator shall prescribe the forms of the receipts and
returns required under this section.
(Prior Code, § 880B.053) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
INCOME SUBJECT TO NET PROFIT TAX
§ 37.060 DETERMINING MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME FOR TAXPAYERS WHO ARE NOT
INDIVIDUALS.
   (A)   Municipal taxable income for a taxpayer who is not an individual for
the municipality is calculated as follows.
   (B)   Income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in
income, multiplied by apportionment, further reduced by any pre-2017 net
operating loss carry-forward equals municipal taxable income.
      (1)   APPORTIONMENT. The apportionment as determined by §
37.061.
      (2)   EXEMPT INCOME. Defined in §
37.016.
      (3)   INCOME for a taxpayer that is not an individual means the NET
PROFIT of the taxpayer.
         (a)   NET PROFIT for a person other than an individual is defined in §
37.016.
         (b)   ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME is defined in §
37.016.
      (4)   PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRY-FORWARD. Defined in §
37.016.
(Prior Code, § 880B.061) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.061 NET PROFIT; INCOME SUBJECT TO NET PROFIT TAX; ALTERNATIVE
APPORTIONMENT.
   This section applies to any taxpayer engaged in a business or profession in
the municipality, unless the taxpayer is an individual who resides in the
municipality or the taxpayer is an electric company, combined company or
telephone company that is subject to and required to file reports under R.C.
Ch. 5745.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) and (I) of this section,
net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and without the
boundaries of the municipality shall be considered as having a taxable situs in
the municipality for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same
proportion as the average ratio of the following.
      (1)   (a)   The average original cost of the real property and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
in the municipality during the taxable period to the average original cost of
all of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in
the business or profession during the same period, wherever situated.
         (b)   As used in the preceding subsection, tangible personal or real
property shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value
of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon
by eight.
      (2)   Wages, salaries and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services
performed in the municipality to wages, salaries and other compensation paid
during the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession,
wherever the individual’s services are performed, excluding compensation from
which taxes are not required to be withheld under §
37.047; and
      (3)   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales and
rentals made, and services performed during the taxable period in the
municipality to total gross receipts of the business or profession during the
same period from sales, rentals and services, wherever made or performed.
   (B)   (1)   If the apportionment factors described in division (A) of this
section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer’s business activity in
the municipality, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Administrator of the
municipality may require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any
portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method
involving one or more of the following:
         (a)   Separate accounting;
         (b)   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;
         (c)   The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would
provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the
municipality; and
         (d)   A modification of one or more of the factors.
      (2)   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method shall
be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an
assessment or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the
requested alternative method, unless the Tax Administrator denies the request
in an assessment issued within the period prescribed by §
37.161(A).
      (3)   A Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer to use an alternative
apportionment method as described in division (B)(1) of this section only by
issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period prescribed by §
37.161(A).
      (4)   Nothing in division (B) of this section nullifies or otherwise
affects any alternative apportionment arrangement approved by a Tax
Administrator or otherwise agreed upon by both the Tax Administrator and
taxpayer before January 1, 2016.
   (C)   As used in division (A)(2) of this section, wages, salaries and other
compensation includes only wages, salaries or other compensation paid to an
employee for services performed at any of the following locations:
      (1)   A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented to, or
under the possession of one of the following:
         (a)   The employer;
         (b)   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the employer, or a
related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient; or
         (c)   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person described in
division (C)(1)(b) of this section, or a related member of such a vendor,
customer, client, or patient.
      (2)   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation,
inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative, judicial, or
legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted; provided that the
compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer
or that the employee’s presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits
the employer; or
      (3)   Any other location, if the Tax Administrator determines that the
employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in
lieu of a location described in division (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section
solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer’s municipal income tax
liability. If a Tax Administrator makes such a determination, the employer may
dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence,
that the Tax Administrator’s determination was unreasonable.
   (D)   For the purposes of division (A)(3) of this section, and except as
provided in division (I) of this section, receipts from sales and rentals made
and services performed shall be sitused to a municipal corporation as follows.
      (1)   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall be
sitused to the municipal corporation only if, regardless of where title passes,
the property meets either of the following criteria:
         (a)   The property is shipped to or delivered within the municipal
corporation from a stock of goods located within the municipal corporation; or
         (b)   The property is delivered within the municipal corporation from
a location outside the municipal corporation; provided the taxpayer is
regularly engaged through its own employees in the solicitation or promotion of
sales within such municipal corporation and the sales result from such
solicitation or promotion.
      (2)   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation to the extent that such services are performed in the
municipal corporation.
      (3)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale of
real property located in the municipal corporation shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation.
      (4)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and
royalties from real property located in the municipal corporation shall be
sitused to the municipal corporation.
      (5)   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal
property shall be sitused to the municipal corporation based upon the extent to
which the tangible personal property is used in the municipal corporation.
   (E)   (1)   The net profit received by an individual taxpayer from the
rental of real estate owned directly by the individual or by a disregarded
entity owned by the individual shall be subject to tax only by the municipal
corporation in which the property generating the net profit is located and the
municipal corporation in which the individual taxpayer that receives the net
profit resides.
      (2)   A municipal corporation shall allow such taxpayers to elect to use
separate accounting for the purpose of calculating net profit sitused under
this division to the municipal corporation in which the property is located.
   (F)   (1)   Except as provided in division (F)(2) of this section,
commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating to the sale,
purchase or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the municipal corporation
in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported by the real estate
agent or broker shall be allocated to a municipal corporation based upon the
ratio of the commissions the agent or broker received from the sale, purchase,
or lease of real estate located in the municipal corporation to the commissions
received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate everywhere in the
taxable year.
      (2)   An individual who is a resident of a municipal corporation that
imposes a municipal income tax shall report the individual’s net profit from
all real estate activity on the individual’s annual tax return for that
municipal corporation. The individual may claim a credit for taxes the
individual paid on such net profit to another municipal corporation to the
extent that such credit is allowed under §
37.090.
   (G)   (1)   If, in computing a taxpayer’s adjusted federal taxable income,
the taxpayer deducted any amount with respect to a stock option granted to an
employee, and if the employee is not required to include in the employee’s
income any such amount or a portion thereof because it is exempted from
taxation under §
37.016, by a municipal corporation to which the taxpayer has apportioned a
portion of its net profit, the taxpayer shall add the amount that is exempt
from taxation to the taxpayer’s net profit that was apportioned to that
municipal corporation. In no case shall a taxpayer be required to add to its
net profit that was apportioned to that municipal corporation any amount other
than the amount upon which the employee would be required to pay tax were the
amount related to the stock option not exempted from taxation.
      (2)   This division applies solely for the purpose of making an
adjustment to the amount of a taxpayer’s net profit that was apportioned to a
municipal corporation under this section.
   (H)   When calculating the ratios described in division (A) of this section
for the purposes of that division or division (B) of this section, the owner of
a disregarded entity shall include in the owner’s ratios the property, payroll
and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.
   (I)   As used in this division:
      (1)   QUALIFYING REMOTE EMPLOYEE OR OWNER means an individual who is an
employee of a taxpayer or who is a partner or member holding an ownership
interest in a taxpayer that is treated as a partnership for federal income tax
purposes, provided that the individual meets both of the following criteria:
         (a)   The taxpayer has assigned the individual to a qualifying
reporting location.
         (b)   The individual is permitted or required to perform services for
the taxpayer at a qualifying remote work location.
      (2)   QUALIFYING REMOTE WORK LOCATION means a permanent or temporary
location at which an employee or owner chooses or is required to perform
services for the taxpayer, other than a reporting location of the taxpayer or
any other location owned or controlled by a customer or client of the taxpayer.
QUALIFYING REMOTE WORK LOCATION may include the residence of an employee or
owner and may be located outside of a municipal corporation that imposes an
income tax in accordance with this chapter. An employee or owner may have more
than one qualifying remote work location during a taxable year.
      (3)   REPORTING LOCATION means either of the following:
         (a)   A permanent or temporary place of doing business, such as an
office, warehouse, storefront, construction site, or similar location, that is
owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the taxpayer;
         (b)   Any location in this state owned or controlled by a customer or
client of the taxpayer, provided that the taxpayer is required to withhold
taxes under §
37.046, on qualifying wages paid to an employee for the performance of personal
services at that location.
      (4)   QUALIFYING REPORTING LOCATION means one of the following:
         (a)   The reporting location in this state at which an employee or
owner performs services for the taxpayer on a regular or periodic basis during
the taxable year;
         (b)   If no reporting location exists in this state for an employee or
owner under the above division of this section, the reporting location in this
state at which the employee's or owner's supervisor regularly or periodically
reports during the taxable year;
         (c)   If no reporting location exists in this state for an employee or
owner under the above division of this section, the location that the taxpayer
otherwise assigns as the employee's or owner's qualifying reporting location,
provided the assignment is made in good faith and is recorded and maintained in
the taxpayer's business records. A taxpayer may change the qualifying reporting
location designated for an employee or owner under this division at any time.
   (J)   (l)   For tax years ending on or after December 31, 2023, a taxpayer
may elect to apply the provisions of this division to the apportionment of its
net profit from a business or profession. For taxpayers that make this
election, the provisions of this section apply to such apportionment except as
otherwise provided in this division.
      (2)   A taxpayer shall make the election allowed under this division in
writing on or with the taxpayer's net profit return or, if applicable, a timely
filed amended net profit return or a timely filed appeal of an assessment. The
election applies to the taxable year for which that return or appeal is filed
and for all subsequent taxable years, until the taxpayer revokes the election.
      (3)   The taxpayer shall make the initial election with the tax
administrator of each municipal corporation with which, after applying the
apportionment provisions authotized in this division, the taxpayer is required
to file a net profit tax return for that taxable year. A taxpayer shall not be
required to notify the tax administrator of a municipal corporation in which a
qualifying remote employee's or owner's qualifying remote work location is
located, unless the taxpayer is otherwise required to file a net profit return
with that municipal corporation due to business operations that are unrelated
to the employee's or owner's activity at the qualifying remote work location.
      (4)   After the taxpayer makes the initial election, the election applies
to every municipal corporation in which the taxpayer conducts business. The
taxpayer shall not be required to file a net profit return with a municipal
corporation solely because a qualifying remote employee's or owner's qualifying
remote work location is located in such municipal corporation.
      (5)   Nothing in this division prohibits a taxpayer from making a new
election under this division after properly revoking a prior election.
   (K)   For the purpose of calculating the ratios described in division (A) of
this section, all of the following apply to a taxpayer that has made the
election described in division (I) of this section:
      (1)   For the purpose of division (A)(1) of this section, the average
original cost of any tangible personal property used by a qualifying remote
employee or owner at that individual's qualifying remote work location shall be
sitused to that individual's qualifying reporting location.
      (2)   For the purpose of division (A)(2) of this section, any wages,
salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable period to a qualifying
remote employee or owner for services performed at that individual's qualifying
remote work location shall be sitused to that individual's qualifying reporting
location.
      (3)   For the purpose of division (A)(3) of this section, and
notwithstanding division (D) of this section, any gross receipts of the
business or profession from services performed during the taxable period by a
qualifying remote employee or owner for services performed at that individual's
qualifying remote work location shall be sitused to that individual's
qualifying reporting location.
   (L)   Nothing in this division prevents a taxpayer from requesting, or a tax
administrator from requiring, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or a
portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method as
described in division (B) of this section. However, a tax administrator shall
not require an alternative apportionment method in such a manner that it would
require a taxpayer to file a net profit return with a municipal corporation
solely because a qualifying remote employee's or owner's qualifying remote work
location is located in that municipal corporation.
   (M)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, nothing in this section
is intended to affect the withholding of taxes on qualifying wages pursuant to
§
37.046.
(Prior Code, § 880B.062) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015; Ord. 2018-04, passed
3-13-2018; Ord. 2023- 13, passed 12-12-2023)
§ 37.062 CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AFFILIATED GROUP OF CORPORATIONS. An affiliated group as defined in §
1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a group includes at
least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily engaged in the
business of providing local exchange telephone service in this state, the
affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange carrier that
would otherwise be included in the group.
      CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN. A consolidated return filed for
federal income tax purposes pursuant to § 1501 of the Internal Revenue Code.
      CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME. The consolidated taxable income of
an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the purposes of filing a
consolidated federal income tax return, before consideration of net operating
losses or special deductions. CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME does not
include income or loss of an incumbent local exchange carrier that is excluded
from the affiliated group under this division.
      INCUMBENT LOCAL EXCHANGE CARRIER. The same meaning as in R.C. § 4927.01.
      LOCAL EXCHANGE TELEPHONE SERVICE. The same meaning as in R.C. § 5727.01.
   (B)   (1)   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016, a
taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may elect to
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year if at least
one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to the municipal
income tax in that taxable year and if the affiliated group of corporations
filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to that taxable
year:
         (a)   The election is binding for a five-year period beginning with
the first taxable year of the initial election, unless a change in the
reporting method is required under federal law;
         (b)   The election continues to be binding for each subsequent five-
year period, unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing consolidated
municipal income tax returns under division (B)(2) of this section; or
         (c)   A taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Administrator. The
Tax Administrator shall approve such a request for good cause shown.
      (2)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated municipal income tax
returns under this section must be made in the first year following the last
year of a five-year consolidated municipal income tax return election period in
effect under division (B)(1) of this section. The election to discontinue
filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is binding for a five-year
period beginning with the first taxable year of the election.
      (3)   An election made under division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section is
binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a
municipal income tax.
      (4)   When a taxpayer makes the election allowed under R.C. § 718.80, a
valid election made by the taxpayer under division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this
section is binding upon the Tax Commissioner for the remainder of the five-year
period.
      (5)   When an election made under R.C. § 718.80 is terminated, a valid
election made under R.C. § 718.86 is binding upon the Tax Administrator for the
remainder of the five-year period.
   (C)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for that taxable year if the
Tax Administrator determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that
intercompany transactions have not been conducted at arm’s length and that
there has been a distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to
allocation of net profits to the municipal corporation. A taxpayer that is
required to file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year
shall file a consolidated municipal income tax return for all subsequent
taxable years, unless the taxpayer requests and receives written permission
from the Tax Administrator to file a separate return or a taxpayer has
experienced a change in circumstances.
   (D)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated municipal income tax return in
the same manner as is required under the United States Department of Treasury
regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated
federal income tax return required to be filed by the common parent of the
affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.
   (E)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (E)(2), (E)(3) and (E)
(4) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated municipal income tax
return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in §
37.016, by substituting consolidated federal taxable income for federal taxable
income wherever federal taxable income appears in that division, and by
substituting an affiliated group of corporations for a C corporation wherever a
C corporation appears in that division.
      (2)   No corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return
shall make any adjustment otherwise required under §
37.016 to the extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise subject to
the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the computation of
consolidated federal taxable income.
      (3)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at least
80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the
corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return shall do one of
the following with respect to that pass-through entity’s net profit or loss for
that taxable year:
         (a)   Exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in §
37.061, exclude the property, payroll and gross receipts of the pass-through
entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused to a
municipal corporation. If the entity’s net profit or loss is so excluded, the
entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the
entity’s net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group; or
         (b)   Include the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in §
37.061, include the property, payroll and gross receipts of the pass-through
entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused to a
municipal corporation. If the entity’s net profit or loss is so included, the
entity shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of
the entity’s net profits that are included in the consolidated federal taxable
income of the affiliated group.
      (4)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less than
80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, all
of the following shall apply:
         (a)   The corporation filing the consolidated municipal income tax
return shall exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purposes of making the computations required in §
37.061, exclude the property, payroll and gross receipts of the pass-through
entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused to a
municipal corporation; and
         (b)   The pass-through entity shall be subject to municipal income
taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with this chapter on the basis of
the entity’s net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
   (F)   Corporations filing a consolidated municipal income tax return shall
make the computations required under §
37.061 by substituting consolidated federal taxable income attributable to for
net profit from wherever net profit from appears in that section, and by
substituting affiliated group of corporations for taxpayer wherever taxpayer
appears in that section.
   (G)   Each corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is
jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges
or other amounts imposed by a municipal corporation in accordance with this
chapter on the corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a
member for any portion of the taxable year, or any one or more members of such
an affiliated group.
   (H)   Corporations and their affiliates that made an election or entered
into an agreement with a municipal corporation before January 1, 2016, to file
a consolidated or combined tax return with such municipal corporation may
continue to file consolidated or combined tax returns in accordance with such
election or agreement for taxable years beginning on and after January 1, 2016.
(Prior Code, § 880B.063) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015; Ord. 2018-04, passed
3-13-2018)
§ 37.063 TAX CREDIT FOR BUSINESSES THAT FOSTER NEW JOBS IN THE STATE.
   The municipality, by ordinance, may grant a refundable or nonrefundable
credit against its tax on income to a taxpayer to foster job creation in the
municipality. If a credit is granted under this section, it shall be measured
as a percentage of the new income tax revenue the municipality derives from new
employees of the taxpayer and shall be for a term not exceeding 15 years.
Before the municipality passes an ordinance granting a credit, the municipality
and the taxpayer shall enter into an agreement specifying all the conditions of
the credit.
(Prior Code, § 880B.064) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.064 TAX CREDITS TO FOSTER JOB RETENTION.
   The municipality, by ordinance, may grant a refundable or nonrefundable
credit against its tax on income to a taxpayer for the purpose of fostering job
retention in the municipality. If a credit is granted under this section, it
shall be measured as a percentage of the income tax revenue the municipality
derives from the retained employees of the taxpayer, and shall be for a term
not exceeding 15 years. Before the municipality passes an ordinance allowing
such a credit, the municipality and the taxpayer shall enter into an agreement
specifying all the conditions of the credit.
(Prior Code, § 880B.065) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAX
§ 37.075 DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAX.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ESTIMATED TAXES. The amount that the taxpayer reasonably estimates to be
the taxpayer’s tax liability for a municipal corporation’s income tax for the
current taxable year.
      TAX LIABILITY. The total taxes due to a municipal corporation for the
taxable year, after allowing any credit to which the taxpayer is entitled, and
after applying any estimated tax payment, withholding payment, or credit from
another taxable year.
   (B)   (1)   Every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for
the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Administrator, if
the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least $200. For the purposes of
this section, the following apply.
         (a)   Taxes withheld from qualifying wages shall be considered as paid
to the municipal corporation for which the taxes were withheld in equal amounts
on each payment date. If the taxpayer establishes the dates on which all
amounts were actually withheld, the amounts withheld shall be considered as
paid on the dates on which the amounts were actually withheld.
         (b)   An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a subsequent
taxable year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark stamped on the
cover in which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is made by electronic
funds transfer, on the date of the timestamp assigned by the first electronic
system receiving that payment. For purposes of this section, receiving that
payment refers to the transfer of funds from the account of the taxpayer. Such
funds are considered transferred and no longer under the control of the
taxpayer once the timestamp has occurred. As used in this division, DATE OF THE
POSTMARK means, in the event there is more than one date on the cover, the
earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service.
         (c)   A taxpayer having a taxable year of less than 12 months shall
make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
         (d)   Taxes withheld by a casino operator or by a lottery sales agent
under R.C. § 718.031 are deemed to be paid to the municipal corporation for
which the taxes were withheld on the date the taxes are withheld from the
taxpayer’s winnings.
      (2)   Taxpayers filing joint returns shall file joint declarations of
estimated taxes.
      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the
date prescribed for the filing of municipal income tax returns under §
37.105(G) or on or before April 15 of the first taxable year after the taxpayer
becomes subject to tax for the first time.
      (4)   Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a declaration
on or before April 15 after the beginning of each fiscal year or period.
      (5)   The original declaration or any subsequent amendment may be
increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day as
provided in this section.
   (C)   (1)   The required portion of the tax liability for the taxable year
that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to the municipality or
Tax Administrator, including the application of tax refunds to estimated taxes
and withholding on or before the applicable payment date, shall be as follows:
         (a)   On or before April 15 after the beginning of the taxable year,
22.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         (b)   On or before June 15 after the beginning of the taxable year,
45% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         (c)   On or before September 15 after the beginning of the taxable
year, 67.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year; and
         (d)   For an individual, on or before January 15 of the following
taxable year, 90% of the tax liability for the taxable year. For a person other
than an individual, on or before December 15 of the taxable year, 90% of the
tax liability for the taxable year.
      (2)   A taxpayer may amend a declaration under rules prescribed by the
Tax Administrator. When an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid
balance shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid in equal
installments on or before the remaining payment dates. The amended declaration
must be filed on the next applicable due date as outlined in division (C)(1)(a)
through (C)(1)(d) above.
      (3)   On or before April 15 of the year following that for which the
declaration or amended declaration was filed, an annual return shall be filed
and any balance which may be due shall be paid with the return in accordance
with §
37.105.
         (a)   For taxpayers who are individuals, or who are not individuals
and are reporting and filing on a calendar year basis, the annual tax return is
due on the same date as the filing of the federal tax return, unless extended
pursuant to R.C. § 5747.08(G).
         (b)   For taxpayers who are not individuals and are reporting and
filing on a fiscal year basis or any period other than a calendar year, the
annual return is due on April 15 following the end of the taxable year or
period.
      (4)   An amended declaration is required whenever the taxpayer’s
estimated tax liability changes during the taxable year. A change in estimated
tax liability may either increase or decrease the estimated tax liability for
the taxable year.
   (D)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of any portion of a tax
liability, penalty and interest may be imposed pursuant to §
37.125 upon the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment, unless
the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in division (E) of
this section. The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, 22.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         (b)   For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, 45% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         (c)   For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, 67.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment; and
         (d)   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, 90% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment.
      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated
payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For
purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment
date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the
extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment
presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty.
   (E)   An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined under
division (D) of this section shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty
imposed by this section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if
any of the following apply:
      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 90% of
the tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by annualizing the
income received during the year up to the end of the month immediately
preceding the month in which the payment is due;
      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 100%
of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the preceding
taxable year; provided that the immediately preceding taxable year reflected a
period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a return with the municipal
corporation under §
37.105 for that year; or
      (3)   The taxpayer is an individual who resides in the municipality but
was not domiciled there on January 1 of the calendar year that includes the
first day of the taxable year.
   (F)    A Tax Administrator may waive the requirement for filing a
declaration of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after finding that
the waiver is reasonable and proper in view of administrative costs and other
factors.
(Prior Code, § 880B.07) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015; Ord. 2016-15, passed
12-13-2016; Ord. 2017-28, passed 12-12-2017)
CREDIT FOR TAX PAID
§ 37.090 CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO ANOTHER MUNICIPALITY.
   (A)   Where a resident of the municipality is subject to a municipal income
tax in another municipality or an income tax in a joint economic development
district, he or she shall not pay a total combined municipal income tax in a
joint economic development district income tax on the same income greater than
the municipal income tax or the joint economic development district income tax
imposed at the higher rate.
   (B)   Every individual taxpayer who is a resident of the municipality and
received net profits, salaries, wages, commissions, or other personal service
compensation for work done or services performed or rendered outside of the
municipality, if it is shown that he or she has paid municipal or joint
economic development district income tax on the same income taxable under this
chapter, shall receive a credit of the amount so paid by him or her, or on his
or her behalf, to such other municipality or joint economic development
district. The credit shall not exceed the tax assessed by this chapter on such
income earned or paid in such other municipality or municipalities or joint
economic development district or districts where such tax is paid.
(Prior Code, § 880B.081) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.091 REFUNDABLE CREDIT FOR QUALIFYING LOSS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      NONQUALIFIED DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN. A compensation plan described in
§ 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      QUALIFYING LOSS.
         (a)   Except as provided subsection (b) below, the excess, if any, of
the total amount of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a
nonqualified deferred compensation plan over the total amount of income the
taxpayer has recognized for federal income tax purposes for all taxable years
on a cumulative basis as compensation with respect to the taxpayer’s receipt of
money and property attributable to distributions in connection with the
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         (b)   If, for one or more taxable years, the taxpayer has not paid to
one or more municipal corporations income tax imposed on the entire amount of
compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified
deferred compensation plan, then the QUALIFYING LOSS is the product of the
amount resulting from the calculation described in this subsection computed
without regard to this subsection and a fraction the numerator of which is the
portion of such compensation on which the taxpayer has paid income tax to one
or more municipal corporations, and the denominator of which is the total
amount of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         (c)   With respect to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan, the
taxpayer sustains a qualifying loss only in the taxable year in which the
taxpayer receives the final distribution of money and property pursuant to that
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
      QUALIFYING TAX RATE. The applicable tax rate for the taxable year for the
which the taxpayer paid income tax to a municipal corporation with respect to
any portion of the total amount of compensation the payment of which is
deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan. If different
tax rates applied for different taxable years, then the QUALIFYING TAX RATE is
a weighted average of those different tax rates. The weighted average shall be
based upon the tax paid to the municipal corporation each year with respect to
the nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section, a refundable
credit shall be allowed against the income tax imposed by a municipal
corporation for each qualifying loss sustained by a taxpayer during the taxable
year. The amount of the credit shall be equal to the product of the qualifying
loss and the qualifying tax rate.
      (2)   A taxpayer shall claim the credit allowed under this section from
each municipal corporation to which the taxpayer paid municipal income tax with
respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan in one or more taxable
years.
      (3)   If a taxpayer has paid tax to more than one municipal corporation
with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan, the amount of the
credit that a taxpayer may claim from each municipal corporation shall be
calculated on the basis of each municipal corporation’s proportionate share of
the total municipal corporation income tax paid by the taxpayer to all
municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation
plan.
      (4)   In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed under this
section exceed the cumulative income tax that a taxpayer has paid to a
municipal corporation for all taxable years with respect to the nonqualified
deferred compensation plan.
   (C)   (1)   For purposes of this section, municipal corporation income tax
that has been withheld with respect to a nonqualified deferred compensation
plan shall be considered to have been paid by the taxpayer with respect to the
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
      (2)   Any municipal income tax that has been refunded or otherwise
credited for the benefit of the taxpayer with respect to a nonqualified
deferred compensation plan shall not be considered to have been paid to the
municipal corporation by the taxpayer.
   (D)   The credit allowed under this section is allowed only to the extent
the taxpayer’s qualifying loss is attributable to:
      (1)   The insolvency or bankruptcy of the employer who had established
the nonqualified deferred compensation plan; or
      (2)   The employee’s failure or inability to satisfy all of the
employer’s terms and conditions necessary to receive the nonqualified deferred
compensation.
(Prior Code, § 880B.082) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.092 CREDIT FOR PERSON WORKING IN JOINT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
   A municipality shall grant a credit against its tax on income to a resident
of the municipality who works in a joint economic development zone created
under R.C. § 715.691, or a joint economic development district created under
R.C. §§ 715.70, 715.71 or 715.72 to the same extent that it grants a credit
against its tax on income to its residents who are employed in another
municipal corporation, pursuant to §
37.090.
(Prior Code, § 880B.083) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.093 CREDIT FOR TAX BEYOND STATUTE FOR OBTAINING REFUND.
   (A)   Income tax that has been deposited or paid to the municipality, but
should have been deposited or paid to another municipal corporation, is
allowable by the municipality as a refund, but is subject to the three-year
limitation on refunds as provided in § 35.110.
   (B)   Income tax that should have been deposited or paid to the
municipality, but was deposited or paid to another municipal corporation, shall
be subject to collection and recovery by the municipality. To the extent a
refund of such tax or withholding is barred by the limitation on refunds as
provided in §
37.110, the municipality will allow a nonrefundable credit equal to the tax or
withholding paid to the other municipality against the income tax the
municipality claims is due. If the municipality’s tax rate is higher, the tax
representing the net difference of the tax rates is also subject to collection
by the municipality, along with any penalty and interest accruing during the
period of nonpayment.
   (C)   No carry-forward of credit will be permitted when the overpayment is
beyond the three-year limitation for refunding of same as provided in §
37.110 of this chapter.
   (D)   Nothing in this section requires a municipality to allow credit for
tax paid to another municipal corporation if the municipality has reduced
credit for tax paid to another municipal corporation. Section 37.090 regarding
any limitation on credit shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 880B.084) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.094 TAX CREDIT FOR RESIDENTS WHO ARE FULL-TIME STUDENTS IN A POST-
SECONDARY EDUCATION PROGRAM AND WHO ALSO OWE MUNICIPAL INCOME TAX.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      FULL-TIME ENROLLMENT. The period established by the qualifying post-
secondary institution as full-time status for students in attendance.
      QUALIFYING POST-SECONDARY INSTITUTION. A college, university, technical
school, vocational school or training program whose students are eligible to
receive grants and loans through programs established by the United States
Department of Education.
   (B)   Tax credit. A tax credit not to exceed $300 per year is created for
residents of the city who work in the city or owe municipal income tax to the
city and are enrolled full-time at least nine calendar months of the year in
which the credit is requested at a qualifying post-secondary institution.
Students shall also be eligible to receive the credit if they are enrolled at
least four calendar months of the year and continue enrollment as a full-time
student the following calendar year. This tax credit shall be calculated by
taking 2% of the first $15,000 of the taxable income. Residents applying for
the tax credit shall be required to complete and sign a disclosure and
authorization form that may be obtained from the municipality’s Income Tax
Division. No person shall receive this tax credit for more than five years. No
person shall receive this tax credit if their college tuition is reduced by
employer tuition reimbursements or employer tuition assistance programs.
Further, residents applying for the tax credit shall be required to disclose
any such employer tuition reimbursements received that reduce their tuition
costs as full-time students.
(Prior Code, § 880B.085) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
ANNUAL RETURN
§ 37.105 RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX.
   (A)   (1)   An annual return with respect to the income tax levied on
municipal taxable income by the municipality shall be completed and filed by
every taxpayer for any taxable year for which the taxpayer is subject to the
tax, regardless of whether or not income tax is due.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator shall accept on behalf of all nonresident
individual taxpayers a return filed by an employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer located in the municipality under §
37.046(C) when the nonresident individual taxpayer’s sole income subject to the
tax is the qualifying wages reported by the employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer, and no additional tax is due to the municipality.
      (3)   All resident individual taxpayers, 18 years of age and older, shall
file an annual municipal income tax return with the municipality, regardless of
income or liability.
   (B)   If an individual is deceased, any return or notice required of that
individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent’s executor,
administrator or other person charged with the property of that decedent.
   (C)   If an individual is unable to complete and file a return or notice
required by the municipality in accordance with this chapter, the return or
notice required of that individual shall be completed and filed by the
individual’s duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary or other
person charged with the care of the person or property of that individual. Such
duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or other person
charged with the care of the person or property of that individual shall
provide, with the filing of the return, appropriate documentation to support
that they are authorized to file a return or notice on behalf of the taxpayer.
This notice shall include any legally binding authorizations, and contact
information including name, address, and phone number of the duly authorized
agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary or other person.
   (D)   Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust shall be completed
and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust. Such fiduciary shall
provide, with the filing of the return, appropriate documentation to support
that they are authorized to file a return or notice on behalf of the taxpayer.
This notice shall include any legally binding authorizations, and contact
information including name, address and phone number of the fiduciary.
   (E)   No municipal corporation shall deny spouses the ability to file a
joint return.
   (F)   (1)   Each return required to be filed under this section shall
contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s duly authorized agent
and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer, and shall include
the taxpayer’s Social Security number or taxpayer identification number. Each
return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of perjury.
      (2)   A taxpayer who is an individual is required to include, with each
annual return, amended return, or request for refund required under this
section, copies of only the following documents: all of the taxpayer’s Internal
Revenue Service Form W-2, “Wage and Tax Statements,” including all information
reported on the taxpayer’s federal W-2, as well as taxable wages reported or
withheld for any municipal corporation; the taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service
Form 1040; and, with respect to an amended tax return or refund request, any
other documentation necessary to support the refund request or the adjustments
made in the amended return. An individual taxpayer who files the annual return
required by this section electronically is not required to provide paper copies
of any of the foregoing to the Tax Administrator unless the Tax Administrator
requests such copies after the return has been filed.
      (3)   A taxpayer that is not an individual is required to include, with
each annual net profit return, amended net profit return, or request for refund
required under this section, copies of only the following documents: the
taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service Form 1041, Form 1065, Form 1120, Form 1120-
REIT, Form 1120F or Form 1120S, and, with respect to an amended tax return or
refund request, any other documentation necessary to support the refund request
or the adjustments made in the amended return.
      (4)   A taxpayer that is not an individual and that files an annual net
profit return electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or in some other
manner shall either mail the documents required under this division to the Tax
Administrator at the time of filing or, if electronic submission is available,
submit the documents electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or a
portal provided by municipality. The Department of Taxation shall publish a
method of electronically submitting the documents required under this division
through the Ohio Business Gateway on or before January 1, 2016. The Department
shall transmit all documents submitted electronically under this division to
the appropriate Tax Administrator.
      (5)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Administrator shall
request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements, or
documents required by the municipality to determine and verify the taxpayer’s
municipal income tax liability. The requirements imposed under division (F) of
this section apply regardless of whether the taxpayer files on a generic form
or on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
      (6)   Any other documentation, including schedules, other municipal
income tax returns, or other supporting documentation necessary to verify
credits, income, losses, or other pertinent factors on the return shall also be
included to avoid delay in processing, or disallowance by the Tax Administrator
of undocumented credits or losses.
   (G)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each
individual income tax return required to be filed under this section shall be
completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator on or before the date
prescribed for the filing of state individual income tax returns under R.C. §
5747.08(G). The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on forms
prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms, together with
remittance made payable to the municipality or Tax Administrator. A municipal
corporation shall not require a qualifying employee whose income consists
exclusively of exempt income described in §
37.016 to file a return under this section.
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each annual net
profit income tax return required to be filed under this section by a taxpayer
that is not an individual shall be completed and filed as required by the Tax
Administrator on or before April 15 following the end of the taxpayer’s taxable
year or period. The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on
forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms, together with
remittance made payable to the municipality or Tax Administrator.
         (c)   In the case of individual income tax return required to be filed
by an individual, and net profit income tax return required to be filed by a
taxpayer who is not an individual, no remittance is required if the amount
shown to be due is $10 or less.
      (2)   If the Tax Administrator considers it necessary in order to ensure
the payment of the tax imposed by the municipality in accordance with this
chapter, the Tax Administrator may require taxpayers to file returns and make
payments otherwise than as provided in this section, including taxpayers not
otherwise required to file annual returns.
      (3)   With respect to taxpayers to whom §
37.106 applies, to the extent that any provision in this division conflicts
with any provision in §
37.106, the provision in §
37.106 prevails.
   (H)   (1)   For taxable years beginning after 2015, the municipality shall
not require a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net profits if the amount
due is $10 or less.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (H)(3) of this section, any taxpayer
not required to remit tax to the municipality for a taxable year pursuant to
division (H)(1) of this section shall file with the municipality an annual net
profit return under divisions (F)(3) and (F)(4) of this section.
      (3)   A municipal corporation shall not require a person to file a net
profit return under this section if the person’s income consists exclusively of
exempt income described in §
37.016.
   (I)   (1)   If any report, claim, statement, or other document required to
be filed, or any payment required to be made, within a prescribed period or on
or before a prescribed date under this chapter is delivered after that period
or that to the Tax Administrator or other municipal official with which the
report, claim, statement, or other document is required to be filed, or to
which the payment is required to be made, the date of the postmark stamped on
the cover in which the report, claim, statement, or other document, or payment
is mailed shall be deemed to be the date of delivery or the date of payment.
THE DATE OF POSTMARK means, in the event there is more than one date on the
cover, the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service.
      (2)   If a payment is made by electronic funds transfer, the payment
shall be considered to be made on the date of the timestamp assigned by the
first electronic system receiving that payment. For purposes of this section,
receiving that payment refers to the transfer of funds from the account of the
taxpayer. Such funds are considered transferred and no longer under the control
of the taxpayer once the timestamp has occurred.
   (J)   The amounts withheld for the municipality by an employer, the agent of
an employer or other payer as described in §
37.046 shall be allowed to the recipient of the compensation as credits against
payment of the tax imposed on the recipient unless the amounts withheld were
not remitted to the municipality, and the recipient colluded with the employer,
agent or other payer in connection with the failure to remit the amounts
withheld.
   (K)   Each return required by the municipality to be filed in accordance
with this section shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize
another person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to
communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to the return.
The return or instructions accompanying the return shall indicate that by
checking the box, the taxpayer authorizes the Tax Administrator to contact the
preparer or other person concerning questions that arise during the examination
or other review of the return, and authorizes the preparer or other person only
to provide the Tax Administrator with information that is missing from the
return, to contact the Tax Administrator for information about the examination
or other review of the return or the status of the taxpayer’s refund or
payments, and to respond to notices about mathematical errors, offsets, or
return preparation that the taxpayer has received from the Tax Administrator
and has shown to the preparer or other person. Authorization by the taxpayer of
another person to communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters
pertaining to the return does not preclude the Tax Administrator from
contacting the taxpayer regarding such matters.
   (L)   The Tax Administrator of the municipality shall accept for filing a
generic form of any income tax return, report or document required by the
municipality in accordance with this chapter; provided that the generic form,
once completed and filed, contains all of the information required by
ordinances, resolutions, or rules adopted by the municipality or Tax
Administrator; and provided that the taxpayer or tax return preparer filing the
generic form otherwise complies with the provisions of this chapter and of the
municipality’s ordinance or resolution governing the filing of returns, reports
or documents.
   (M)   When income tax returns, reports or other documents require the
signature of a tax return preparer, the Tax Administrator shall accept a
facsimile of such a signature in lieu of a manual signature.
   (N)   (1)   As used in this division, WORKSITE LOCATION has the same meaning
as in §
37.046.
      (2)   A person may notify a tax administrator that the person does not
expect to be a taxpayer with respect to the municipal corporation for a taxable
year if both of the following conditions apply:
         (a)   The person was required to file a tax return with the municipal
corporation for the immediately preceding taxable year because the person
performed services at a worksite location within the municipal corporation, and
the person has filed all appropriate and required returns, and remitted all
applicable income tax and withholding payments as provided by this chapter. The
Tax Administrator is not required to accept an affidavit from a taxpayer who
has not complied with the provisions of this chapter;
         (b)   1.   The person no longer provides services in the municipal
corporation and does not expect to be subject to the municipal corporation’s
income tax for the taxable year.
            2.   The person shall provide the notice in a signed affidavit that
briefly explains the person’s circumstances, including the location of the
previous worksite location and the last date on which the person performed
services or made any sales within the municipal corporation. The affidavit also
shall include the following statement:
         “The affiant has no plans to perform any services within the municipal
corporation, make any sales in the municipal corporation, or otherwise become
subject to the tax levied by the municipal corporation during the taxable year.
If the affiant does become subject to the tax levied by the municipal
corporation for the taxable year, the affiant agrees to be considered a
taxpayer and to properly register as a taxpayer with the municipal corporation,
if such a registration is required by the municipal corporation’s resolutions,
ordinances, or rules.”
            3.   The person shall sign the affidavit under penalty of perjury.
         (c)   If a person submits an affidavit described in division (N)(2) of
this section, the Tax Administrator shall not require the person to file any
tax return for the taxable year, unless the Tax Administrator possesses
information that conflicts with the affidavit or if the circumstances described
in the affidavit change, or the taxpayer has engaged in activity which results
in work being performed, services provided, sales made or other activity that
results in municipal taxable income reportable to the municipality in the
taxable year. It shall be the responsibility of the taxpayer to comply with the
provisions of this chapter relating to the reporting and filing of municipal
taxable income on an annual municipal income tax return, even if an affidavit
has been filed with the Tax Administrator for the taxable year. Nothing in
division (N) of this section prohibits the Tax Administrator from performing an
audit of the person.
(Prior Code, § 880B.091) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015; Ord. 2016-15, passed
12-13-2016; Ord. 2019-16, passed 10-22-2019)
§ 37.106 RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX; INDIVIDUALS SERVING IN COMBAT ZONE.
   (A)   Each member of the National Guard of any state and each member of a
reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United States called to active
duty pursuant to an executive order issued by the President of the United
States or an act of the Congress of the United States, and each civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the Armed Forces, may apply to the Tax Administrator of the
municipality for both an extension of time for filing of the return and an
extension of time for payment of taxes required by the municipality in
accordance with this chapter during the period of the member’s or civilian’s
duty service and for 180 days thereafter. The application shall be filed on or
before the 180th day after the member’s or civilian’s duty terminates. An
applicant shall provide such evidence as the Tax Administrator considers
necessary to demonstrate eligibility for the extension.
   (B)   (1)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the Tax Administrator shall
enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment of the tax in
installments that begin on the 181st day after the applicant’s active duty or
service terminates. Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section, the
Tax Administrator may prescribe such contract terms as the Tax Administrator
considers appropriate.
      (2)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is qualified
for an extension under this section, the applicant shall neither be required to
file any return, report or other tax document, nor be required to pay any tax
otherwise due to the municipality before the 181st day after the applicant’s
active duty or service terminates.
      (3)   Taxes paid pursuant to a contract entered into under division (B)
(1) of this section are not delinquent. The Tax Administrator shall not require
any payments of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the
extension period.
   (C)   (1)   Nothing in this division denies to any person described in this
division the application of divisions (A) and (B) of this section.
      (2)   (a)   A qualifying taxpayer who is eligible for an extension under
the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an extension of time in which to
file any return, report or other tax document and an extension of time in which
to make any payment of taxes required by the municipality in accordance with
this chapter. The length of any extension granted under this division (C)(2)(a)
shall be equal to the length of the corresponding extension that the taxpayer
receives under the Internal Revenue Code. As used in this section, QUALIFYING
TAXPAYER means a member of the National Guard or a member of a reserve
component of the Armed Forces of the United States called to active duty
pursuant to either an executive order issued by the President of the United
States or an act of the Congress of the United States, or a civilian serving as
support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in support of the
Armed Forces.
         (b)   Taxes the payment of which is extended in accordance with
division (C)(2)(a) of this section are not delinquent during the extension
period. Such taxes become delinquent on the first day after the expiration of
the extension period if the taxes are not paid prior to that date. The Tax
Administrator shall not require any payment of penalties or interest in
connection with those taxes for the extension period. The Tax Administrator
shall not include any period of extension granted under division (C)(2)(a) of
this section in calculating the penalty or interest due on any unpaid tax.
   (D)   For each taxable year to which divisions (A), (B) or (C) of this
section applies to a taxpayer, the provisions of divisions (B)(2) and (B)(3) or
(C) of this section, as applicable, apply to the spouse of that taxpayer if the
filing status of the spouse and the taxpayer is married filing jointly for that
year.
(Prior Code, § 880B.092) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.107 USE OF OHIO BUSINESS GATEWAY; TYPES OF FILINGS AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   Any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with respect to the
taxpayer’s net profit from a business or profession may file any municipal
income tax return or, estimated municipal income tax return, or extension for
filing a municipal income tax return, and may make payment of amounts shown to
be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
   (B)   Any employer, agent of an employer or other payer may report the
amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages, and may make
remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
   (C)   Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing employer
withholding tax returns or deposit of any required tax.
   (D)   The use of the Ohio Business Gateway by municipal corporations,
taxpayers, or other persons does not affect the legal rights of municipalities
or taxpayers as otherwise permitted by law. The state shall not be a party to
the administration of municipal income taxes or to an appeal of a municipal
income tax matter, except as otherwise specifically provided by law.
   (E)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting or removing the
authority of any municipal corporation to administer, audit and enforce the
provisions of its municipal income tax.
(Prior Code, § 880B.093) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.108 EXTENSION OF TIME TO FILE.
   (A)   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six-month extension
for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return shall automatically receive
an extension for the filing of a municipal income tax return. The extended due
date of the municipal income tax return shall be October 15 after the last day
of the taxable year to which the return relates. For tax years ending on or
after January 1, 2023, the extended due date of the municipality's income tax
return for a taxpayer that is not an individual shall be the 15th day of the
11th month after the last day of the taxable year to which the return relates.
   (B)   Any taxpayer that qualifies for an automatic federal extension for a
period other than six months for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax
return shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal
income tax return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return
shall be the same as that of the extended federal income tax return.
   (C)   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month extension
for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return may request that the Tax
Administrator grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the date for filing
the taxpayer’s municipal income tax return. If the request is received by the
Tax Administrator on or before the date the municipal income tax return is due,
the Tax Administrator shall grant the taxpayer’s requested extension.
   (D)   An extension of time to file under this chapter is not an extension of
the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax Administrator grants an extension of
that date.
   (E)   If the State Tax Commissioner extends for all taxpayers the date for
filing state income tax returns under R.C. § 5747.08(G), a taxpayer shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal income tax
return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return shall be the
same as the extended due date of the state income tax return.
   (F)   If a taxpayer receives an extension for the filing of a municipal
income tax return under any division of this section, the tax administrator
shall not make any inquiry or send any notice to the taxpayer with regard to
the return on or before the date the taxpayer files the return or on or before
the extended due date to file the return, whichever occurs first.
   (G)   If a tax administrator violates division (F) of this section, the
municipal corporation shall reimburse the taxpayer for any reasonable costs
incurred to respond to such inquiry or notice, up to $150.
   (H)   Division (F) of this section does not apply to an extension received
under division (A) of this section if the tax administrator has actual
knowledge that the taxpayer failed to file for a federal extension as required
to receive the extension under division (A) of this section or failed to file
for an extension under division (C) of this section.
(Prior Code, § 880B.094) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015; Ord. 2023-13, passed
12-12-2023)
§ 37.109 AMENDED RETURNS.
   (A)   (1)   A taxpayer shall file an amended return with the Tax
Administrator in such form as the Tax Administrator requires if any of the
facts, figures, computations or attachments required in the taxpayer’s annual
return to determine the tax due levied by the municipality in accordance with
this chapter must be altered.
      (2)   Within 60 days after the final determination of any federal or
state tax liability affecting the taxpayer’s municipal tax liability, that
taxpayer shall make and file an amended municipal return showing income subject
to the municipal income tax based upon such final determination of federal or
state tax liability, and pay any additional municipal income tax shown due
thereon or make a claim for refund of any overpayment, unless the tax or
overpayment is $10 or less.   
      (3)   If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal
income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a
consolidated return, based on the taxpayer’s consolidated federal income tax
return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax Administrator before filing the
amended return.
   (B)   (1)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due together with any
penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to be due is $10 or
less, such amount need not accompany the amended return. Except as provided
under division (B)(2) of this section, the amended return shall not reopen
those facts, figures, computations, or attachments from a previously filed
return that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment
to the taxpayer’s federal or state income tax return, unless the applicable
statute of limitations for civil actions or prosecutions under §
37.161 has not expired for a previously filed return.
      (2)   The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the amount of tax
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations and attachments were
reopened.
   (C)   (1)   In the case of an overpayment, a request for refund may be filed
under this division within the period prescribed by division (A)(2) of this
section for filing the amended return even if it is filed beyond the period
prescribed in that division if it otherwise conforms to the requirements of
that division. If the amount of the refund is $10 or less, no refund need be
paid by the municipality to the taxpayer. Except as set forth in division (C)
(2) of this section, a request filed under this division shall claim refund of
overpayments resulting from alterations to only those facts, figures,
computations or attachments required in the taxpayer’s annual return that are
affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer’s
federal or state income tax return, unless it is also filed within the time
prescribed in §
37.110. Except as set forth in division (C)(2) of this section, the request
shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations or attachments that are not
affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer’s
federal or state income tax return.
      (2)   The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount of refund
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations and attachments were
reopened.
(Prior Code, § 880B.095) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.110 REFUNDS.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the Tax Administrator of the
municipality, in accordance with this section, shall refund to employers,
agents of employers, other payers or taxpayers, with respect to any income or
withholding tax levied by the municipality:
      (1)   Overpayments of more than $10; and
      (2)   Amounts paid erroneously if the refund requested exceeds $10.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, returns setting
forth a request for refund shall be filed with the Tax Administrator, within
three years after the tax was due or paid, whichever is later. Any
documentation that substantiates the taxpayer’s claim for a refund must be
included with the return filing. Failure to remit all documentation, including
schedules, other municipal income tax returns, or other supporting
documentation necessary to verify credits, income, losses or other pertinent
factors on the return will cause delay in processing, and/or disallowance of
undocumented credits or losses.
      (2)   On filing of the refund request, the Tax Administrator shall
determine the amount of refund due and certify such amount to the appropriate
municipal corporation official for payment. Except as provided in division (B)
(3) of this section, the Administrator shall issue an assessment to any
taxpayer whose request for refund is fully or partially denied. The assessment
shall state the amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the
denial and instructions for appealing the assessment.
      (3)   If a Tax Administrator denies in whole or in part a refund request
included within the taxpayer’s originally filed annual income tax return, the
Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the amount of the
refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial, and instructions for
requesting an assessment that may be appealed under §
37.160.
   (C)   A request for a refund that is received after the last day for filing
specified in division (B) of this section shall be considered to have been
filed in a timely manner if any of the following situations exist:
      (1)   The request is delivered by the postal service and the earliest
postal service postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed is not
later than the last day for filing the request;
      (2)   The request is delivered by the postal service, the only postmark
on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed by a private postal
meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the last day for filing the
request and the request is received within seven days of such last day; and
      (3)   The request is delivered by the postal service, no postmark date
was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or the date of the
postmark so affixed is not legible and the request is received within seven
days of the last day for making the request.
   (D)   Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a taxpayer of
any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the overpayment until the
date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if any overpayment is
refunded within 90 days after the final filing date of the annual return or 90
days after the completed return is filed, whichever is later, no interest shall
be allowed on the refund. For the purpose of computing the payment of interest
on amounts overpaid, no amount of tax for any taxable year shall be considered
to have been paid before the date on which the return on which the tax is
reported is due, without regard to any extension of time for filing that
return. Interest shall be paid at the interest rate described in §
37.125.
   (E)   As used in this section, WITHHOLDING TAX has the same meaning as in §
37.125.
(Prior Code, § 880B.096) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
INTEREST; AUDIT; ROUNDING
§ 37.125 PENALTY, INTEREST, FEES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      APPLICABLE LAW. This chapter, the resolutions, ordinances, codes,
directives, instructions and rules adopted by the municipality; provided such
resolutions, ordinances, codes, directives, instructions and rules impose or
directly or indirectly address the levy, payment, remittance, or filing
requirements of a municipal income tax.
      FEDERAL SHORT-TERM RATE. The rate of the average market yield on
outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with remaining periods
to maturity of three years or less, as determined under § 1274 of the Internal
Revenue Code, for July of the current year.
      INCOME TAX, ESTIMATED INCOME TAX and WITHHOLDING TAX. Any income tax,
estimated income tax and withholding tax imposed by a municipal corporation
pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      INTEREST RATE. The federal short-term rate, rounded to the nearest whole
number percent, plus 5%. The rate shall apply for the calendar year next
following the July of the year in which the FEDERAL SHORT-TERM RATE is
determined in accordance with this section.
      RETURN. Any tax return, report, reconciliation, schedule and other
document required to be filed with a Tax Administrator or municipal corporation
by a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer or any other payer pursuant
to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      UNPAID ESTIMATED INCOME TAX. Estimated income tax due but not paid by the
date the tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      UNPAID INCOME TAX. Income tax due but not paid by the date the income tax
is required to be paid under applicable law.
      UNPAID WITHHOLDING TAX. Withholding tax due but not paid by the date the
withholding tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      WITHHOLDING TAX. Amounts an employer, any agent of an employer or any
other payer did not withhold in whole or in part from an employee’s qualifying
wages, but that, under applicable law, the employer, agent or other payer is
required to withhold from an employee’s qualifying wages.
   (B)   (1)   This section shall apply to the following:
         (a)   Any return required to be filed under applicable law for taxable
years beginning on or after January 1, 2016; and
         (b)   Income tax, estimated income tax and withholding tax required to
be paid or remitted to the municipality on or after January 1, 2016 for taxable
years beginning on or after January 1, 2016.
      (2)   This section does not apply to returns required to be filed or
payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, regardless of the filing
or payment date. Returns required to be filed or payments required to be made
before January 1, 2016, but filed or paid after that date shall be subject to
the ordinances or rules, as adopted from time to time before January 1, 2016 of
this municipality.
   (C)   The municipality shall impose on a taxpayer, employer, any agent of
the employer, and any other payer, and will attempt to collect, the interest
amounts and penalties prescribed in this section when the taxpayer, employer,
any agent of the employer, or any other payer for any reason fails, in whole or
in part, to make to the municipality timely and full payment or remittance of
income tax, estimated income tax, or withholding tax or to file timely with the
municipality any return required to be filed.
      (1)   Interest shall be imposed at the rate defined as INTEREST RATE as
described in division (A) of this section, per annum, on all unpaid income tax,
unpaid estimated income tax and unpaid withholding tax. This imposition of
interest shall be assessed per month, or fraction of a month.
      (2)   With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated income tax,
a penalty equal to 15% of the amount not timely paid shall be imposed.
      (3)   With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, a penalty not exceeding
50% of the amount not timely paid shall be imposed.
      (4)   For tax years ending on or before December 31, 2022, with respect
to returns other than estimated income tax returns, the municipality may impose
a penalty of $25 for each failure to timely file each return, regardless of the
liability shown thereon for each month, or any fraction thereof, during which
the return remains unfiled regardless of the liability shown thereon. The
penalty shall not exceed $150 for each failure.
      (5)   For tax years ending on or after January 1, 2023, with respect to
returns other than estimated income tax returns, the municipality may impose a
penalty not exceeding $25 for each failure to timely file each return,
regardless of the liability shown thereon, except that the municipality shall
abate or refund the penalty assessed on a taxpayer's first failure to timely
file a return after the taxpayer files that return.
   (D)   With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes, withholding
taxes and returns, the municipality shall not impose, seek to collect, or
collect any penalty, amount of interest, charges or additional fees not
described in this section.
   (E)   With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes, withholding
taxes and returns, the municipality shall not refund or credit any penalty,
amount of interest, charges, or additional fees that were properly imposed or
collected before January 1, 2016.
   (F)   The Tax Administrator may, in the Tax Administrator’s sole discretion,
abate or partially abate penalties or interest imposed under this section when
the Tax Administrator deems such abatement or partial abatement to be
appropriate. Such abatement or partial abatement shall be properly documented
and maintained on the record of the taxpayer who received benefit of such
abatement or partial abatement.
   (G)   The municipality shall impose on the taxpayer, employer, any agent of
the employer or any other payer the municipality’s post-judgment collection
costs and fees, including attorney’s fees.
(Prior Code, § 880B.10) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015; Ord. 2017-28, passed
12-12-2017; Ord. 2023- 13, passed 12-12-2023)
§ 37.126 AUDIT.
   (A)   At or before the commencement of an audit, as defined in §
37.016, the Tax Administrator shall provide to the taxpayer a written
description of the roles of the Tax Administrator and of the taxpayer during an
audit and a statement of the taxpayer’s rights, including any right to obtain a
refund of an overpayment of tax. At or before the commencement of an audit, the
Tax Administrator shall inform the taxpayer when the audit is considered to
have commenced.
   (B)    Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the Tax
Administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular business
hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A taxpayer who is
unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the grounds that the
proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must offer reasonable
alternative dates for the audit.
   (C)   (1)   At all stages of an audit by the Tax Administrator, a taxpayer
is entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant,
bookkeeper or other tax practitioner. The Tax Administrator shall prescribe a
form by which a taxpayer may designate such a person to assist or represent the
taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting from actions by the Tax
Administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted such a form, the Tax
Administrator may accept other evidence, as the Tax Administrator considers
appropriate, that a person is the authorized representative of a taxpayer.
      (2)   A taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by the person
conducting an audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to consult with the
taxpayer’s attorney, accountant, bookkeeper or other tax practitioner. This
division does not authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an
attorney.
   (D)   A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit
examination.
   (E)   The failure of the Tax Administrator to comply with a provision of
this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any taxes owed by
the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer’s case.
   (F)   If the Tax Administrator fails to substantially comply with the
provisions of this section, the Tax Administrator, upon application by the
taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest arising from
the audit.
(Prior Code, § 880B.11) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.127 ROUNDING.
   A person may round to the nearest whole dollar, all amounts the person is
required to enter on any return, report, voucher or other document required
under this chapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or exceeds
$0.50 shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any fractional part of a
dollar that is less than $0.50 shall be dropped, rounding down to the nearest
whole dollar. If a person chooses to round amounts entered on a document, the
person shall round all amounts entered on the document.
(Prior Code, § 880B.12) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
AUTHORITY AND POWERS OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR
§ 37.140 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS OF THE TAX
ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Tax Administrator has the authority to perform all duties and functions
necessary and appropriate to implement the provisions of this chapter,
including without limitation:
   (A)   Exercise all powers whatsoever of an inquisitorial nature as provided
by law, including, the right to inspect books, accounts, records, memorandums,
and federal and state income tax returns, to examine persons under oath, to
issue orders or subpoenas for the production of books, accounts, papers,
records, documents, and testimony, to take depositions, to apply to a court for
attachment proceedings as for contempt, to approve vouchers for the fees of
officers and witnesses, and to administer oaths; provided that the powers
referred to in this division (A) shall be exercised by the Tax Administrator
only in connection with the performance of the duties respectively assigned to
the Tax Administrator under a municipal corporation income tax ordinance or
resolution adopted in accordance with this chapter;
   (B)   Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties;
   (C)   Confer and meet with officers of other municipal corporations and
states and officers of the United States on any matters pertaining to their
respective official duties as provided by law;
   (D)   Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders from
bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including
penalties and interest thereon, illegally or erroneously imposed or collected,
or for any other reason overpaid, and, in addition, the Tax Administrator may
investigate any claim of overpayment and make a written statement of the Tax
Administrator’s findings, and, if the Tax Administrator finds that there has
been an overpayment, approve and issue a refund payable to the taxpayer, the
taxpayer’s assigns or legal representative as provided in this chapter;
   (E)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to consenting to the
compromise and settlement of tax claims;
   (F)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the use of
alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers in accordance with §
37.061;
   (G)   Make all tax findings, determinations, computations, assessments and
orders the Tax Administrator is by law authorized and required to make and,
pursuant to time limitations provided by law, on the Tax Administrator’s own
motion, review, redetermine, or correct any tax findings, determinations,
computations, assessments, or orders the Tax Administrator has made, but the
Tax Administrator shall not review, redetermine, or correct any tax finding,
determination, computation, assessment, or order which the Tax Administrator
has made for which an appeal has been filed with the Local Board of Tax Review
or other appropriate tribunal, unless such appeal or application is withdrawn
by the appellant or applicant, is dismissed, or is otherwise final;
   (H)   Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in the manner
authorized by law; and
   (I)   Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the withholding
obligations described in §
37.046.
(Prior Code, § 880B.131) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.141 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; COMPROMISE OF CLAIM AND PAYMENT OVER
TIME.
   (A)   As used in this section, CLAIM means a claim for an amount payable to
the municipality that arises pursuant to the municipal income tax imposed in
accordance with this chapter.
   (B)   The Tax Administrator may do either of the following if such action is
in the best interests of the municipality:
      (1)   Compromise a claim; and
      (2)   Extend for a reasonable period the time for payment of a claim by
agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments, upon such terms and
conditions as the Tax Administrator may require.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator’s rejection of a compromise or payment-over-time
agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim shall not be appealable.
   (D)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be binding upon and shall inure to the benefit of only the parties to the
compromise or agreement, and shall not extinguish or otherwise affect the
liability of any other person.
   (E)   (1)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a
claim shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the compromise or agreement,
or if the compromise or agreement was obtained by fraud or by misrepresentation
of a material fact. Any amount that was due before the compromise or agreement
and that is unpaid shall remain due, and any penalties or interest that would
have accrued in the absence of the compromise or agreement shall continue to
accrue and be due.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator shall have sole discretion to determine
whether or not penalty, interest, charges or applicable fees will be assessed
through the duration of any compromise or payment-over-time agreement.
   (F)   The Tax Administrator may require that the taxpayer provide detailed
financial documentation and information, in order to determine whether or not a
payment-over-time agreement will be authorized. The taxpayer’s failure to
provide the necessary and required information by the Tax Administrator shall
preclude consideration of a payment-over-time agreement.
(Prior Code, § 880B.132) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.142 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; RIGHT TO EXAMINE.
   (A)   The Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent or employee thereof may
examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns of
any employer, taxpayer, or other person that is subject to, or that the Tax
Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter for the
purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no return was
filed, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter. Upon written request by the
Tax Administrator or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every
employer, taxpayer, or other person subject to this section is required to
furnish the opportunity for the Tax Administrator, authorized agent, or
employee to investigate and examine such books, papers, records, and federal
and state income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the
request.
   (B)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer, employer, or other
person that is subject to, or that a Tax Administrator believes is subject to,
the provisions of this chapter shall be open to the Tax Administrator’s
inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six
years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents
relate, unless the Tax Administrator, in writing, consents to their destruction
within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. The Tax
Administrator of a municipal corporation may require any person, by notice
served on that person, to keep such records as the Tax Administrator determines
necessary to show whether or not that person is liable, and the extent of such
liability, for the income tax levied by the municipality or for the withholding
of such tax.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator may examine under oath any person that the Tax
Administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that was
or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to affect
such income. The Tax Administrator may, for this purpose, compel any such
person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books, papers,
records, and federal and state income tax returns in such person’s possession
or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an attorney,
accountant, bookkeeper or other tax practitioner at any such hearing or
examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law by a person
who is not an attorney.
   (D)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Administrator compelling
attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers,
records, or federal and state income tax returns under this section shall fail
to comply.
(Prior Code, § 880B.133) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015) Penalty, see §
37.999
§ 37.143 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; REQUIRING IDENTIFYING INFORMATION.
   (A)   The Tax Administrator may require any person filing a tax document
with the Tax Administrator to provide identifying information, which may
include the person’s Social Security number, federal employer identification
number or other identification number requested by the Tax Administrator. A
person required by the Tax Administrator to provide identifying information
that has experienced any change with respect to that information shall notify
the Tax Administrator of the change before, or upon, filing the next tax
document requiring the identifying information.
   (B)   (1)   If the Tax Administrator makes a request for identifying
information and the Tax Administrator does not receive valid identifying
information within 30 days of making the request, nothing in this chapter
prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty upon the person to whom
the request was directed pursuant to §
37.125, in addition to any applicable penalty described in §
37.999.
      (2)   If a person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information does not notify the Tax Administrator of a change with
respect to that information as required under division (A) of this section
within 30 days after filing the next tax document requiring such identifying
information, nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from
imposing a penalty pursuant to §
37.125.
      (3)   The penalties provided for under divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) of
this section may be billed and imposed in the same manner as the tax or fee
with respect to which the identifying information is sought, and are in
addition to any applicable criminal penalties described in §
37.999 for a violation of §
37.157, and any other penalties that may be imposed by the Tax Administrator by
law.
(Prior Code, § 880B.134) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015) Penalty, see §
37.999
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 37.155 CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (A)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings or verifications required or authorized by R.C. Ch. 718, or by the
charter or ordinance of the municipality is confidential, and no person shall
access or disclose such information, except in accordance with a proper
judicial order or in connection with the performance of that person’s official
duties or the official business of the municipality as authorized by R.C. Ch.
718 or the Charter or ordinance authorizing the levy. The Tax Administrator or
a designee thereof may furnish copies of returns filed or otherwise received
under this chapter and other related tax information to the Internal Revenue
Service, the State Tax Commissioner and Tax Administrators of other municipal
corporations.
   (B)   This section does not prohibit the municipality from publishing or
disclosing statistics in a form that does not disclose information with respect
to particular taxpayers.
(Prior Code, § 880B.14) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.156 CRIMINAL RECORDS CHECK.
   (A)   Division (B) of this section applies to any of the following
individuals:
      (1)   An employee in the service of a municipal corporation or regional
council of government;
      (2)   A prospective employee for a position in the service of a municipal
corporation or regional council of government; or
      (3)   A contractor of a municipal corporation or regional council of
government.
   (B)   (1)   If an individual described in division (A) of this section has
or, in the case of a prospective employee, will have access to or the use of
federal tax information, the Tax Administrator shall request that the
Superintendent of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation
conduct a criminal records check based on the individual’s fingerprints in
accordance with R.C. § 109.572. The Tax Administrator shall request that
criminal record information from the Federal Bureau of Investigation be
obtained as part of the criminal records check.
      (2)   The individual and the Tax Administrator shall also comply with any
separate request by the Federal Bureau of Investigation to conduct a national
criminal records check.
   (C)   A Tax Administrator may adopt any rules or policies necessary to
implement this section.
(Prior Code, § 880B.141) (Ord. 2019-16, passed 10-22-2019)
§ 37.157 FRAUD.
   No person shall knowingly make, present, aid or assist in the preparation or
presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return, schedule, statement,
claim, or document authorized or required by municipal corporation ordinance or
state law to be filed with the Tax Administrator, or knowingly procure,
counsel, or advise the preparation or presentation of such report, return,
schedule, statement, claim, or document, or knowingly change, alter, or amend,
or knowingly procure, counsel or advise such change, alteration, or amendment
of the records upon which such report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or
document is based with intent to defraud the municipality or the Tax
Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 880B.15) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015) Penalty, see §
37.999
§ 37.158 OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   An OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR means an opinion issued under this
section with respect to prospective municipal income tax liability. It does not
include ordinary correspondence of the Tax Administrator.
   (B)   A taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of the Tax
Administrator as to whether or how certain income, source of income or a
certain activity or transaction will be taxed. The written response of the Tax
Administrator shall be an opinion of the Tax Administrator and shall bind the
Tax Administrator, in accordance with divisions (C), (G) and (H) of this
section; provided all of the following conditions are satisfied:
      (1)   The taxpayer’s request fully and accurately describes the specific
facts or circumstances relevant to a determination of the taxability of the
income, source of income, activity or transaction, and, if an activity or
transaction, all parties involved in the activity or transaction are clearly
identified by name, location, or other pertinent facts;
      (2)   The request relates to a tax imposed by the municipality in
accordance with this chapter; and
      (3)   The Tax Administrator’s response is signed by the Tax Administrator
and designated as an opinion of the Tax Administrator.
   (C)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator shall remain in effect and shall
protect the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and who reasonably
relies on it from liability for any taxes, penalty, or interest otherwise
chargeable on the activity or transaction specifically held by the Tax
Administrator’s opinion to be taxable in a particular manner or not to be
subject to taxation for any taxable years that may be specified in the opinion,
or until the earliest of the following dates:
      (1)   The effective date of a written revocation by the Tax Administrator
sent to the taxpayer by certified mail, return receipt requested. The effective
date of the revocation shall be the taxpayer’s date of receipt or one year
after the issuance of the opinion, whichever is later;
      (2)   The effective date of any amendment or enactment of a relevant
section of the Ohio Revised Code, uncodified state law or the municipality’s
income tax ordinance that would substantially change the analysis and
conclusion of the opinion of the Tax Administrator;
      (3)   The date on which a court issues an opinion establishing or
changing relevant case law with respect to the Ohio Revised Code, uncodified
state law or the municipality’s income tax ordinance;
      (4)   If the opinion of the Tax Administrator was based on the
interpretation of federal law, the effective date of any change in the relevant
federal statutes or regulations, or the date on which a court issues an opinion
establishing or changing relevant case law with respect to federal statutes or
regulations;
      (5)   The effective date of any change in the taxpayer’s material facts
or circumstances; and
      (6)   The effective date of the expiration of the opinion, if specified
in the opinion.
   (D)   (1)   A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for any activity or
transaction related to a request for an opinion that contained any
misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts.
      (2)   If the taxpayer knowingly has misrepresented the pertinent facts or
omitted material facts with intent to defraud the municipality in order to
obtain a more favorable opinion, the taxpayer may be in violation of §
37.157.
   (E)   If a Tax Administrator provides written advice under this section, the
opinion shall include a statement that:
      (1)   The tax consequences stated in the opinion may be subject to change
for any of the reasons stated in division (C) of this section; and
      (2)   It is the duty of the taxpayer to be aware of such changes.
   (F)   A Tax Administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any request
received under this section.
   (G)   This section binds a Tax Administrator only with respect to opinions
of the Tax Administrator issued on or after January 1, 2016.
   (H)   An opinion of a Tax Administrator binds that Tax Administrator only
with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and does not
bind the Tax Administrator of any other municipal corporation.
   (I)   A Tax Administrator shall make available the text of all opinions
issued under this section, except those opinions prepared for a taxpayer who
has requested that the text of the opinion remain confidential. In no event
shall the text of an opinion be made available until the Tax Administrator has
removed all information that identifies the taxpayer and any other parties
involved in the activity or transaction.
   (J)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator issued under this section or a
refusal to offer an opinion under division (F) of this section may not be
appealed.
(Prior Code, § 880B.16) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.159 ASSESSMENT; APPEAL BASED ON PRESUMPTION OF DELIVERY.
   (A)   (1)   The Tax Administrator shall serve an assessment either by
personal service, by certified mail or by a delivery service authorized under
R.C. § 5703.056.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator may deliver the assessment through
alternative means as provided in this section, including, but not limited to,
delivery by secure electronic mail. Such alternative delivery method must be
authorized by the person subject to the assessment.
      (3)   Once service of the assessment has been made by the Tax
Administrator or other municipal official, or the designee of either, the
person to whom the assessment is directed may protest the ruling of that
assessment by filing an appeal with the Local Board of Tax Review within 60
days after the receipt of service. The delivery of an assessment of the Tax
Administrator as prescribed in R.C. § 718.18 is prima facie evidence that
delivery is complete and that the assessment is served.
   (B)   (1)   A person may challenge the presumption of delivery and service
as set forth in this division (B). A person disputing the presumption of
delivery and service under this section bears the burden of proving by a
preponderance of the evidence that the address to which the assessment was sent
was not an address with which the person was associated at the time the Tax
Administrator originally mailed the assessment by certified mail. For the
purposes of this section, a person is associated with an address at the time
the Tax Administrator originally mailed the assessment if, at that time, the
person was residing, receiving legal documents, or conducting business at the
address; or if, before that time, the person had conducted business at the
address and, when the assessment was mailed, the person’s agent or the person’s
affiliate was conducting business at the address. For the purposes of this
section, a person’s affiliate is any other person that, at the time the
assessment was mailed, owned or controlled at least 20%, as determined by
voting rights, of the addressee’s business.
      (2)   If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the basis described
in division (B)(1) of this section, and if that assessment is subject to
collection and is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so within 60
days after the initial contact by the Tax Administrator or other municipal
official, or the designee of either, with the person. Nothing in this division
prevents the Tax Administrator or other official from entering into a
compromise with the person if the person does not actually file such an appeal
with the Local Board of Tax Review.
(Prior Code, § 880B.17) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.160 LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW; APPEAL TO LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW.
   (A)   (1)   The legislative authority of the municipality shall maintain a
Local Board of Tax Review to hear appeals as provided in R.C. Ch. 718.
      (2)   (a)   The Local Board of Tax Review shall consist of three members.
         (b)   Two members shall be appointed by the legislative authority of
the municipality, and may not be employees, elected officials or contractors
with the municipality at any time during their term or in the five years
immediately preceding the date of appointment. One member shall be appointed by
the top administrative official of the municipality. This member may be an
employee of the municipality, but may not be the Director of Finance or
equivalent officer, or the Tax Administrator or other similar official or an
employee directly involved in municipal tax matters, or any direct subordinate
thereof.
      (3)   The term for members of the Local Board of Tax Review appointed by
the legislative authority of the municipality shall be two years. There is no
limit on the number of terms that a member may serve should the member be
reappointed by the legislative authority. The Board member appointed by the top
administrative official of the municipality shall serve at the discretion of
the administrative official.
      (4)   Members of the Board of Tax Review appointed by the legislative
authority may be removed by the legislative authority as set forth in R.C. §
718.11(A)(4).
      (5)   A member of the Board who, for any reason, ceases to meet the
qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall resign
immediately by operation of law.
      (6)   A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in the same manner
as the original appointment within 60 days of when the vacancy was created. Any
member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the
term for which the member’s predecessor was appointed shall hold office for the
remainder of such term. No vacancy on the Board shall impair the power and
authority of the remaining members to exercise all the powers of the Board.
      (7)   If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the Board due to a
conflict of interest, illness, absence or similar reason, the legislative
authority or top administrative official that appointed the member shall
appoint another individual to temporarily serve on the Board in the member’s
place. This appointment shall be subject to the same requirements and
limitations as are applicable to the appointment of the member temporarily
unable to serve.
   (B)   Whenever a Tax Administrator issues an assessment, the Tax
Administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the
taxpayer’s right to appeal the assessment, the manner in which the taxpayer may
appeal the assessment, and the address to which the appeal should be directed,
and to whom the appeal should be directed.
   (C)   Any person who has been issued an assessment may appeal the assessment
to the Board by filing a request with the Board. The request shall be in
writing, shall specify the reason or reasons why the assessment should be
deemed incorrect or unlawful and shall be filed within 60 days after the
taxpayer receives the assessment.
   (D)   The Local Board of Tax Review shall schedule a hearing to be held
within 60 days after receiving an appeal of an assessment under division (C) of
this section, unless the taxpayer requests additional time to prepare or waives
a hearing. If the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer may appear
before the Board and/or may be represented by an attorney at law, certified
public accountant or other representative. The Board may allow a hearing to be
continued as jointly agreed to by the parties. In such a case, the hearing must
be completed within 120 days after the first day of the hearing unless the
parties agree otherwise.
   (E)   The Board may affirm, reverse or modify the Tax Administrator’s
assessment or any part of that assessment. The Board shall issue a final
determination on the appeal within 90 days after the Board’s final hearing on
the appeal, and send a copy of its final determination by ordinary mail to all
of the parties to the appeal within 15 days after issuing the final
determination. The taxpayer or the Tax Administrator may appeal the Board’s
final determination as provided in R.C. § 5717.011.
   (F)   The Local Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section shall
adopt rules governing its procedures, including a schedule of related costs,
and shall keep a record of its transactions. The rules governing the Local
Board of Tax Review procedures shall be in writing, and may be amended as
needed by the Local Board of Tax Review. Such records are not public records
available for inspection under R.C. § 149.43. For this reason, any
documentation, copies of returns or reports, final determinations, or working
papers for each case must be maintained in a secure location under the control
of the Tax Administrator. No member of the Local Board of Tax Review may remove
such documentation, copies of returns or reports, final determinations, or
working papers from the hearing. Hearings requested by a taxpayer before a
Local Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section are not meetings of
a public body subject to R.C. § 121.22. For this reason, such hearings shall
not be open to the public and only those parties to the case may be present
during the hearing.
(Prior Code, § 880B.18) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.161 ACTIONS TO RECOVER; STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and
penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within the
latter of:
            1.   Three years after the tax was due or the return was filed,
whichever is later; or
            2.   One year after the conclusion of the qualifying deferral
period, if any.
         (b)   The time limit described in division (A)(1)(a) of this section
may be extended at any time if both the Tax Administrator and the employer,
agent of the employer, other payer or taxpayer consent in writing to the
extension. Any extension shall also extend for the same period of time the time
limit described in division (C) of this section.
      (2)   As used in this section, QUALIFYING DEFERRAL PERIOD means a period
of time beginning and ending as follows:
         (a)   Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved by an assessment
files with a Local Board of Tax Review the request described in §
37.161 of this chapter. That date shall not be affected by any subsequent
decision, finding, or holding by any administrative body or court that the
Local Board of Tax Review with which the aggrieved person filed the request did
not have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or modify the assessment or any part
of that assessment; and
         (b)   Ending the later of the sixtieth day after the date on which the
final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review becomes final or, if any
party appeals from the determination of the Local Board of Tax Review, the
sixtieth day after the date on which the final determination of the Local Board
of Tax Review is either ultimately affirmed in whole or in part or ultimately
reversed and no further appeal of either that affirmation, in whole or in part,
or that reversal is available or taken.
   (B)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a resolution or
ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within three years after
the commission of the offense; provided that in the case of fraud, failure to
file a return or the omission of 25% or more of income required to be reported,
prosecutions may be commenced within six years after the commission of the
offense.
   (C)   A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be brought within
the time limitation provided in §
37.110.
   (D)   (1)   Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is pending, the
petitioner may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of
the appeal. The acceptance of a payment by the municipality does not prejudice
any claim for refund upon final determination of the appeal.   
      (2)   If upon final determination of the appeal, an error in the
assessment is corrected by the Tax Administrator, upon an appeal so filed or
pursuant to a final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review created
under §
37.160, of the Ohio Board of Tax Appeals, or any court to which the decision of
the Ohio Board of Tax Appeals has been appealed, so that the amount due from
the party assessed under the corrected assessment is less than the amount paid,
there shall be issued to the appellant or to the appellant’
37.110, with interest on that amount as provided by division (D) of this
section.
   (E)   No civil action to recover municipal income tax or related penalties
or interest shall be brought during either of the following time periods:
      (1)   The period during which a taxpayer has a right to appeal the
imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties; and
      (2)   The period during which an appeal related to the imposition of that
tax or interest or those penalties is pending.
(Prior Code, § 880B.19) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.162 ADOPTION OF RULES.
   (A)   Pursuant to R.C. § 718.30, the municipality pursuant to this chapter,
grants authority to the Tax Administrator to adopt rules to administer the
income tax imposed by the municipality.
   (B)   All rules adopted under this section shall be published and posted on
the internet.
(Prior Code, § 880B.20) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.163 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   The following miscellaneous provisions shall apply to taxpayers subject to
this chapter.
   (A)   Tenant list. All persons engaged in the rental of real estate shall,
when filing their annual return, complete and file with the Tax Administrator a
form obtainable at the income tax office specifying their tenants’ names,
addresses and such other information as requested, if known.
   (B)   Building permit applications. At the time a contractor or
subcontractor applies for a building permit, he or she must supply a city tax
identification number to the Zoning Department as evidence of registration with
the Income Tax Division.
   (C)   Occupancy permit applications. At the time a deed holder signs for an
occupancy permit in the city, he or she shall be required to complete a form as
prescribed by the Tax Administrator, giving all information necessary to
determine the city income tax status for all persons living or working at that
address.
(Prior Code, § 880B.21) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.164 ELECTION TO BE SUBJECT TO R.C. §§ 718.80 TO 718.95.
   (A)   The municipality hereby adopts and incorporates herein by reference
R.C. §§ 718.80 to 718.95 for tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2018.
   (B)   A taxpayer, as defined in division (C) of this section, may elect to
be subject to R.C. §§ 718.80 to 718.95 in lieu of the provisions of this
chapter.
   (C)   TAXPAYER has the same meaning as in R.C. § 718.01, except that
taxpayer does not include natural persons or entities subject to the tax
imposed under R.C. Ch. 5745. Taxpayer may include receivers, assignees or
trustees in bankruptcy when such persons are required to assume the role of a
taxpayer.
   (D)   In the event that R.C. §§ 718.80 to 718.95 are determined by a court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise
unenforceable, this section shall be considered null and void and shall be
automatically repealed until and unless further legislative action is taken by
City Council.
(Prior Code, § 880B.22) (Ord. 2018-04, passed 3-13-2018)
§ 37.165 COLLECTION OF TAX AFTER TERMINATION OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   This chapter shall continue in full force and effect insofar as the
levy of taxes is concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of
taxes levied hereunder and actions and proceedings for collecting any tax so
levied or enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall
continue in full force and effect until all of the taxes levied in the
aforesaid period are fully paid, and any and all suits and prosecutions for the
collection of taxes or for the punishment of violations of this chapter have
been fully terminated, subject to the limitations contained in §
37.161.
   (B)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of
this chapter shall be due on the date provided in §
37.105 as though the same were continuing.
(Prior Code, § 880B.97) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.166 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter, or any tax imposed
against, or exemption from tax granted to, any taxpayer or forms of income
specified herein is found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such
unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall affect only such clause,
sentence, section or part of this chapter so found and shall not affect or
impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or other
parts of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the
legislative authority of the municipality that this chapter would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section
or part thereof not been included in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 880B.98) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 37.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, whoever violates
§§
37.046,
37.155(A), or
37.157 by failing to remit municipal income taxes deducted and withheld from an
employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term of up to
six months, or both. In addition, the violation is punishable by dismissal from
office or discharge from employment, or both.
   (B)   Any person who discloses information received from the Internal
Revenue Service in violation of Internal Revenue Code §§ 7213(a), 7213A or 7431
shall be guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition, the violation is punishable by dismissal from office or discharge
from employment, or both.
   (C)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of §
37.155(A) constitutes a separate offense.
   (D)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which violation no
penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree
on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first
offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree; and on each
subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. By way of an illustrative
enumeration, violations of this chapter shall include, but not be limited to,
the following acts, conduct and/or omissions:
      (1)   Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or declaration required
by this chapter;
      (2)   Knowingly make any incomplete return;
      (3)   Willfully fail, neglect or refuse to pay the tax, penalties and
interest, or any combination thereof, imposed by this chapter;
      (4)   Cause to not be remitted the city income tax withheld from
qualifying wages of employees to the municipality municipal corporation as
required by §
37.046;
      (5)   Neglect or refuse to withhold or remit municipal income tax from
employees;
      (6)   Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized agent
or employee to examine his or her books, records, papers, federal and state
income tax returns, or any documentation relating to the income or net profits
of a taxpayer;
      (7)   Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to produce his or
her books, records, papers, federal and state income tax returns, or any
documentation relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer upon order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator;
      (8)   Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any information with
respect to such person’s income or net profits, or in the case of a person
responsible for maintaining information relating to his or her employers’
income or net profits, such person’s employer’s income or net profits;
      (9)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator;
      (10)   To avoid imposition or collection of municipal income tax,
willfully give to an employer or prospective employer false information as to
his or her residence address, or willfully fail to promptly notify an employer
or a prospective employer of any change in residence address and date thereof;
      (11)   Fail, as an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer, to
maintain proper records of employees’ residence addresses, total qualifying
wages paid and municipal tax withheld, or to knowingly give the Tax
Administrator false information;
      (12)   Willfully fail, neglect or refuse to make any payment of estimated
municipal income tax for any taxable year or any part of any taxable year in
accordance with this chapter; or
      (13)   Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the
whole or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter.
      (14)   For purposes of this section, any violation that does not specify
a culpable mental state or intent, shall be one of strict liability and no
culpable mental state or intent shall be required for a person to be guilty of
that violation.
      (15)   For purposes of this section, the term PERSON shall, in addition
to the meaning prescribed in § 37.0163, include in the case of a corporation,
association, pass-through entity or unincorporated business entity not having
any resident owner or officer within the city, any employee or agent of such
corporation, association, pass-through entity or unincorporated business entity
who has control or supervision over or is charged with the responsibility of
filing the municipal income tax returns and making the payments of the
municipal income tax as required by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 880B.99) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 11-10-2015)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GARBAGE AND RUBBISH COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
      
51.   LEAF DROP-OFF PROGRAM
      
52.   STORM SEWER SYSTEM
      
53.   STORM WATER DRAINAGE FACILITIES
      
54.   MAINTENANCE OF STORM WATER MANAGEMENT INFRASTRUCTURE
      
55.   UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE AND RUBBISH COLLECTION
AND DISPOSAL
Section
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Recycling
   
50.03   Collection; permit required; indemnification; security; fees
   
50.04   Impounding of vehicles for noncompliance; revocation of permit
   
50.05   Prevention of spillage
   
50.06   Quarterly reports
   
50.07   Transport
   
50.08   Disposal restrictions
   
50.09   Accumulation of waste and junk on private property
   
50.10   Exemption of city
   
50.11   Authority of Director of Public Service to make rules and set fees
   
50.12   Enforcement
 
   
50.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Collection and disposal of garbage, see R.C. §§ 715.43 and 717.01
   Disposal and transportation upon public ways, see R.C. §§ 3767.201 et seq.
   Employment of scavengers, see R.C. § 3707.39
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CARDBOARD. Paper board and corrugated material.
   COMPOSTING. The controlled biological decomposition of yard and garden
wastes under aerobic conditions.
   CURBSIDE. Close to the traveled portion of the street or roadway, but in
such a manner as to avoid interference with the safe and free flow of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   CURBSIDE RECYCLING CONTAINER. A storage unit in which recyclable materials
are placed for collection.
   GARBAGE. The matter, substance or waste resulting from the growing,
handling, storage, preparation, cooking and/or consumption of food, including
fat and bones, fowl, fish, fruits, and vegetables.
   GLASS FOOD AND BEVERAGE CONTAINER. Any glass bottle or jar used to package
food or beverage products.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Those substances which, singularly or in combination, pose
a significant present or potential threat or hazard to human health or to the
environment and require special handling, processing or disposal because they
may be flammable, explosive, reactive, corrosive, toxic, carcinogenic,
poisonous or persistent in nature, potentially lethal, an irritant or a strong
sensitizer. HAZARDOUS WASTE may not be disposed of as refuse, but must be taken
to a proper authority that may dispose of or recycle such material.
   HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any hazardous materials contained in commonly
used household products often found in residences. Common items are motor oil,
car batteries, paint and paint thinners, and the like.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Solid, liquid or gaseous by-products of commercial,
manufacturing or service activities which must be recycled or disposed of in
accordance with commercial regulations.
   JUNK. Items that have fallen into disuse or disrepair.
   MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING. The grouping together under a common roof of two
or three residential units.
   NEWSPAPER. Used or discarded newsprint, not including glossy inserts.
   NONSOURCE-SEPARATED. Recyclable materials that are separated from refuse at
the recycling facility.
   OFFICE PAPER. Used computer forms, used copier paper, used typing paper,
used graphic paper and stationery.
   PLASTIC CONTAINER. Only PET/HDPE number 1 or 2 bottles, jugs or other
containers.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIAL. Cardboard, glass food and beverage containers,
newspaper, office paper, and PET/HDPE plastic containers.
   RECYCLE RATE. The percentage of all solid waste collected, either recyclable
material or yard waste.
   RECYCLING FACILITY. A facility for the collection, sorting, processing,
transfer or sale of recyclable materials for the purpose of reclaiming material
therefrom.
   REFUSE. All waste or offal of fish, fowl, and fruit, vegetable, and animal
matter resulting from the preparation of food for human consumption, leaves,
lawn and hedge trimmings, paper, magazines, barrels, boxes, baskets, discarded
rags, mattresses, furniture, shoe leather, carpets, scrap metals, broken dishes
and glassware, tin cans, and other discarded household materials of a similar
nature. REFUSE shall not include such material as broken or whole bricks or
cement, wood ashes, stone, gravel, cinders, asphalt, earth, or large household
appliances, such as stoves, refrigerators and the like.
   RESIDENTIAL. Single-family and multiple-family dwellings.
   RESIDENTIAL UNIT. The place of abode of a person or persons living
separately or together as a family.
   RUBBISH. Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible or
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar
materials.
   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN. The plans prepared and implemented by the
Director of Public Service in compliance with State House Bill No. 592 and in
accordance with the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency (OEPA) regulations.
   SOURCE-SEPARATED. Sorting of recyclables from single- and multiple-family
residences into a recycling container, separate from refuse, for the refuse
hauler pick-up.
   YARD WASTE. Leaves, grass clippings, weeds, brush and other vegetation.
(Prior Code, § 1060.01) (Ord. 94-3, passed 3-22-1994)
§ 50.02 RECYCLING.
   (A)   Effective June 1, 1993, and continuing thereafter, curbside recycling
shall be mandatory. Each refuse license holder shall implement a curbside
collection of recyclables and yard waste for its residential customers. This
program shall be on file and approved by the Director of Public Service and
shall include bi-monthly curbside collection of recyclable materials, disposal
of recyclable materials through a bona fide recycling facility, and collection
of yard waste and disposal thereof through a bona fide composting facility. For
good cause shown, the Director of Public Service may grant an extension of up
to 60 days for implementation of said program.
   (B)   A source-separated curbside collection of recyclables is preferred.
However, a nonsource-separated curbside collection of recyclables may be
permitted if the facility meets OEPA guidelines for removal of recyclable
materials.
   (C)   Items placed for curbside pick-up may only be picked up by licensed
trash haulers.
(Prior Code, § 1060.02) (Ord. 94-3, passed 3-22-1994)
§ 50.03 COLLECTION; PERMIT REQUIRED; INDEMNIFICATION; SECURITY; FEES.
   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of collecting or removing
recyclables, refuse or waste materials of any kind within the city and upon its
streets without first obtaining an annual permit therefor from the Director of
Public Service and without first agreeing to comply with the requirements of
this chapter. The city shall have full power and authority to enter into an
exclusive agreement with a waste hauler to be the sole, exclusive company for
the collection and removal of residential recyclables, refuse and waste
materials in the city. Upon execution of an exclusive agreement with a waste
hauler by the city, the existence of that agreement shall be proper basis, in
the sole discretion of the city, to deny a permit to any other waste hauler
applying for a permit under this chapter.
   (B)   Whoever desires a permit to engage in any business as described in
division (A) of this section shall make written application therefor at the
city administration building. The written application must be made on the form
provided, correctly stating or containing the following information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   The applicant’s business name, address and telephone number;
      (3)   The make, model, year and current registration license(s) of motor
vehicle(s) used in the business;
      (4)   The type(s) of materials to be collected;
      (5)   The type(s) of service, commercial or residential;
      (6)   A list of all drivers and drivers’ license numbers (CDL);
      (7)   The annual vehicle safety inspection certificate for each motor
vehicle used in the business; and
      (8)   The names of the recycle, compost, disposal and other facilities
used by refuse hauler.
   (C)   The haulers shall indemnify and save harmless the city and all of its
executives, representatives, officers, agents, employees, successors, and
assigns, jointly and severally, of and from all manner of losses, suits,
actions, payments, costs, charges, damages, judgments, claims and demands of
any character, name or description, brought on account of any injury or damage
received or sustained by any person, persons or property by reason of any act,
omission, neglect or misconduct of said hauler or his or her agent or
employees.
   (D)   A surety in the amount of $500 cash or a surety bond from a surety
company in the amount of $500 shall be filed with the application.
   (E)   A certificate of public liability insurance, in the name of the permit
holder, as the insured, shall be filed with the application, in the amounts of
$1,000,000 per person for bodily injury, $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily
injury and $500,000 per accident for property damage.
   (F)   Upon payment by the applicant of the permit fee for each motor vehicle
to be operated in the city, the Director of Public Service shall issue a permit
to the applicant that shall be valid from the date of issuance to June 1,
together with a license identification affixed to each motor vehicle in an
unobscured, conspicuous place. The permit fee shall be collected for the
purpose of reimbursing the city for the cost of processing the permit as
follows: $25 for vehicles up to nine cubic yards and $50 for vehicles over nine
cubic yards.
   (G)   Appointments for safety inspections may be made with the Director of
Public Service.
   (H)   All motor vehicles shall have the company name prominently displayed
in letters no less than six inches high.
   (I)   Licensed refuse haulers must provide curbside recycle pick-up to
residents on a minimum bi-monthly schedule. The service may be source-separated
or the service may be nonsource-separated if the hauler is in compliance with §
50.02(B).
   (J)   A violation of any provision of this section may result in revocation
of the permit, as deemed proper by the Director of Public Service.
(Prior Code, § 1060.03) (Ord. 94-3, passed 3-22-1994; Ord. 03-03, passed 3-11-
2003) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.04 IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE; REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   Any motor vehicle licensed in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter and subsequently found by the police authority not to be in compliance
with this chapter may be impounded. Upon the licensee’s failure to comply after
being so ordered, and upon recommendation of the police authority, the Director
of Public Service may revoke the licensee’s permit.
(Prior Code, § 1060.04) (Ord. 94-3, passed 3-22-1994)
§ 50.05 PREVENTION OF SPILLAGE.
   No permit shall be issued for any motor vehicle not enclosed or equipped
with an adequate covering, a tarpaulin or other material suitable for serving
as an effective cover to prevent materials collected therein from blowing from
or falling off of the motor vehicle, or for any motor vehicle whose bed or body
construction or containers are not properly constructed to prevent dropping or
leaking of the materials collected therein.
(Prior Code, § 1060.05) (Ord. 94-3, passed 3-22-1994)
§ 50.06 QUARTERLY REPORTS.
   (A)   Each permit holder must complete a city quarterly report form and file
it with the Director of Public Service. The report form must be submitted by
April 15, July 15, October 15 and January 15 for the preceding quarter.
   (B)   The report will contain the number of units serviced within the city,
the weight in tons of refuse collected within the city, the weight in tons of
recyclables collected within the city and the weight in tons of yard waste
collected within the city, as well as the name of the facilities to which the
materials were taken.
   (C)   Permit holders who do not file their reports pursuant to division (A)
of this section shall be fined $20 per day for each day not in compliance.
(Prior Code, § 1060.06) (Ord. 94-3, passed 3-22-1994)
§ 50.07 TRANSPORT.
   Industrial, commercial or individual producers of refuse may transport such
refuse through the streets of the city; provided that the conveying of such
refuse is made in trucks or vehicles so constructed as to prevent the leakage
or scattering of the contents thereof; and provided, further, that the ultimate
disposal of said refuse is made without violating any other provision of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1060.07) (Ord. 94-3, passed 3-22-1994)
§ 50.08 DISPOSAL RESTRICTIONS.
   No person shall, within the limits of the city, throw any refuse upon the
ground or bury the same upon any premises, public or private, or burn the same
in any place; provided, however, that this section shall not prevent the use of
mechanical disposal devices.
(Prior Code, § 1060.08) (Ord. 94-3, passed 3-22-1994)
§ 50.09 ACCUMULATION OF WASTE AND JUNK ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person shall accumulate or permit the accumulation of one or more items
of waste or one or more items of machinery, furniture or household appliances,
which have fallen into disuse or disrepair, for more than ten days on private
property in any area which is visible from any other private property or from
any public property.
(Prior Code, § 1060.09) (Ord. 94-3, passed 3-22-1994)
§ 50.10 EXEMPTION OF CITY.
   The city is expressly exempted from the provisions of this chapter
pertaining to refuse collection permits or any other provision of this chapter
which might be construed as requiring the city to pay any fee or to obtain any
permit.
(Prior Code, § 1060.10) (Ord. 94-3, passed 3-22-1994)
§ 50.11 AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SERVICE TO MAKE RULES AND SET FEES.
   With the approval of Council, the Director of Public Service has authority
to make rules and regulations and set permit fees, not inconsistent herewith,
pertaining to the collection and disposal of solid waste and recyclables, as
deemed advisable.
(Prior Code, § 1060.11) (Ord. 94-3, passed 3-22-1994)
§ 50.12 ENFORCEMENT.
   Any hauler or other person in noncompliance with the provisions of this
chapter shall be issued a letter by the Director of Public Service, with a copy
to the Law Director. If the noncompliance continues, the matter shall be
referred to the Law Director for enforcement.
(Prior Code, § 1060.12) (Ord. 94-3, passed 3-22-1994)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter, for which no
penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a first
offense and shall be fined not more than $100. For a second offense, such
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be fined not
more than $250 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. For a third or
subsequent offense, such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree
and shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or
both.
   (B)   Whoever violates §
50.08 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both.
(Prior Code, § 1060.99) (Ord. 94-3, passed 3-22-1994)
CHAPTER 51: LEAF DROP-OFF PROGRAM
Section
   
51.01   Approval; funding; participation
Statutory reference:
   Nuisances, see R.C. Ch. 3767
§ 51.01 APPROVAL; FUNDING; PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   Council hereby approves a leaf drop-off program for city residents.
Council, through the budgetary process, shall appropriate money each year to
fund the city leaf drop-off program.
   (B)   Participation in the program will be voluntary at the centrally
located site on four consecutive Saturdays commencing the last Saturday of
October, from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
   (C)   The Director Public Service is hereby authorized to utilize Highway
Department workers already scheduled to work on Saturdays to help hold costs of
the leaf drop-off program to a minimum.
   (D)   Leaves deposited during the program shall be taken by the Department
of Public Service to an appropriate depository.
(Prior Code, § 1064.01) (Res. 95-R148, passed 12-5-1995)
CHAPTER 52: STORM SEWER SYSTEM
Section
   
52.01   Purpose and scope
   
52.02   Applicability and administration
   
52.03   Definitions
   
52.04   Disclaimer of liability
   
52.05   Conflicts, severability, nuisances and responsibility
   
52.06   Responsibility for administration
   
52.07   Discharge and connection prohibitions
   
52.08   Monitoring of illicit discharges and illegal connections
   
52.09   Riparian zone protection
   
52.10   Notification of spills
   
52.11   Enforcement
   
52.12   Appeal of notice of violation
   
52.13   Enforcement measures after appeal
   
52.14   Cost of abatement of the violation
   
52.15   Injunctive relief
   
52.16   Violations deemed a public nuisance
   
52.17   Remedies not exclusive
 
   
52.99   Penalty
§ 52.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the public health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of illicit
discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and waters of the
state. This chapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of
pollutants into the MS4 and the waters of the state in order to comply with
requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit process, as required by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency (Ohio
EPA). The objectives of this chapter are:
   (A)   To prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the MS4,
onto the ground surface, into common drainage tiles, ditch, creek, stream or
other body of water; and
   (B)   To establish legal authority to carry out inspections, monitoring
procedures and enforcement actions necessary to ensure compliance with this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1043.01) (Ord. 2012-22, passed 11-27-2012)
§ 52.02 APPLICABILITY AND ADMINISTRATION.
   This chapter shall apply to all residential, commercial, industrial or
institutional facilities responsible for discharges as described in §
52.01(A) and on any lands in the city and:
   (A)   Where the city has entered into a memorandum of agreement with another
governmental entity to provide such service; and
   (B)   Except for those discharges generated by the activities detailed in §
52.07.
(Prior Code, § 1043.02) (Ord. 2012-22, passed 11-27-2012)
§ 52.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to storm water. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures and practices to control site
runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251
et seq.) and any subsequent amendments.
   COMMUNITY. The city offices and departments, its designated representatives,
boards or commissions.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
AGENCY (USEPA). The United States Environmental Protection Agency, including,
but not limited to, the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency (Ohio EPA) or any
duly authorized official of the agency.
   FLOATABLE MATERIAL. Any foreign matter that may float or remain suspended in
the water column, and includes, but is not limited to, plastic, aluminum cans,
wood products, bottles and paper products.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Any material including any substance, waste or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or
otherwise managed.
   ILLEGAL CONNECTION. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, that allow an illicit discharge to enter the MS4.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. As defined at 40 C.F.R. § 122.26 (b)(2), any discharge to
an MS4 that is not composed entirely of storm water, except for those
discharges to an MS4 pursuant to a NPDES permit or noted in §
52.07.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14).
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). As defined at 40 C.F.R. §
122.26(b)(8), a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches,
human-made channels or storm drains):
      (1)   Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish,
district, municipality, township, county, district, association or other public
body (created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over sewage,
industrial wastes, including special districts under state law, such as a sewer
district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal
organization, or a designated and approved management agency under § 208 of the
Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1288, that discharges to waters of the
United States;
      (2)   Designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water;
      (3)   Which is not a combined sewer; and
      (4)   Which is not part of a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) as
defined at 40 C.F.R. § 122.2.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued by the EPA (or by the state under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on
an individual, group or general area-wide basis.
   OFF-LOT DISCHARGING HOME SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM. A system designed to treat
home sewage on-site and discharges treated wastewater effluent off the property
into a storm water or surface water conveyance or system.
   OWNER/OPERATOR/PERSON. Any individual, association, organization,
partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as
either the owner or on the owner’s behalf.
   POLLUTANT. Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. POLLUTANTS may
include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes, solvents, oil and other
automotive fluids, nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes, yard wastes, refuse,
rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, floatable
materials, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, hazardous materials, wastes,
sewage, dissolved and particulate metals, animal wastes, residues that result
from constructing a structure, and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
   STORM WATER. Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of a source,
it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and other
bodies or accumulations of water, surface and underground, natural or
artificial, regardless of the depth of the strata in which underground water is
located, that are situated wholly or partly within, or border upon, this state,
or are within its jurisdiction, except those private waters that do not combine
or effect a junction with natural surface or underground water.
(Prior Code, § 1043.03) (Ord. 2012-22, passed 11-27-2012)
§ 52.04 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not relieve any person
from responsibility for damage to any person otherwise imposed by law. The
provisions of this chapter are promulgated to promote the health, safety and
welfare of the public, and are not designed for the benefit of any individual
or for the benefit of any particular parcel of property.
(Prior Code, § 1043.04) (Ord. 2012-22, passed 11-27-2012)
§ 52.05 CONFLICTS, SEVERABILITY, NUISANCES AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Where this chapter is in conflict with other provisions of law or
ordinance, restrictive provisions, as determined by the city, shall prevail.
   (B)   If any clause, section or provision of this chapter is declared
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the validity
of the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected.
   (C)   This chapter shall not be construed as authorizing any person to
maintain a nuisance on their property, and compliance with the provisions of
this chapter shall not be a defense in any action to abate such a nuisance.
   (D)   Failure of the city to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly
conditions or to recommend corrective measures shall not relieve the site owner
from the responsibility for the condition or damage resulting from hazardous or
unsightly conditions and shall not result in the city, its officers, employees,
or agents being responsible for any condition or damage resulting from
hazardous or unsightly conditions.
(Prior Code, § 1043.05) (Ord. 2012-22, passed 11-27-2012)
§ 52.06 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   The city shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. The city may contract with the County Combined General Health District
to conduct inspections and monitoring, and to assist with enforcement actions.
(Prior Code, § 1043.06) (Ord. 2012-22, passed 11-27-2012)
§ 52.07 DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall discharge, or cause
to be discharged, an illicit discharge into the MS4. The commencement, conduct
or continuance of any illicit discharge to the MS4 is prohibited except:
      (1)   Water line flushing; landscape irrigation; diverted stream flows;
rising ground waters; uncontaminated ground water infiltration; uncontaminated
pumped ground water; discharges from potable water sources; foundation drains;
air conditioning condensate; irrigation water; springs; water from crawl space
pumps; footer drains; lawn watering; individual residential car washing; flows
from riparian habitats and wetlands; dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
street wash water; and discharges or flows from firefighting activities. These
discharges are exempt until such time as they are determined by the city to be
significant contributors of pollutants to the MS4;
      (2)   Discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to
protect public health and safety; and
      (3)   Discharges from off-lot household sewage treatment systems
permitted by the city for the purpose of discharging treated sewage effluent in
accordance with O.A.C. 3701-29-02(A) - (K) until such time as the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency issues an NPDES permitting mechanism for
residential one-, two- or three-family dwellings. These discharges are exempt,
unless such discharges are deemed to be creating a public health nuisance by
the city. In compliance with the Community Storm Water Management Program,
discharges from all off-lot household sewage treatment systems must either be
eliminated if found not to be eligible for an NPDES permit for existing
discharges or receive coverage under an appropriate NPDES permit issued and
approved by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency. When such permit coverage
is available, discharges from off-lot discharging household sewage treatment
systems will no longer be exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, use, maintenance
or continued existence of illegal connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
      (1)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
      (2)   A person is considered to be in violation of this regulation if the
person connects a line conveying illicit discharges to the MS4 or allows such a
connection to continue.
(Prior Code, § 1043.07) (Ord. 2012-22, passed 11-27-2012) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.08 MONITORING OF ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Establishment of an illicit discharge and illegal connection
monitoring program. The city has established this program to detect and
eliminate illicit discharges and illegal connections to the MS4, including the
systematic investigation of potential residential, commercial, industrial and
institutional facilities for the sources of any dry weather flows found as the
result of these inspections.
   (B)   Inspection of residential, commercial, industrial or institutional
facilities.
      (1)   The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject
to this chapter as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this
chapter.
      (2)   The city shall have the right to set up at facilities subject to
this chapter, such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/or
sampling of the facility’s storm water discharge, as determined by the Health
District.
      (3)   The city shall have the right to require the facility owner/
operator to install monitoring equipment as necessary. This sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in safe and proper
operating condition by the facility owner/operator at the owner/operator’s
expense.
      (4)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and reasonable
access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed
by the facility’s owner/operator at the written or oral request of the city and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
facility owner/operator.
      (5)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a facility
subject to this chapter for the purposes of illicit discharge inspection is a
violation of this chapter.
      (6)   If the city is refused access to any part of the facility from
which storm water is discharged, and the city demonstrates probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this chapter or that there is a need
to inspect and/or sample as part of an inspection and sampling program designed
to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to
protect the public health, safety and welfare, the city may seek issuance of a
search warrant, civil remedies, including, but not limited to, injunctive
relief, and/or criminal remedies from any court of appropriate jurisdiction.
      (7)   Any costs associated with these inspections, pollution source
tracking, enforcement and abatement shall be assessed to the facility owner/
operator.
(Prior Code, § 1043.08) (Ord. 2012-22, passed 11-27-2012)
§ 52.09 RIPARIAN ZONE PROTECTION.
   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris and other obstacles that would pollute,
contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse.
In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately-owned
structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will
not become a hazard to the use, function or physical integrity of the
watercourse. The maintenance of structures and work within a riparian zone
shall not violate the riparian setback ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 1043.09) (Ord. 2012-22, passed 11-27-2012)
§ 52.10 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.
   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of
materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of the state,
the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment
and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous
materials, the person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of
the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of
nonhazardous materials, the person shall notify the authorized enforcement
agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the authorized enforcement agency within three business
days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates
from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such
establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and
the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for
at least three years.
(Prior Code, § 1043.10) (Ord. 2012-22, passed 11-27-2012)
§ 52.11 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Notice of violation. When the city finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the city may order
compliance by written notice of violation. Such notice must specify the
violation and shall be hand delivered, and/or sent by registered mail, to the
owner/operator of the facility. Such notice may require the following actions:
      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
      (2)   The elimination of illicit discharges or illegal connections;
      (3)   That violating discharges, practices or operations cease and
desist;
      (4)   The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; or
      (5)   The implantation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   (B)   Abatement. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected
property is required, the notice of violation shall set forth a deadline within
which such remediation or restoration must be completed. The notice shall
further advise that a legal action for enforcement may be initiated if the
facility owner/operator fails to remediate or restore within the established
deadline.
   (C)   Notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation must
meet compliance standards within the time established in the notice of
violation.
   (D)   Administrative hearing. If the violation has not been corrected
pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, the city
shall schedule an administrative hearing to determine reasons for noncompliance
and to determine the next enforcement activity. Notice of the administrative
hearing shall be hand delivered and/or sent registered mail.
   (E)   Injunctive relief. It shall be unlawful for any owner/operator to
violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this
chapter pursuant to R.C. § 3709.211. If a owner/operator has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the city may petition for
a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the owner/operator from
activities that would create further violations or compelling the owner/
operator to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
(Prior Code, § 1043.11) (Ord. 2012-22, passed 11-27-2012)
§ 52.12 APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the city. The notice of appeal must be received within 15 days from the date of
the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before City Council shall take
place within 45 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The
decision of the City Council or their designee shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 1043.12) (Ord. 2012-22, passed 11-27-2012)
§ 52.13 ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.
   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days
of the decision of City Council upholding the decision of the city, then
representatives of the authorized enforcement agency forward the nuisance to
the Law Director for injunctive relief or if authorized by City Council, shall
enter upon the subject private property to take any and all measures necessary
to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for
any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to
allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises
for the purposes set forth in this section.
(Prior Code, § 1043.13) (Ord. 2012-22, passed 11-27-2012)
§ 52.14 COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION.
   Within 60 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property
will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The
property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the
assessment within 45 days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner
as determined by the decision of the city or by the expiration of the time in
which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against
the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the
assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the city by reason of such violation.
(Prior Code, § 1043.14) (Ord. 2012-22, passed 11-27-2012)
§ 52.15 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated
or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the authorized
enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction
restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or
compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
(Prior Code, § 1043.15) (Ord. 2012-22, passed 11-27-2012) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.16 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter is a threat to public health, safety and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the
violator’s expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel
the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
(Prior Code, § 1043.16) (Ord. 2012-22, passed 11-27-2012) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.17 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is in the
discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies.
(Prior Code, § 1043.17) (Ord. 2012-22, passed 11-27-2012)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
Environmental Health Code shall be subject to penalties provided in R.C. §§
3707.99 and 3709.99.
(Prior Code, § 1043.99) (Ord. 2012-22, passed 11-27-2012)
CHAPTER 53: STORM SEWER DRAINAGE FACILITIES
Section
   
53.01   Request for maintenance agreement and waiver of notice
Statutory reference:
   Compulsory sewer connections, see R.C. § 729.06
   Management and control of sewerage system, see R.C. §§ 729.50 et seq.
   Power to construct sewerage system, see R.C. §§ 715.40 and 717.01
§ 53.01 REQUEST FOR MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT AND WAIVER OF NOTICE.
   (A)   Commercial, residential and other developers for any development
containing drainage facilities, said facilities being the city’s responsibility
for maintenance, shall execute and file a request for maintenance agreement and
waiver of notice of public hearing with the city no later than the time of
request for final plat approval.
   (B)   Said agreement and waiver of notice shall permit the city to establish
drainage maintenance fees for maintaining said drainage facilities in
accordance with R.C. Ch. 6137. Copies of said agreement and waiver of notice
are set forth in full following this section and are hereby made a part of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1044.01) (Ord. 92-9, passed 6-9-1992)
   REQUEST FOR MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT
   Whereas, _____________________________________ is the title owner in fee
simple of the real estate known as _________________ consisting of
approximately _____ acres of land in Sections _______ of __________ County of
Summit, Ohio, and said _________________ shall become the owner of the area
therein to be dedicated to the public use; and
   Whereas, said _______________________________ Subdivision contains _______
lots as set forth on the plat and amendments thereto as shall be recorded with
the County of Summit Recorder; and
   Whereas, said ___________________________ contains a number of ditches,
storm sewers, culverts, a retention area, a retention basin and general
drainage areas, all of said areas being set forth on the plans showing the same
as being within the drainage easements as shown on the original plat and
amendments thereto; and
   Whereas, the plans have been sealed by a professional engineer registered in
the State of Ohio; and
   Whereas, the City of Green, as part of the subdivision review, shall approve
all of the ditches, storm sewers, culverts, the retention area, the retention
basin and general drainage areas, as shown on the original plans and plat; and
   Whereas, the improvements are to be constructed by the owner under the
supervision and control of the City of Green and shall meet the approval of the
City of Green as constructed; and
   Whereas, the owner agrees that this agreement, along with the plan and
schedules of the improvements, shall be filed with the Clerk of Council of the
City of Green to locate and establish such as a public watercourse.
   This Maintenance Agreement for drainage facilities is a part of the
development plan, and the obligation to pay the maintenance fees shall pass
with the title to the property. There shall be inserted in each deep passing
title to any of the land herein by the owner or developer the words:
   “Title to the fee includes the obligation to pay the drainage maintenance
fee assessed, or to be assessed, by the city, pursuant to Ohio Revised Code
Chapter 6137 and following.”
   NOW, THEREFORE, the above owner wishes to have established by the Council of
the City of Green a Ditch Maintenance Fund, pursuant to Section 6131.63 and
Chapter 6137 of the Ohio Revised Code, and have the lots and public areas
assessed for said maintenance.
   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we have hereunto set our hands this ____ day of
____________ , 20___.
________________________________      ______________________________________
Witness                              Owner
_________________________________      ______________________________________
Witness                              Owner
STATE OF OHIO, SUMMIT COUNTY, SS
BEFORE ME, A NOTARY PUBLIC IN AND FOR SAID COUNTY AND STATE, PERSONALLY
APPEARED ___________________ WHO ACKNOWLEDGED THAT HE/SHE/THEY DID SIGN THE
FOREGOING INSTRUMENT AND THAT THE SAME IS HIS/HER/THEIR FREE ACT AND DEED.
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF, I HAVE HERETO SET MY HAND AND OFFICIAL SEAL, AT
_____________________ THIS ________ DAY OF _______________, 20____.
__________________________
Notary Public
_____________________ Subdivision Recorded in Cabinet _____ Slides.
   WAIVER OF NOTICE OF PUBLIC MEETING
   We, the undersigned, being all the owners affected by the Request for
Maintenance Agreement which has been submitted by us on behalf of the
______________________, hereby waive the holding of said public meeting since
there are no other owners to object to said assessment, and hereby request that
the said Maintenance Fund be immediately enacted.
___________________________
Owner
____________________________
Owner
STATE OF OHIO, SUMMIT COUNTY, SS
BEFORE ME, A NOTARY PUBLIC IN AND FOR SAID COUNTY AND STATE, PERSONALLY
APPEARED _________________ WHO ACKNOWLEDGED THAT HE/SHE/THEY DID SIGN THE
FOREGOING INSTRUMENT AND THAT SAME IS HIS/HER/THEIR FREE ACT AND DEED.
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF, I HAVE HERETO SET MY HAND AND OFFICIAL SEAL, AT
__________________ THIS _____ DAY OF ______________________ , 20____.
_________________________________
Notary Public
This instrument was prepared by:
_______________________________________
Owner
CHAPTER 54: MAINTENANCE OF STORM WATER MANAGEMENT INFRASTRUCTURE
Section
   
54.01   Definitions
   
54.02   Inspection and maintenance required
   
54.03   Abatement of violations
   
54.04   Collection of costs
   
54.05   Storm water management policy
§ 54.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DETENTION BASIN.  Flow control structure that is used to contain storm water
for a limited period of time and provides protection for areas below it by
containing storm water. The water is discharged from the basin until the basin
is empty.
   DRAINAGE WAY. Use of the land to collect and transport storm water runoff in
a swale, ditch, channel or stream.
   RETENTION BASIN. A flow control structure that is used to contain storm
water for a limited period of time and provides protection for areas below it
by containing storm water. Some water remains in the basin area.
   STORM SEWER. A series of buried pipes, manholes, catch basins or culvert
pipes that are designed to drain excess rain and groundwater from paved
streets, parking lots, sidewalks, and roofs, and convey to a drainage way.
   STORM WATER. Water that originates during precipitation events, snowmelts or
other runoff sources.
   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM. All aspects of the system designed to
effectively regulate and control storm water runoff emanating from one property
or development to another, and which includes, but is not limited to, retention
basins, detention basins, open waterways and drainage easement areas.
   STORM WATER RUNOFF. Water from rain, snowmelt or other sources, that flows
over the land surface.
(Prior Code, § 1045.01) (Ord. 2012-14, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 54.02 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   The homeowner’s association for each residential development and/or
the owner of each lot or parcel within the residential development, as well as
the owner(s) of any nonresidential development, shall be responsible for
inspecting and maintaining, in good working order, the storm water management
system that has been provided to control the storm water runoff generated by
such development. However, the city shall be responsible for maintaining any
storm water management system that is located on city-owned property.
   (B)   Minimum required inspection and maintenance of detention and/or
retention basins shall include, but not be limited to, the control of
vegetation within basin areas so as to not exceed a height of ten inches,
unless otherwise explicitly approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and/
or City Council as part of a professional landscape plan. In addition,
detention and/or retention basins shall not be permitted to accumulate with
silt, soil, branches, trees, vegetation, debris or any other obstructions, or
to become damaged or compromised in any way so as to prevent the detention and/
or retention basin from effectively operating in the manner in which it was
designed and intended as determined by the City Engineer.
   (C)   Open drainageways, or any portion of any open drainageways, located on
any lot or parcel shall be maintained free from accumulations of silt, soil,
branches, trees, vegetation, debris or any other obstructions which impede the
natural flow and/or course of the open waterway as determined by the City
Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 1045.02) (Ord. 2012-14, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 54.03 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.
   If the homeowner’s association for the residential development and/or the
individual lot or parcel owners within the residential development, or the
owner(s) of any nonresidential development, after being given notice to comply
with the requirements of this section, fail, neglect or refuse, within 30 days
to comply with the order by the city, the city may take such action required by
such order, either by force account or by contract, or the Director of Law may
institute legal proceedings to compel compliance with the order. The City
Engineer shall have authority to grant an extension of the 30-day compliance
period if, in his or her professional judgment, additional time is reasonably
required to correct the violation in question.
(Prior Code, § 1045.03) (Ord. 2012-14, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 54.04 COLLECTION OF COSTS.
   Any cost or expense incurred by the city pursuant to achieving compliance
with the requirements of this section, shall be reimbursed to the city by the
homeowner’s association and/or the individual lot or parcel owners within the
residential development, or the owner(s) of any nonresidential development,
either at the contractor’s price or the city’s remedial expenses to cover the
city’s administrative cost of maintaining the storm water management system. If
not paid by the homeowner’s association and/or the individual lot or parcel
owners within the residential development, or the owner(s) of any
nonresidential development, within 30 days after billing, such expense or cost
may be recovered by an action at law against such responsible parties, and to
the extent permitted by law, by resolution of Council, and be certified to the
County Fiscal Officer and placed proportionately on the tax duplicates of any
lot(s) and/or parcel(s) owned by the homeowner’s association for the
residential development and/or on each individual lot or parcel owned within
the residential development, or on the lot(s) and/or parcel(s) owned within any
nonresidential development, for collection and shall become a lien on such lot
(s) or parcel(s).
(Prior Code, § 1045.04) (Ord. 2012-14, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 54.05 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT POLICY.
   The city’s administration shall adopt a storm water management policy to use
as a guide to enforce this chapter. The administration shall notify City
Council if any changes are made to the policy adopted.
(Prior Code, § 1045.05) (Ord. 2012-14, passed 10-23-2012)
CHAPTER 55: UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT
Section
   
55.01   Underground utilities required
   
55.02   Exceptions to requirement of underground utility facilities
   
55.03   Designation of underground utilities districts
   
55.04   Waiver
   
55.05   Maintenance
 
   
55.99   Penalty
§ 55.01 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES REQUIRED.
   (A)   All utility facilities to be located or relocated within the city,
other than existing aboveground utility facilities, including, without
limitation, utility facilities located or relocated as part of a public
improvement project, shall be placed underground within dedicated utility
easements or streets, alleys, properties and rights-of-way of the city. As used
herein, PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PROJECT is defined as all improvements that will be
dedicated to the city for public use, prior to or upon completion, regardless
of funding source.
   (B)   As used herein, UTILITY FACILITY means all lines, poles, conduits,
pipes, posts, tanks, vaults, wires, equipment and appurtenances, above or below
ground, in streets, alleys, utility easements, properties, and rights-of-way of
the city, used or useful in supplying electric, communication, television
signal services, gas, sanitary, storm, or any other public or private utility.
(Prior Code, § 1050.01) (Ord. 2017-12, passed 6-27-2017)
§ 55.02 EXCEPTIONS TO REQUIREMENT OF UNDERGROUND UTILITY FACILITIES.
   The following aboveground utility facilities are permitted:
   (A)   Poles used exclusively for police and fire alarm boxes, traffic-
control facilities or any similar municipal equipment installed under the
supervision and to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Service and/or
Director of Safety;
   (B)   Street lighting systems and lighting units comprised of poles,
standards, luminaries, conductors and appurtenant equipment for street lighting
systems and for area lighting;
   (C)   Radio antennas and associated equipment, including supporting
structures. This exception does not include facilities extending to and from
such equipment;
   (D)   Temporary utility facilities used for supplying services to new
construction or for maintaining services during periods of restoration or
replacement. The time limit for the temporary utility facilities shall be as
determined by the City Engineer;
   (E)   Electric and telephone service terminals and splices in pedestals;
enclosed pad-mounted distribution transformers; pad-mounted distribution
equipment; and riser facilities for connecting approved distribution lines to
existing distribution lines;
   (F)   Service equipment and connections mounted against walls of buildings
served, including gas and electric risers, and meters and communication or
television risers and terminals; and
   (G)   Those utility facilities that require connection with existing
aboveground utility facilities that are located adjacent to the city’s
municipal boundaries, and due to such required connection, cannot be
structurally placed underground.
(Prior Code, § 1050.02) (Ord. 2017-12, passed 6-27-2017)
§ 55.03 DESIGNATION OF UNDERGROUND UTILITIES DISTRICTS.
   The following areas are designated as Underground Utilities Districts:
   (A)   The Massillon Road North District Underground Utilities District,
bounded on the south by I-77, bounded on the north at a point 500 feet north of
State Route 619 and bounded on the east and west 200 feet from the center line
of Massillon Road; and
   (B)   The Massillon Road South District Underground Utilities District,
bounded on the north by I-77, bounded on the south at a point 200 feet south of
Wise Road and bounded on the east and west 200 feet from the center line of
Massillon Road.
(Prior Code, § 1050.03) (Ord. 2017-12, passed 6-27-2017)
§ 55.04 WAIVER.
   A waiver from the application of this chapter may be granted by City Council
upon application that compliance with the provisions herein is impracticable.
As a condition for granting a waiver, City Council may require the utility
facilities to be screened to minimize their visual impact.
(Prior Code, § 1050.04) (Ord. 2017-12, passed 6-27-2017)
§ 55.05 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   All utility facilities shall be installed and maintained in accordance
with this chapter and the National Electrical Safety Code, DOT Pipeline Safety
Code and the National Fuel Gas Code.
   (B)   The Director of Public Service in coordination with the City Engineer
is authorized and directed to promulgate rules and standards for the
construction of underground utility facilities and that are not in conflict
with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1050.05) (Ord. 2017-12, passed 6-27-2017)
§ 55.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   No subdivision, preliminary or final plat, site plan, having overhead
connections, or public improvement plan approval shall be granted, unless such
subdivision, preliminary or final plat, site plan, having overhead connections,
or public improvement plan complies with the terms of this chapter.
   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and punished as provided in this chapter. Each
day, or portion thereof, during which the violation is committed, continued or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such. In addition, the city shall have the right to institute the
appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such
violation or to require the removal or termination of the illegally located or
installed utility.
(Prior Code, § 1050.99) (Ord. 2017-12, passed 6-27-2017)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   LICENSING PROVISIONS
      
72.   TRAFFIC RULES
      
73.   MOTOR VEHICLE CRIMES
      
74.   EQUIPMENT AND LOADS
      
75.   BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, AND OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
      
76.   PARKING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Compliance with order of police officer
   
70.03   Emergency vehicles to proceed cautiously past red or stop signal
   
70.04   Exceptions generally; emergency, public safety and coroner vehicles
exempt
   
70.05   Persons riding or driving animals upon roadways
   
70.06   Prohibitions against pedestrians and slow-moving vehicles on freeways
   
70.07   Use of private property for vehicular travel
   
70.08   Names of persons damaging real property by operation of vehicle to be
provided to owner
   
70.09   Limited access highways; barriers along; vehicles to enter and leave at
designated intersections
   
70.10   Through highways
   
70.11   Officer may remove ignition key
   
70.12   Removal of vehicles after accidents
   
70.13   Impounding of vehicles; redemption
   
70.14   Traffic direction in emergencies; obedience to school guards
   
70.15   Application to drivers of government vehicles
Traffic-Control Devices
   
70.30   Obeying traffic-control devices
   
70.31   Signal lights
   
70.32   Signals over reversible lanes
   
70.33   Ambiguous or non-working traffic signals
   
70.34   Pedestrian-control signals
   
70.35   Unauthorized signs and signals prohibited
   
70.36   Alteration, defacement, or removal prohibited
   
70.37   Unauthorized possession or sale of devices
   
70.38   Signal preemption devices; prohibitions
   
70.39   Authority and considerations for placement of device
   
70.40   Conformity with state manual
   
70.41   Powers of Director of Public Safety
   
70.42   Posting of signs and signals required
   
70.43   Director’s powers not limited
   
70.44   Records of Director
   
70.45   Reservation of power to Council
   
70.46   Violations subject to general code penalty
   
70.47   Bicycle symbol signal indications
 
   
70.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Unauthorized use of a motor vehicle, see §
131.09
Statutory reference:
   Local traffic regulations, scope and authority, see R.C. § 4511.07
   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
   Traffic law photo-monitoring devices, state regulations, see R.C. §§
4511.092 et seq.
   Uniform application and precedence of state traffic laws, see R.C. § 4511.06
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided, the definitions set forth in R.C. § 4501.01
shall apply to this Title, and the penal laws of the municipality. For the
purpose of this Title, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR and TRACTION ENGINE. Every self-propelled vehicle
designed or used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery, but having no
provision for carrying loads independently of such other vehicles, and used
principally for agricultural purposes.
   ALLEY. A street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of
lots or buildings in urban districts, and not intended for the purpose of
through vehicular traffic, and any street or highway that has been declared an
“alley” by the Legislative Authority of the municipality in which the street or
highway is located.
   ARTERIAL STREET OR HIGHWAY. A street or highway primarily used by through
traffic, usually on a continuous route or a street or highway designated as
part of an arterial system.
   AUTOCYCLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   BEACON. A highway traffic signal with one or more signal sections that
operate in a flashing mode.
   BICYCLE. A pedal-powered vehicle upon which a human operator sits, including
an electric bicycle.
   BICYCLE BOX. A designated area on the approach to a signalized intersection,
between an advance motorist stop line and the crosswalk or intersection, that
is intended to provide bicyclists a visible location to wait in front of
stopped motorists during the red signal phase.
   BICYCLE LANE. A portion of a roadway that has been designated for
preferential or exclusive use by bicyclists and is often delineated from the
adjacent general-purpose lanes by longitudinal pavement markings and either a
bicycle lane symbol, words, or signs. The term includes all of the following:
      (1)   A buffer-separated bicycle lane, which is separated from the
adjacent general- purpose lanes by a pattern of standard longitudinal pavement
markings that are wider than a normal or wide-lane pavement marking;
      (2)   A counter-flow bicycle lane, which is a one-directional bicycle
lane that provides a lawful path of travel for bicycles in the opposite
direction from the general traffic on a roadway that otherwise requires the
general traffic to travel in only one direction. A counter-flow bicycle lane is
designated by the traffic control devices used for other bicycle lanes;
      (3)   A separated bicycle lane, which is an exclusive facility for
bicyclists that is located within or directly adjacent to the roadway and is
physically separated from the motor vehicle traffic with a vertical element.
   BICYCLE SIGNAL FACE. A signal face that displays only bicycle symbol signal
indications in accordance with R.C. § 4511.15 that exclusively controls a
bicyclist’s movement from a designated bicycle lane or from a separate
facility, and that displays signal indications that are applicable only to a
bicyclist’s movement.
   BICYCLE SIGNAL SIGN. A sign meant to inform road users that the signal
indications in the bicycle signal face are intended only for bicyclists, and to
inform bicyclists which bicyclist movements are controlled by that bicycle
signal face.
   BIKEWAY. Any road, street, path, or way that in some manner is specifically
designated for bicycle travel, regardless of whether the facility is designated
for the exclusive use of bicycles or if it is shared with other modes of
transportation.
   BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine passengers,
and used for the transportation of persons other than in a ridesharing
arrangement, and every motor vehicle, automobile for hire, or funeral car,
other than a taxicab or motor vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement,
designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory fronting upon a street or highway,
including the street or highway, between successive intersections within the
municipality, where 50% or more of the frontage between successive
intersections is occupied by buildings in use for business, or within or
outside the municipality where 50% or more of the frontage for a distance of
300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business, and the
character of the territory is indicated by official traffic-control devices.
   BUSWAY. A traveled way that is used exclusively by buses.
   CAB-ENCLOSED MOTORCYCLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE. A motor vehicle that is designed to carry nine or
fewer passengers and is operated for hire pursuant to a prearranged contract
for the transportation of passengers on public roads and highways along a route
under the control of the person hiring the vehicle and not over a defined and
regular route. “Prearranged contract” means an agreement, made in advance of
boarding, to provide transportation from a specific location in an chauffeured
limousine. The term does not include any vehicle that is used exclusively in
the business of funeral directing. (R.C. § 4501.01(LL))
   CHILD CARE CENTER. Has the same meaning as set forth in R.C. § 5104.01.
   COMMERCIAL TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle having motive power designed or used
for drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load
thereon, or designed or used for drawing other vehicles while carrying a
portion of the other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both.
   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every street or highway in respect to which
owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right or
access to or from the same except at certain points only and in a manner as may
be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over the street or
highway.
   CROSSWALK.
      (1)   That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs, or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway, and in the absence of a sidewalk on one side of the
roadway, the part of a roadway included within the extension of the lateral
lines of the sidewalk at right angles to the center line;
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere,
distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface, which might be supplemented by contrasting pavement texture, style, or
color;
      (3)   Notwithstanding divisions (1) and (2) of this definition, the term
does not include an area where local authorities have placed signs indicating
no crossing.
   DRIVER or OPERATOR. Any person who drives or is in actual physical control
of a vehicle.
   DRIVEWAY. An access from a roadway to a building, site, or abutting
property.
   ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a “class 1 electric bicycle”, a “class 2 electric
bicycle”, or a “class 3 electric bicycle” as defined below.
      (1)   CLASS 1 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that
provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles per hour.
      (2)   CLASS 2 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that may
provide assistance regardless of whether the rider is pedaling and is not
capable of providing assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles
per hour.
      (3)   CLASS 3 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that
provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 28 miles per hour.
   ELECTRONIC. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Emergency vehicles of municipal, township or county
departments or public utility corporations, when identified as such as required
by law, the Director of Public Safety, or local authorities, and motor vehicles
when commandeered by a police officer.
   EXPLOSIVES. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is intended for
the purpose of producing an explosion that contains any oxidizing and
combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities, or
packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion, or
by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause a sudden
generation of highly heated gases, such that the resultant gaseous pressures
are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects, or of
destroying life or limb. Manufactured articles shall not be held to be
explosives when the individual units contain explosives in limited quantities
of such nature or in such packing that it is impossible to procure a
simultaneous or a destructive explosion of the units, to the injury of life,
limb, or property by fire, friction, concussion, percussion, or by a detonator,
such as fixed ammunition for small arms, firecrackers, or safety fuse matches.
   EXPRESSWAY. A divided arterial street or highway for through traffic with
full or partial control of access with an excess of 50% of all crossroads
separated in grade.
   FARM MACHINERY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   FLAMMABLE LIQUID. Any liquid which has a flash point of 70°F or less, as
determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.
   FREEWAY. A divided multi-lane highway for through traffic with crossroads
separated in grade and with full control of access.
   FUNERAL ESCORT VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, including a funeral hearse, while
used to facilitate the movement of a funeral procession.
   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load thereon.
   HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle used in snow and ice removal or road
surface maintenance, including a snow plow, traffic line striper, road sweeper,
mowing machine, asphalt distributing vehicle, or other such vehicle designed
for use in specific highway maintenance activities.
   HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SIGNAL. A power-operated traffic control device by which
traffic is warned or directed to take some specific action. The term includes a
beacon, an in-road warning light, a lane-use control signal, and a traffic
control signal. The term does not include a power-operated sign, steadily
illuminated pavement marker, gate, flashing light signal, warning light, or
steady burning electric lamp.
   HYBRID BEACON. A special type of beacon that is intentionally placed in a
dark mode where no indications are displayed between periods of operation and,
when operated, displays both steady and flashing highway traffic signal
indications. The term includes both of the following:
      (1)   An emergency-vehicle hybrid beacon used to warn and control traffic
at an otherwise unsignalized location to assist authorized emergency vehicles
in entering or crossing a street or highway;
      (2)   A pedestrian hybrid beacon used to warn and control traffic at an
otherwise unsignalized location to assist pedestrians in crossing a street or
highway at a marked crosswalk.
   IN-ROAD WARNING LIGHT. A special type of highway traffic signal that is
installed in the roadway surface to warn road users that they are approaching a
condition on or adjacent to the roadway that might not be readily apparent and
might require the road users to reduce speed or come to a complete stop.
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of
two highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or
the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways that join at
any other angle might come into conflict. The junction of an alley, driveway,
or site roadway open to public travel with a public roadway or highway does not
constitute an intersection, unless the public roadway or highway at the
junction is controlled by a traffic control device.
      (2)   If a highway includes two roadways separated by a median, then
every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway constitutes a separate intersection if the opposing left-turn paths
cross and there is sufficient interior storage for the design vehicle. As used
in this division, “design vehicle” means the longest vehicle authorized under
R.C. § 5577.05 to operate on that roadway without a permit.
      (3)   At a location controlled by a highway traffic signal, regardless of
the distance between the separate intersections as described in division (2) of
this definition:
         (a)   If a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk has not been designated
on the roadway within the median between the separate intersections, the two
intersections and the roadway and median constitute one intersection.
         (b)   Where a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk is designated on the
roadway on the intersection approach, the area within the crosswalk and any
area beyond the designated stop line or yield line constitute part of the
intersection.
         (c)   Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on the departure
from the intersection, the intersection includes the area that extends to the
far side of the crosswalk.
   LANE-USE CONTROL SIGNAL. A signal face or comparable display on a full-
matrix changeable message sign that displays indications to permit or prohibit
the use of specific lanes of a roadway or a shoulder where driving is sometimes
authorized or to indicate the impending prohibition of such use.
   LANED HIGHWAY. A highway the roadway of which is divided into two or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
   LIMITED DRIVING PRIVILEGES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   LOCAL AUTHORITIES. Every county, municipal, and other local board or body
having authority to adopt police regulations under the Constitution and laws of
this state.
   LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICE. Means a device weighing less than 100 pounds
that has handlebars, is propelled by an electric motor or human power, and has
an attainable speed on a paved level surface of not more than 20 miles per hour
when propelled by the electric motor.
   MEDIAN. The portion of a highway separating opposing directions of the
traveled way or the area between two roadways of a divided highway, measured
from edge of traveled way to edge of traveled way. The median excludes turn
lanes. The width of a median may be different between intersections,
interchanges, and at opposite approaches of the same intersection.
   MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE OR MOTOR SCOOTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4501.01.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than muscular
power or power collected from overhead electric trolley wires, except motorized
bicycles, electric bicycles, road rollers, traction engines, power shovels,
power cranes and other equipment used in construction work, and not designed
for or employed in general highway transportation, hole-digging machinery,
well- drilling machinery, ditch-digging machinery, farm machinery, and trailers
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat or
saddle for the use of the operator and designed to travel on not more than
three wheels in contact with the ground, including but not limited to motor
vehicles known as “motor-driven cycle”, “motor scooter”, “autocycle”, “cab-
enclosed motorcycle”, or “motorcycle” without regard to weight or brake
horsepower.
   MOTORIZED BICYCLE or MOPED. Any vehicle having either two tandem wheels or
one wheel in the front and two wheels in the rear, that may be pedaled, and
that is equipped with a helper motor of not more than 50 cubic centimeters
piston displacement that produces not more than one brake horsepower and is
capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of not greater than 20 miles per
hour on a level surface. The terms do not include an electric bicycle.
   MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR. Any self-propelled vehicle designed for, and used by,
a person with a disability and that is incapable of a speed in excess of eight
miles per hour.
   MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR. A type of agricultural tractor that has
two or more wheels or tires on each side of one axle at the rear of the
tractor, is designed or used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery,
has no provision for carrying loads independently of the drawn vehicles or
machinery, and is used principally for agricultural purposes.
   NATURAL RESOURCES OFFICER. An officer appointed pursuant to R.C. § 1501.24.
   OPERATE. To cause or have caused movement of a vehicle.
   PARKED or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle upon a street, road, alley,
highway or public ground, whether accompanied or unaccompanied by a driver, but
does not include the temporary standing of a vehicle for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or loading merchandise or passengers.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person on foot, in a motorized or non-motorized wheelchair,
or using another equivalent device, such as skates or a skateboard. The term
includes a personal delivery device as defined in R.C. § 4511.513 unless the
context clearly suggests otherwise.
   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
   POLE TRAILER. Every trailer or semitrailer attached to the towing vehicle by
means of a reach, pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing
vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular shaped loads
such as poles, pipes, or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining
themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or
to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
   PREDICATE MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAFFIC OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12, 4511.132,
4511.16, 4511.20, 4511.201, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32,
4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40,
4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451,
4511.452, 4511.46, 4511.47, 4511.48, 4511.481, 4511.49, 4511.50, 4511.511,
4511.53, 4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.56, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60,
4511.61, 4511.64, 4511.66, 4511.661, 4511.68, 4511.70, 4511.701, 4511.71,
4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, 4511.73, 4511.763, 4511.771, 4511.78, or
4511.84;
      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.17(A)(2), 4511.51(A) through (D), or
4511.74(A);
      (3)   A violation of any provision of R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.76 for
which no penalty otherwise is provided in the section that contains the
provision violated;
      (4)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.214;
      (5)   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any section or provision set forth or described in division (1),
(2), (3), or (4) of this definition.
   PRIVATE ROAD. Every way or place in private ownership used for vehicular
travel by the owner, and those having express or implied permission from the
owner, but not by other persons.
   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Any of the following:
      (1)   Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under contract to
a municipality, township, or county, and private ambulances and nontransport
vehicles bearing license plates issued under R.C. § 4503.49;
      (2)   Motor vehicles used by public law enforcement officers or other
persons sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state;
      (3)   Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required by the
Director of Public Safety, when used in response to fire emergency calls or to
provide emergency medical service to ill or injured persons, and when operated
by a duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer rescue service or a
volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to the rules or
directives of that service. The State Fire Marshal shall be designated by the
Director of Public Safety as the certifying agency for all public safety
vehicles described herein;
      (4)   Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor vehicles when
used by volunteer firefighters responding to emergency calls in the fire
department service when identified as required by the Director of Public
Safety;
      (5)   Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency medical service
to an ill or injured person, when certified as a public safety vehicle, shall
be considered such a vehicle when transporting an ill or injured person to a
hospital, regardless of whether such vehicle has already passed a hospital;
      (6)   Vehicles used by the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit for the
enforcement of orders and rules of the Public Utilities Commission as specified
in R.C. § 5503.34.
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property operating upon rails or tracks
placed principally on a private right-of-way.
   RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal, or device erected by authority of
a public body or official or by a railroad, and intended to give notice of the
presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a train.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory, not comprising a business district,
fronting on a street or highway, including the street or highway, where, for a
distance of 300 feet or more, the frontage is improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.
   RIDESHARING ARRANGEMENT. Includes the transportation of persons in a motor
vehicle where the transportation is incidental to another purpose of a
volunteer driver, and includes arrangements known as carpools, vanpools, and
buspools.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Either of the following, as the context requires:
      (1)   The right of a vehicle or pedestrian to proceed uninterruptedly in
a lawful manner in the direction in which it, he or she is moving, in
preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching from a different
direction into its, his or her path;
      (2)   A general term denoting land, property, or the interest therein,
usually in the configuration of a strip, acquired for or devoted to
transportation purposes. When used in this context, “right-of-way” includes the
roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch, and slopes extending to the right-of-way
limits under the control of the state or local authority.
   ROAD SERVICE VEHICLE. Means wreckers, utility repair vehicles, and state,
county, and municipal service vehicles equipped with visual signals by means of
flashing, rotating, or oscillating lights.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel and parking lanes, not including the berm, sidewalk, or
shoulder, even if the berm, sidewalk, or shoulder is used by a person operating
a bicycle or other human-powered vehicle. If a highway includes two or more
separate roadways, the term means any such roadway separately but not all such
roadways collectively.
   ROUNDABOUT. A circular intersection with a yield control at each entry,
which permits a vehicle on the circulatory roadway to proceed, with deflection
of the approaching vehicles counter- clockwise around a central island.
   RURAL MAIL DELIVERY VEHICLE. Every vehicle used to deliver United States
mail on a rural mail delivery route.
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians, and protected or marked or indicated by adequate
signs so as to be plainly visible at all times.
   SCHOOL BUS. Every bus designed for carrying more than nine passengers that
is owned by a public, private, or governmental agency or institution of
learning and operated for the transportation of children to or from a school
session or a school function, or owned by a private person and operated for
compensation for the transportation of children to or from a school session or
a school function. The term does not include any of the following:
      (1)   A bus operated by a municipally owned transportation system, a mass
transit company operating exclusively within the territorial limits of a
municipal corporation, or within such limits and the territorial limits of
municipal corporations immediately contiguous to such municipal corporation,
nor a common passenger carrier certified by the public utilities commission
unless such bus is devoted exclusively to the transportation of children to and
from a school session or a school function;
      (2)   A van or bus used by a licensed child care center or type A family
child care home to transport children from the child care center or type A
family child care home to a school if the van or bus does not have more than 15
children in the van or bus at any time;
      (3)   An alternative vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.76.
   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or property
with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part of its own
weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by another
vehicle.
   SHARED-USE PATH. A bikeway outside the traveled way and physically separated
from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and either within
the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment. A shared-use path
also may be used by pedestrians, including skaters, joggers, users of manual
and motorized wheelchairs, and other authorized motorized and non-motorized
users. A shared-use path does not  include any trail that is intended to be
used primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or other similar
uses, or any other single track or natural surface trail that has historically
been reserved for non-motorized use.
   SHOULDER. A longitudinal area contiguous with the traveled way that is used
for accommodating vehicles that are stopped for an emergency and for lateral
support of base and surface courses; graded for emergency stopping; either
paved or unpaved; and when paved, may be open for part-time travel by some or
all vehicles or may also be available for use by pedestrians or bicycles in the
absence of other pedestrian or bicycle facilities.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines or easements of private
property, that is paved or improved, and is intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   SITE ROADWAY OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL. A roadway or bikeway on site of a
shopping center, office park, airport, school, university, sports arena,
recreational park, or other similar business, government, or recreation
facility that is publicly or privately owned but where the public is allowed to
travel without full-time access restrictions. The term does not include a
roadway where access is restricted at all times by gates or guards to
residents, employees, or other specifically authorized persons, a parking area,
a driving aisle within a parking area, or a private highway-rail grade
crossing.
   STANDING. When prohibited, means any halting of a vehicle, even momentarily,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device.
   STATE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   STATE HIGHWAY. A highway under the jurisdiction of the Department of
Transportation, outside the limits of municipalities, provided that the
authority conferred upon the Director of Transportation in R.C. § 5511.01 to
erect state highway route markers and signs directing traffic shall not be
modified by R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.79 and 4511.99.
   STATE ROUTE. Every highway which is designated with an official state route
number and so marked.
   STOP. When required, means a complete cessation of movement.
   STOP INTERSECTION. Any intersection at one or more entrances of which stop
signs are erected.
   STOPPING. When prohibited, means any halting of a vehicle, even momentarily,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. A general term for denoting a public way for purposes of
travel by vehicles and vulnerable road users, including the entire area within
the right-of-way.
   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every street or highway as provided in R.C. § 4511.65, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   THRUWAY. A through highway whose entire roadway is reserved for through
traffic and on which roadway parking is prohibited.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars, and
other devices, either singly or together, while using for purposes of travel
any highway or site roadway open to public travel.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE. A flagger, sign, signal, marking, channelization
device, or other device that uses colors, shapes, symbols, words, sounds, or
tactile information for the primary purpose of communicating a regulatory,
warning, or guidance message to road users on a street, highway, site roadway
open to public travel, pedestrian facility, bikeway, or pathway.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. A highway traffic signal placed at an intersection,
movable bridge, fire station, mid-block crosswalk, alternating one-way sections
of a single lane road, private driveway, or other location that requires
conflicting traffic to be directed to stop and permitted to proceed in an
orderly manner. The term includes a vehicular signal indication, a pedestrian
signal indication, and a bicycle symbol signal indication. The term does not
include an emergency-vehicle hybrid beacon or a pedestrian hybrid beacon.
   TRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or property
wholly on its own structure, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, including
any vehicle when formed by or operated as a combination of a semitrailer and a
vehicle of the dolly type, such as that commonly known as a trailer dolly, a
vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production
materials between a local place of storage or supply and the farm when drawn or
towed on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour and a
vehicle designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of
storage and a marina, or in and around a  marina, when drawn or towed on a
street or highway for a distance of more than ten miles or at a speed of more
than 25 miles per hour.
   TRAIN. One or more locomotives coupled, with or without cars, that operates
on rails or tracks and to which all other traffic is required by law to yield
the right-of-way at highway-rail grade crossings.
   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers, designed and
used to carry property.
   TWO-STAGE BICYCLE TURN BOX. A designated area at an intersection that is
intended to provide bicyclists a place to wait for traffic to clear before
proceeding in a different direction of travel.
   TYPE A FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME. Has the same meaning as set forth in R.C. §
5104.01.
   URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street or
highway which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or
dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of
one-quarter of a mile or more, and the character of the territory is indicated
by official traffic-control devices.
   VEHICLE. Every device, including a bicycle, motorized bicycle and an
electric bicycle, in, upon, or by which any person or property may be
transported or drawn upon a highway. The term does not include any motorized
wheelchair, any electric personal assistive mobility device, any low-speed
micromobility device, any personal delivery device as defined in R.C. §
4511.513, any device that is moved by power collected from overhead electric
trolley wires or that is used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, or
any device that is moved by human power.
   WASTE COLLECTION VEHICLE. A vehicle used in the collection of garbage,
refuse, trash, or recyclable materials.
   WILDLIFE OFFICER. An officer designated pursuant to R.C. § 1531.13.
(R.C. § 4511.01) (Prior Code, § 402.01)
§ 70.02 COMPLIANCE WITH ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any police officer invested with authority to direct, control, or regulate
traffic.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to elude or
flee a police officer after receiving a visible or audible signal from a police
officer to bring the person’s motor vehicle to a stop.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to comply
with an order or signal of a police officer.
      (2)   A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (C)(4) and (C)(5) of this section,
a violation of division (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a felony and shall
be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier of fact
finds by proof beyond a reasonable doubt that in committing the offense, the
offender was fleeing immediately after the commission of a felony.
      (5)   (a)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a felony and
shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier
of fact finds any of the following by proof beyond a reasonable doubt:
            1.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender was a
proximate cause of serious physical harm to persons or property.
            2.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender caused a
substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or property.
         (b)   If a police officer pursues an offender who is violating
division (B) of this section and division (C)(5)(a) of this section applies,
the sentencing court, in determining the seriousness of an offender’s conduct
for purposes of sentencing the offender for a violation of division (B) of this
section, shall consider, along with the factors set forth in R.C. §§ 2929.12
and 2929.13 that are required to be considered, all of the following:
            1.   The duration of the pursuit;
            2.   The distance of the pursuit;
            3.   The rate of speed at which the offender operated the motor
vehicle during the pursuit;
            4.   Whether the offender failed to stop for traffic lights or stop
signs during the pursuit;
            5.   The number of traffic lights or stop signs for which the
offender failed to stop during the pursuit;
            6.   Whether the offender operated the motor vehicle during the
pursuit without lighted lights during a time when lighted lights are required;
            7.   Whether the offender committed a moving violation during the
pursuit;
            8.   The number of moving violations the offender committed during
the pursuit;
            9.   Any other relevant factors indicating that the offender’s
conduct is more serious than conduct normally constituting the offense.
   (D)   In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of division
(A) of this section, the court shall impose a class five suspension from the
range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). If the offender previously has been
found guilty of an offense under this section or under R.C. § 2921.331 or any
other substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, in addition to any other
sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class one suspension
as described in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(1). The court may grant limited driving
privileges to the offender on a suspension imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of this section as set forth in R.C. § 4510.021. No judge shall suspend any
portion of the suspension under a class one suspension of an offender’s
license, permit, or privilege required by this division.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      MOVING VIOLATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2743.70.
      POLICE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F))
Cross-reference:
   Resisting arrest, see §
136.08
§ 70.03 EMERGENCY VEHICLES TO PROCEED CAUTIOUSLY PAST RED OR STOP SIGNAL.
   (A)   The driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any
stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety to traffic, but may proceed
cautiously past the red or stop sign or signal with due regard for the safety
of all persons using the street or highway.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.03) (Prior Code, § 432.18)
§ 70.04 EXCEPTIONS GENERALLY; EMERGENCY, PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORONER VEHICLES
EXEMPT.
   (A)   The provisions of this traffic code, except for §§
73.01 and
73.02, do not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment
while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway within an area
designated by traffic-control devices, but apply to those persons and vehicles
when traveling to or from such work.
   (B)   The driver of a highway maintenance vehicle owned by this state or any
political subdivision of this state, while the driver is engaged in the
performance of official duties upon a street or highway, provided the highway
maintenance vehicle is equipped with flashing lights and such other markings as
are required by law and such lights are in operation when the driver and
vehicle are so engaged, shall be exempt from criminal prosecution for
violations of R.C. §§ 4511.22, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30,
4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.66, and 4513.02, and R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, and any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (C)   (1)   This section does not exempt a driver of a highway maintenance
vehicle from civil liability arising from a violation of R.C. § 4511.22,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35,
4511.66, or 4513.02 or R.C. §§ 5577.01 through 5577.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   This section does not exempt a driver of a vehicle who is not a
state employee and who is engaged in the transport of highway maintenance
equipment from criminal liability for a violation of R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   As used in this section, ENGAGED IN THE PERFORMANCE OF OFFICIAL DUTIES
includes driving a highway maintenance vehicle to and from the manufacturer or
vehicle maintenance provider and transporting a highway maintenance vehicle,
equipment, or materials to and from a work location.
(R.C. § 4511.04)
   (E)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.12, 4511.13, 4511.131, 4511.132,
4511.14, 4511.202, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26,
4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34,
4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42,
4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59,
4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.62, 4511.66, 4511.68, 4511.681, and 4511.69, and any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle if the emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle and if the driver of the vehicles is giving an audible signal by siren,
exhaust whistle, or bell. This section does not relieve the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.041)
   (F)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29,
4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, and
4511.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to
a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle
in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance. This division does not relieve a coroner, deputy coroner or
coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with
due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.042)
(Prior Code, §§ 404.03, 404.035)
§ 70.05 PERSONS RIDING OR DRIVING ANIMALS UPON ROADWAYS.
   Every person riding, driving, or leading an animal upon a roadway is subject
to the provisions of this traffic code, applicable to the driver of a vehicle,
except those provisions of this traffic code which by their nature are
inapplicable.
(R.C. § 4511.05) (Prior Code, § 404.04)
§ 70.06 PROHIBITIONS AGAINST PEDESTRIANS AND SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES ON FREEWAYS.
   (A)   No person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, shall:
      (1)   As a pedestrian, occupy any space within the limits of the right-
of-way of a freeway, except: in a rest area; on a facility that is separated
from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately
marked for pedestrian use; in the performance of public works or official
duties; as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a
motor vehicle; or to obtain assistance;
      (2)   Occupy any space within the limits of the right-of-way of a
freeway, with: an animal-drawn vehicle; a ridden or led animal; herded animals;
a pushcart; a bicycle, except on a facility that is separated from the roadway
and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately marked for
bicycle use; an electric bicycle; a bicycle with motor attached; a motor-driven
cycle with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower; an
agricultural tractor; farm machinery; except in the performance of public works
or official duties.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.051) (Prior Code, § 412.05)
Statutory reference:
   Designation of a freeway, see R.C. § 4511.011
§ 70.07 USE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY FOR VEHICULAR TRAVEL.
   The provisions of this traffic code do not prevent the owner of real
property, used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel by permission of
the owner and not as a matter of right, from prohibiting such use or from
requiring additional conditions to those specified in this traffic code, or
otherwise regulating such use as may seem best to the owner.
(R.C. § 4511.08)
§ 70.08 NAMES OF PERSONS DAMAGING REAL PROPERTY BY OPERATION OF VEHICLE TO BE
PROVIDED TO OWNER.
   (A)   As used in this section, MOTOR VEHICLE has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 4501.01.
   (B)   If damage is caused to real property by the operation of a motor
vehicle in, or during the, violation of any section of the Ohio Revised Code or
of any municipal ordinance, the law enforcement agency that investigates the
case, upon request of the real property owner, shall provide the owner with the
names of the persons who are charged with the commission of the offense. If a
request for the names is made, the agency shall provide the names as soon as
possible after the persons are charged with the offense.
   (C)   The personnel of law enforcement agencies who act pursuant to division
(B) of this section in good faith are not liable in damages in a civil action
allegedly arising from their actions taken pursuant to that division. Political
subdivisions and the state are not liable in damages in a civil action
allegedly arising from the actions of personnel of their law enforcement
agencies if the personnel have immunity under this division.
(R.C. § 2935.28)
§ 70.09 LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAYS; BARRIERS ALONG; VEHICLES TO ENTER AND LEAVE AT
DESIGNATED INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall cut, injure, remove, or destroy
any fence or other barrier designed and erected to prevent traffic from
entering or leaving a limited access highway without the permission of the
Director of Transportation, except in a case of emergency where life or
property is in danger. No person, firm or corporation shall cause a vehicle of
any character to enter or leave a limited access highway at any point other
than intersections designated by the Director for such purposes, except in a
case of emergency where life or property is in danger.
(R.C. § 3767.201)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3767.99(D))
§ 70.10 THROUGH HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   All state routes are hereby designated as through highways, provided
that stop signs, yield signs, or highway traffic signals shall be erected at
all intersections with such through highways by the Department of
Transportation as to highways under its jurisdiction and by local authorities
as to highways under their jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this
section. Where two or more state routes that are through highways intersect,
and no highway traffic signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall
be erected at one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local
authorities having jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section.
Whenever the Director of Transportation determines on the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that stop signs are necessary to stop
traffic on a through highway for safe and efficient operation, nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent such installations. When circumstances
warrant, the Director also may omit stop signs on roadways intersecting through
highways under the Director’s jurisdiction. Before the Director either installs
or removes a stop sign under this division, the Director shall give notice, in
writing, of that proposed action to the affected local authority at least 30
days before installing or removing the stop sign.
   (B)   Other streets or highways, or portions thereof, are hereby designated
as through highways if they are within the municipality, if they have a
continuous length of more than one mile between the limits of the street or
highway or portion thereof, and if they have stop or yield signs or highway
traffic signals at the entrances of the majority of intersecting streets or
highways. For purposes of this section, the limits of the street or highway, or
portion thereof, shall be the municipal corporation line, the physical terminus
of the street or highway, or any point on the streets or highway at which
vehicular traffic thereon is required by regulatory signs to stop or yield to
traffic on the intersecting street, provided, that in residence districts, the
municipality may by ordinance designate such street or highway, or portion
thereof, not to be a through highway and thereafter the affected residence
district shall be indicated by official traffic control devices. Where two or
more through highways designated under this division intersect and no highway
traffic signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at
one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local authorities having
jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (C)   The Department or local authorities having jurisdiction need not erect
stop signs at intersections they find to be so constructed as to permit traffic
to safely enter a through highway without coming to a stop. Signs shall be
erected at such intersections indicating that the operator of a vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way to or merge with all traffic proceeding on the through
highway.
   (D)   Local authorities, with reference to highways under their
jurisdiction, may designate additional through highways, and shall erect stop
signs, yield signs, or highway traffic signals at all streets and highways
intersecting such through highways, or may designate any intersection as a stop
or yield intersection, and shall erect like signs at one or more entrances to
the intersection.
(R.C. § 4511.65) (Prior Code, § 414.02)
§ 70.11 OFFICER MAY REMOVE IGNITION KEY.
   A law enforcement officer may remove the ignition key left in the ignition
switch of an unlocked and unattended motor vehicle parked on a street or
highway. The officer removing the key shall place notification upon the vehicle
detailing his or her name and badge number, the place where the key may be
reclaimed, and the procedure for reclaiming the key. The key shall be returned
to the owner of the motor vehicle upon presentation of proof of ownership.
(R.C. § 4549.05) (Prior Code, § 404.01)
§ 70.12 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES AFTER ACCIDENTS.
   (A)   If a motor vehicle accident occurs on any highway, public street, or
other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel and if any
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that has been damaged or spilled as
a result of the motor vehicle accident is blocking the highway, street, or
other property or is otherwise endangering public safety, a public safety
official may do either of the following without the consent of the owner but
with the approval of the law enforcement agency conducting any investigation of
the accident:
      (1)   Remove, or order the removal of, the motor vehicle if the motor
vehicle is unoccupied, cargo, or personal property from the portion of the
highway, public street, or property ordinarily used for vehicular travel on the
highway, public street, or other property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.
      (2)   If the motor vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle, allow the owner
or operator of the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the removal of the
motor vehicle within a period of time specified by the public safety official.
If the public safety official determines that the motor vehicle cannot be
removed within the specified period of time, the public safety official shall
remove or order the removal of the motor vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, the
Department of Transportation, any employee of the Department of Transportation,
or a public safety official who authorizes or participates in the removal of
any unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by
division (A) of this section, regardless of whether the removal is executed by
a private towing service, is not liable for civil damages for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that results from the removal of that
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property. Further, except as
provided in division (B)(2) of this section, if a public safety official
authorizes, employs, or arranges to have a private towing service remove any
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by division
(A) of this section, that private towing service is not liable for civil
damages for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that results from
the removal of that unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         (a)   Any person or entity involved in the removal of an unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property pursuant to division (A) of this
section if that removal causes or contributes to the release of a hazardous
material or to structural damage to the roadway;
         (b)   A private towing service that was not authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to remove an unoccupied motor vehicle,
cargo, or personal property under this section;
         (c)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(d) of this section, a
private towing service that was authorized, employed, or arranged by a public
safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo,
or personal property but the private towing service performed the removal in a
negligent manner;
         (d)   A private towing service that was authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that was endangering public safety
but the private towing service performed the removal in a reckless manner.
   (C)   As used in divisions (A) and (B) of this section:
      HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.232.
      PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICIAL. Means any of the following:
         (a)   The sheriff of the county, or the chief of a law enforcement
agency in the municipal corporation, township, port authority, conservancy
district, university campus police department, park district police force, or
township or joint police district, in which the accident occurred;
         (b)   A state highway patrol trooper;
         (c)   The chief of the fire department having jurisdiction where the
accident occurred;
         (d)   A duly authorized subordinate acting on behalf of an official
specified in divisions (a) to (c) of this definition;
         (e)   A natural resources officer or a wildlife officer.
(R.C. § 4513.66)
   (D)   If a towing service is removing a motor vehicle, and the removal was
not authorized under R.C. § 4513.60, 4513.601, 4513.61, or 4513.66, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, prior to removing the motor
vehicle, the towing service shall provide a written estimate of the price for
the removal to the operator of the motor vehicle, if requested.
   (E)   The towing service shall ensure that any estimate provided under
division (D) of this section includes the fees, services to be rendered, and
destination of the vehicle.
   (F)   If a towing service fails to provide a written estimate as required by
this section, the towing service shall not charge fees for the towing and
storage of the motor vehicle that exceed 25% of any applicable fees established
by the public utilities commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25(B)(4)
or, if the vehicle was towed within a municipal corporation that has
established vehicle removal and storage fees, 25% of the fees established by
the municipal corporation.
   (G)   Any storage facility that accepts towed vehicles shall conspicuously
post a notice at the entrance to the storage facility that states the
limitation on fees established under division (F) of this section.
(R.C. § 4513.68) (Prior Code, § 436.14)
§ 70.13 IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES; REDEMPTION.
   (A)   Law enforcement officers are authorized to provide for the removal and
impounding of a vehicle under the following circumstances:
      (1)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street, bridge or
causeway and is so illegally parked so as to constitute a hazard or obstruction
to the normal movement of traffic, or so as to unreasonably interfere with
street cleaning or snow removal operations;
      (2)   When any vehicle or abandoned junk motor vehicle, as defined in
R.C. § 4513.63, is left on private property for more than 72 consecutive hours
without the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the
property, or on a public street or other property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of
any road or highway, for 48 consecutive hours or longer;
      (3)   When any vehicle has been stolen or operated without the consent of
the owner and is located upon either public or private property;
      (4)   When any vehicle displays illegal license plates or fails to
display the current lawfully required plates and is located upon any public
street or other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking;
      (5)   When any vehicle has been used in or connected with the commission
of a felony and is located upon either public or private property;
      (6)   When any vehicle has been damaged or wrecked so as to be inoperable
or violates equipment provisions of this Traffic Code whereby its continued
operation would constitute a condition hazardous to life, limb or property and
is located upon any public street or other property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking;
      (7)   When any vehicle is left unattended either on public or private
property due to the removal of an ill, injured or arrested operator, or due to
the abandonment thereof by the operator during or immediately after pursuit by
a law enforcement officer;
      (8)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who has failed to
stop in case of an accident or collision and is located either on public or on
private property;
      (9)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who is driving
without a lawful license or while his or her license has been suspended or
revoked, and is located upon a public street or other property open to the
public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking;
      (10)   When any vehicle is found for which two or more citation tags for
violations of this Traffic Code have been issued and the owner or operator
thereof has failed to respond to such citation tags as lawfully required, and
is located upon a public street or other property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking; or
      (11)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any property and such
stopped vehicle is preventing ingress or egress to or from such a property or
use of buildings thereon, or a vehicle is parked in a fire lane or when a
vehicle is parked in such a way as to prevent maintenance or repair of the
property.
   (B)    Any vehicle removed under authority of division (A)(2) of this
section shall be ordered into storage and/or disposed of as provided under R.C.
§§ 4513.60 et seq. Any other vehicle removed under authority of this section
shall be ordered into storage and the law enforcement agency shall forthwith
notify the registered vehicle owner of the fact of such removal and impounding,
reasons therefor and the place of storage. Any person desiring to redeem an
impounded vehicle shall appear at the law enforcement agency offices to furnish
satisfactory evidence of identity and ownership or right to possession. Prior
to issuance of a release form, the claimant, owner or operator shall either pay
the amount due for any fines for violations on account of which such vehicle
was impounded or, as the appropriate court may require, post a bond in an
amount set by the court, to appear to answer to such violations. The pound
operator shall release such vehicle upon the receipt of the release form and
payment of all towage and storage charges.
   (C)   No owner or operator shall remove an impounded vehicle from the place
of storage without complying with the above procedure. Possession of a vehicle
which has been impounded and unlawfully taken from the place of storage, by the
owner or operator, shall constitute prima facie evidence that it was so removed
by the owner or operator.
   (D)   Any person who registers a complaint that is the basis of a law
enforcement agency order for the removal and storage of a motor vehicle under
this section shall provide the identity of the law enforcement agency with
which the complaint was registered to any person who identifies himself or
herself as the owner or operator of the motor vehicle and requests information
pertaining to its location.
   (E)   Any towing company authorized to respond to calls for service from the
law enforcement agency in the city must provide an impound lot lawfully
operated as a full-time facility where any and all vehicles towed as a result
of a law enforcement agency request must be impounded pending further
disposition of the vehicle in conjunction with the vehicle owner, his or her
agent, or an order from a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (F)   Any towing company doing business in the city shall comply with the
following requirements:
      (1)   The company shall have all licenses and permits required by the
state for the operation of a towing business;
      (2)   The company shall provide service 24 hours a day, seven days a
week;
      (3)   The company shall maintain in operable condition at least three tow
trucks, one of which shall be equipped to tow front-wheel drive vehicles, and a
flatbed truck. The company shall also own a motorcycle trailer or other
acceptable means of carrying a motorcycle in an upright position;
      (4)   The company shall only utilize towing vehicles that meet or exceed
all legal requirements;
      (5)   The company shall only employ and utilize drivers who have and
maintain the appropriate state driver’s license;
      (6)   The company, or its agent or employees, shall not respond to the
scene of an accident or a possible tow, unless dispatched thereto by the law
enforcement agency requesting the tow or unless engaged by a third person
having a direct interest in the vehicle or vehicles involved;
      (7)   The company shall be responsible for cleaning all debris on the
roadway resulting from an accident from which vehicles are towed;
      (8)   While towing vehicles pursuant to this section, the company, or its
agents and employees, shall at all times act in a courteous and professional
manner towards members of the public;
      (9)   All towing motor vehicles shall have the company name displayed in
letters no less than six inches high; and
      (10)   A violation of any provision of this section may result in
revocation of the city permit, as deemed necessary by the Director of Public
Service.
(Prior Code, § 404.05) (Ord. 96-5, passed 4-23-1996)
§ 70.14 TRAFFIC DIRECTION IN EMERGENCIES; OBEDIENCE TO SCHOOL GUARDS.
   (A)   Police officers shall direct or regulate traffic in accordance with
the provisions of this Traffic Code, provided that, in the event of fire or
other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, they are
authorized to direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the
provisions of this Traffic Code. Firefighters, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity. The direction of traffic may be by word or audible signal, by gesture
or visible signal or by any combination thereof. No person shall fail to comply
with any lawful order or direction of any police officer or firefighter issued
pursuant to this section.
   (B)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any school crossing guard invested with authority to direct, control or
regulate traffic in the vicinity of the school to which the guard may be
assigned.
(Prior Code, § 404.06)
§ 70.15 APPLICATION TO DRIVERS OF GOVERNMENT VEHICLES.
   The provisions of this Traffic Code applicable to the drivers of vehicles
shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United
States, any state or any political subdivision thereof, including this
municipality, except as may be otherwise provided by law and subject to such
specific exceptions as are set forth with reference to authorized emergency and
public safety vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 404.07)
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.30 OBEYING TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
instructions of any traffic-control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code, unless at the time otherwise directed by a
police officer.
      (2)   No provision of this traffic code for which signs are required
shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the
alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular
section of this traffic code does not state that signs are required, that
section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place.
(R.C. § 4511.12(A))
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, any operator
of a commercial motor vehicle, upon approaching a scale location established
for the purpose of determining the weight of the vehicle and its load, shall
comply with any traffic control device or the order of a peace officer
directing the vehicle to proceed to be weighed or otherwise inspected.
      (2)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle, upon bypassing a scale
location in accordance with division (C) of this section, shall comply with an
order of a peace officer to stop the vehicle to verify the use and operation of
an electronic clearance device.
   (C)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle that is equipped with an
electronic clearance device authorized by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol under R.C. § 4549.081 may bypass a scale location, regardless of
the instruction of a traffic control device to enter the scale facility, if
either of the following apply:
      (1)   The in-cab transponder displays a green light or other affirmative
visual signal and also sounds an affirmative audible signal;
      (2)   Any other criterion established by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol is met.
   (D)   Any peace officer may order the operator of a commercial motor vehicle
that bypasses a scale location to stop the vehicle to verify the use and
operation of an electronic clearance device.
   (E)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE means any
combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating or an actual gross
vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds if the vehicle is used in interstate
or intrastate commerce to transport property and also means any vehicle that is
transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is required pursuant to
49 C.F.R. parts 100 through 180.
(R.C. § 4511.121(A) - (C), (E))
   (F)   No person shall use an electronic clearance device if the device or
its use is not in compliance with rules of the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol.
(R.C. § 4549.081(B))
   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. If
the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting activity
is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the offender is
subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.12(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B) of this
section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (B)
of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender commits the offense while
distracted and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the
commission of the offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine
established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.121(D))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (F) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.081(C)) (Prior Code, § 414.01)
Statutory reference:
   Placing traffic-control devices on state highways, permission required, see
R.C. § 4511.10
   Traffic-control devices to conform to the state manual and specifications,
see R.C. § 4511.11
   Uniform system of traffic-control devices, see R.C. § 4511.09
§ 70.31 SIGNAL LIGHTS.
   Highway traffic signal indications for vehicles and pedestrians shall have
the following meanings:
   (A)   Steady green signal indication.
      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal indication
is permitted to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-turn
movement except as such movement is modified by a lane-use sign, turn
prohibition sign, lane marking, roadway design, separate turn signal
indication, or other traffic control device. Such vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the
right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
movement to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching
from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the
intersection.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal indication, displayed
alone or in combination with another signal indication, is permitted to
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications displayed at
the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left
or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the
following:
         (a)   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
         (b)   Other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (3)   (a)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication,
as provided in R.C. § 4511.14, pedestrians facing a circular green signal
indication are permitted to proceed across the roadway within any marked or
unmarked associated crosswalk. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection or so close as to create an immediate
hazard at the time that the green signal indication is first displayed.
         (b)   Pedestrians facing a green arrow signal indication, unless
otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control
device, shall not cross the roadway.
   (B)   Steady yellow signal indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow signal indication
is thereby warned that the related green movement or the related flashing arrow
movement is being terminated or that a steady red signal indication will be
exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection. The provisions governing vehicular operation under the movement
being terminated shall continue to apply while the steady circular yellow
signal indication is displayed.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow arrow signal indication is
thereby warned that the related green arrow movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated. The provisions governing vehicular
operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while the
steady yellow arrow signal indication is displayed.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal
indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device, shall not start to
cross the roadway.
   (C)   Steady red signal indication.
      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal
indication, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted
by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, traffic shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before
entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication
to proceed is displayed except as provided in divisions (C)(1), (C)(2), and (C)
(3) of this section.
         (b)   Except when a traffic control device is in place prohibiting a
turn on red or a steady red arrow signal indication is displayed, vehicular
traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication is permitted, after
stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-
way street into a one-way street. The right to proceed with the turn shall be
subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a stop
sign.
      (2)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication
shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow
and, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted by
another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before entering the
intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication or other
traffic control device permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is
displayed.
         (b)   When a traffic control device is in place permitting a turn on a
steady red arrow signal indication, vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow
indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to turn
right, or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street. The right
to proceed with the turn shall be limited to the direction indicated by the
arrow and shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a
stop at a stop sign.
      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device, pedestrians facing
a steady circular red or steady red arrow signal indication shall not enter the
roadway.
      (4)   Local authorities by ordinance, or the Director of Transportation
on state highways, may prohibit a right or a left turn against a steady red
signal at any intersection, which shall be effective when signs giving notice
thereof are posted at the intersection.
   (D)   Flashing green signal indication. A flashing green signal indication
has no meaning and shall not be used.
   (E)   Flashing yellow signal indication.
      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing
a flashing circular yellow signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter
the intersection to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by lane-use signs, turn
prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway design, separate turn signal
indications, or other traffic control devices. Such vehicular traffic,
including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall
yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
to the left shall yield the right-of- way to other vehicles approaching from
the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during
the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (2)   (a)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing
a flashing yellow arrow signal indication, displayed alone or in combination
with another signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or other such
movement as is permitted by other signal indications displayed at the same
time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or
making a u-turn, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
to the left shall yield the right-of- way to other vehicles approaching from
the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during
the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing any flashing yellow signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.
      (4)   When a flashing circular yellow signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory or warning requirements of the other traffic
control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently
applicable.
   (F)   Flashing red signal indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular red signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. The right to proceed
shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing any flashing red signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing red signal indication is first displayed.
      (3)    When a flashing circular red signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory requirements of the other traffic control
device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently applicable.
Use of this signal indication shall be limited to supplementing stop, do not
enter, or wrong way signs, and to applications where compliance with the
supplemented traffic control device requires a stop at a designated point.
      (4)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing red arrow signal indication and if intending to turn in the direction
indicated by the arrow, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if there
is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. The right to proceed
shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
   (G)   Transit vehicle signal indication.
      (1)   Light rail and mass transit system bus traffic, on an approach to
an intersection from a designated busway or other designated transit vehicle
lane or tracks shall do all of the following:
         (a)   Stop when facing a steady horizontal white line;
         (b)   Proceed straight ahead when facing a steady vertical white line;
         (c)   Only turn or proceed left when facing a steady diagonal white
line that begins in the lower right corner and angles up and to the left;
         (d)   Only turn or proceed right when facing a steady diagonal white
line that begins in the lower left corner and angles up and to the right;
         (e)   Prepare to stop when facing a flashing vertical white line.
      (2)   As used in division (G)(1) of this section, “mass transit system”
and “bus” have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4511.78.
   (H)   In the event an official highway traffic signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature
can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
   (I)   This section does not apply at railroad grade- crossings. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by
R.C. §§ 4511.61 and 4511.62.
(R.C. § 4511.13) (Prior Code, § 414.03)
§ 70.32 SIGNALS OVER REVERSIBLE LANES.
   The meanings of lane-use control signal indications are as follows:
   (A)   A steady downward green arrow means that the lane over which the arrow
signal indication is located is open to vehicle travel in that direction.
   (B)   A steady yellow “X” means that the lane over which the signal
indication is located is about to be closed to vehicle traffic in that
direction and will be followed by a steady red “X” signal indication, either
within the same signal face or in a downstream signal face.
   (C)   A steady white two-way left-turn arrow means that the lane over which
the signal indication is located is open to traffic making a left turn from
either direction of travel, but not for through travel.
   (D)   A steady white one-way left-turn arrow means that the lane over which
the signal indication is located is open to traffic making a left turn in that
direction, without opposing turns in the same lane, but not for through travel.
   (E)   A steady red “X” means that the lane over which the signal indication
is located is closed to vehicle traffic in the direction viewed by the road
user.
(R.C. § 4511.131) (Prior Code, § 414.04)
§ 70.33 AMBIGUOUS OR NON-WORKING TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
   (A)    The driver of a vehicle who approaches an intersection where traffic
is controlled by highway traffic signals shall do all of the following if the
signal facing the driver exhibits no colored lights or colored lighted arrows,
exhibits a combination of such lights or arrows that fails to clearly indicate
the assignment of right-of-way, or, if the vehicle is a bicycle or an electric
bicycle, the signals are otherwise malfunctioning due to the failure of a
vehicle detector to detect the presence of the bicycle or electric bicycle:
      (1)   Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, stop
before entering the intersection;
      (2)   Yield the right-of-way to all vehicles in the intersection or
approaching on an intersecting road, if the vehicles will constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways;
      (3)   Exercise ordinary care while proceeding through the intersection.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.132)
§ 70.34 PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “walk” or
“don’t walk”, or the symbol of a walking person or an upraised palm are in
place, these signals shall indicate the following instructions:
   (A)   A steady walking person signal indication, which symbolizes “walk”,
means that a pedestrian facing the signal indication is permitted to start to
cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication, possibly in
conflict with turning vehicles. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the walking person
signal indication is first shown.
   (B)   A flashing upraised hand signal indication, which symbolizes “don’t
walk”, means that a pedestrian shall not start to cross the roadway in the
direction of the signal indication, but that any pedestrian who has already
started to cross on a steady walking person signal indication shall proceed to
the far side of the traveled way of the street or highway, unless otherwise
directed by a traffic control device to proceed only to the median of a divided
highway or only to some other island or pedestrian refuge area.
   (C)   A steady upraised hand signal indication means that a pedestrian shall
not enter the roadway in the direction of the signal indication.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the continued
use of pedestrian control signals utilizing the word “wait” if those signals
were installed prior to March 28, 1985.
   (E)   A flashing walking person signal indication has no meaning and shall
not be used.
(R.C. § 4511.14) (Prior Code, § 414.05)
§ 70.35 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of
any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to
be, is an imitation of, or resembles a traffic-control device or railroad sign
or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or hides from
view or interferes with the effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any
public authority permit, upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing
thereon any commercial advertising. This section does not prohibit either the
erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful
directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for traffic-
control devices, or the erection upon private property of traffic-control
devices by the owner of real property in accordance with R.C. §§ 4511.211 and
4511.432.
      (2)   Every prohibited sign, signal, marking, or device is a public
nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway may remove the
same or cause it to be removed.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.16) (Prior Code, § 414.07)
§ 70.36 ALTERATION, DEFACEMENT, OR REMOVAL PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person, without lawful authority, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly
tamper with any traffic-control device, any railroad sign or signal, or any
inscription, shield, or insignia on the device, sign, or signal, or any part of
the device, sign, or signal;
      (2)   Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied pavement marking
material on the surface of a roadway while the marking material is in an
undried condition, and is marked by flags, markers, signs, or other devices
intended to protect it;
      (3)   Knowingly move, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper
with a manhole cover.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A)(1) or (A)(3) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
third degree. If a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(3) of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(3) of
this section causes serious physical harm to property that is owned, leased, or
controlled by a state or local authority, the offender is guilty of a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.17) (Prior Code, § 414.08)
§ 70.37 UNAUTHORIZED POSSESSION OR SALE OF DEVICES.
   (A)   As used in this section, TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE means any sign,
highway traffic signal or other device conforming to and placed or erected in
accordance with the manual adopted under R.C. § 4511.09 by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic, including signs denoting the names of streets and
highways, but does not mean any pavement marking.
   (B)   No individual shall buy or otherwise possess, or sell, a traffic
control device, except when one of the following applies:
      (1)   In the course of the individual’s employment by the state or a
local authority for the express or implied purpose of manufacturing, providing,
erecting, moving or removing such a traffic control device;
      (2)   In the course of the individual’s employment by any manufacturer of
traffic control devices other than a state or local authority;
      (3)   For the purpose of demonstrating the design and function of a
traffic control device to state or local officials;
      (4)   When the traffic control device has been purchased from the state
or a local authority at a sale of property that is no longer needed or is unfit
for use; or
      (5)   When the traffic control device has been properly purchased from a
manufacturer for use on private property and the person possessing the device
has a sales receipt for the device or other acknowledgment of sale issued by
the manufacturer.
   (C)   This section does not preclude, and shall not be construed as
precluding, prosecution for theft in violation of R.C. § 2913.02, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or for receiving stolen property
in violation of R.C. § 2913.51, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.18) (Prior Code, § 414.09)
§ 70.38 SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICES; PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle used in snow and ice removal,
including a snow plow, when it is owned by a political subdivision and operated
by an employee of that political subdivision.
      PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 109.71(A)(1), (A)(12),
(A)(14), and (A)(19).
      PORTABLE SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICE. A device that, if activated by a
person, is capable of changing a highway traffic signal to green out of
sequence.
      PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01(E)(1),
(E)(3), and (E)(4).
   (B)   Except as provided in divisions (C) and (D) of this section:
      (1)   No person shall possess a portable signal preemption device.
      (2)   No person shall use a portable signal preemption device to affect
the operation of the highway traffic signal.
   (C)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the following
persons:
      (1)   A peace officer;
      (2)   A state highway patrol trooper;
      (3)   A person while occupying a public safety vehicle;
      (4)   The authorized employee operator of a highway maintenance vehicle.
   (D)   Division (B)(2) of this section does not apply under either of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   When a person listed in divisions (C)(1) to (C)(3) of this section
is responding to an emergency call;
      (2)   When a person listed in division (C)(4) of this section is
responding to an emergency level two or level three weather event.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (B)(2) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4511.031) (Prior Code, § 414.10)
§ 70.39 AUTHORITY AND CONSIDERATIONS FOR PLACEMENT OF DEVICES.
   The Director of Public Safety shall place and maintain traffic-control
devices upon any street or highway under municipal jurisdiction as are
necessary to effectuate the provisions of this Traffic Code, or to regulate,
warn or guide traffic, and such other traffic-control devices as the person
shall deem necessary for the proper control of traffic. The designated person
shall determine the location, timing and coordination of the traffic-control
devices upon the basis of an applicable engineering or traffic investigation
and shall consider the following:
   (A)   The maximum safety and protection of vehicular and pedestrian traffic
from physical injury or property damage;
   (B)   The existing and potential traffic movement, volume and conditions;
   (C)   The location and frequency of accidents, including studies of remedial
measures;
   (D)   The recommendations of the Chief of Police and Fire Chief;
   (E)   The acceleration of transportation of persons and property by vehicles
so as to expedite travel and promote public safety;
   (F)   The convenience and welfare of the general public in parking,
standing, loading and unloading, and the use of the streets as affecting
business concerns and places of assembly; and
   (G)   Economy in the expenditure of money.
(Prior Code, § 406.01)
§ 70.40 CONFORMITY WITH STATE MANUAL.
   All traffic-control devices placed pursuant to the provisions of this
Traffic Code shall conform to the Ohio Manual and Specifications for a Uniform
System of Traffic-Control Devices, as adopted under R.C. § 4511.09.
(Prior Code, § 406.02)
§ 70.41 POWERS OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY.
   The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to:
   (A)   Designate any street or highway as a through street or highway and
require that all vehicles stop or yield the right-of-way as may be required
before entering the same;
   (B)   Designate any intersection as a stop intersection and require all
vehicles to stop at one or more entrances to the intersection;
   (C)   Designate any intersection as a yield intersection and require all
vehicles to yield the right-of-way as required;
   (D)   Designate any street as a one-way street and require that all vehicles
thereon be moved in one specific direction;
   (E)   Designate and mark lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular
direction regardless of the centerline of the roadway;
   (F)   Erect signs directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or
allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the same direction;
   (G)   Designate those portions of any street, where overtaking and passing
other traffic or driving to the left of the center or centerline of the roadway
would be especially hazardous, by appropriate signs or markings on the street
to indicate the beginning and end of such zones. These zones may be marked by
an auxiliary yellow line placed parallel and to the right of the normal
centerline or offset marked lane line;
   (H)   Place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections
and require that a specific course of direction be traveled by vehicles
proceeding in lanes by either permitting, prohibiting or requiring turns at the
intersections;
   (I)   Install traffic-control devices, signals and signs at any location to
regulate traffic;
   (J)   Establish safety zones, crosswalks, zones of quiet and play streets;
   (K)   Close any street or portion thereof to vehicular traffic which is in
the process of construction, reconstruction or repair;
   (L)   Determine the location of any necessary bus stops and taxicab stands;
   (M)   Determine the location and limiting hours of truck loading zones;
   (N)   Designate dangerous railroad crossings and erect stop signs thereat;
   (O)   Erect “No U Turn” signs at any location to prohibit a vehicle from
being turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction;
   (P)   Regulate or prohibit the stopping, standing and parking of vehicles on
streets, alleys or public property by erecting signs plainly indicating the
prohibitions, restrictions or limitations;
   (Q)   Designate individual parking spaces by markings, which may either be
parallel or at a prescribed angle to the curb or edge of the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 406.03)
§ 70.42 POSTING OF SIGNS AND SIGNALS REQUIRED.
   No provision of this chapter shall be effective until signs, signals,
markings or other devices giving notice of the local traffic regulations are
posted upon or at the entrance to the street or part thereof affected, as may
be most appropriate, so that in a proper position they are sufficiently legible
to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
(Prior Code, § 406.04)
§ 70.43 DIRECTOR’S POWERS NOT LIMITED.
   The powers of the Director of Public Safety shall not be limited by the
specific enumeration of subjects contained in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 406.05)
§ 70.44 RECORDS OF DIRECTOR.
   The Director of Public Safety shall keep a record of all rules, regulations
and proceedings promulgated in connection with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 406.06)
§ 70.45 RESERVATION OF POWER TO COUNCIL.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, Council may override any
decision of the Director of Public Safety and may assume any of the powers
delegated to the person, by a resolution adopted by a vote of a majority of the
members duly elected thereto. Upon the adoption of any such resolution, the
same may be changed only by an amending or repealing resolution adopted by
Council.
(Prior Code, § 406.07)
§ 70.46 VIOLATIONS SUBJECT TO GENERAL CODE PENALTY.
   Any person violating the rules and regulations promulgated in connection
with this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be subject to the penalties provided for in §
70.99.
(Prior Code, § 406.08) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.47 BICYCLE SYMBOL SIGNAL INDICATIONS.
   Bicycle symbol signal indications have the following meanings:
   (A)   A steady green bicycle signal indication means that bicyclists are
permitted to enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by the
lane-use arrow displayed on the bicycle signal sign that is located immediately
adjacent to the bicycle signal face. Bicyclists proceeding into the
intersection during the display of the indication shall yield the right-of-way
to both of the following:
      (1)   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
      (2)   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
   (B)   A steady yellow bicycle signal indication means that bicyclists are
warned that the related green movement is being terminated and that a steady
red bicycle signal indication will be displayed immediately thereafter when
bicyclists shall not enter the intersection. The provisions governing bicyclist
operations under the movement being terminated continue to apply while the
steady yellow bicycle signal indication is displayed.
   (C)   (1)   A steady red bicycle signal indication means that bicyclists
shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the lane-use
arrow displayed on the bicycle signal sign that is located immediately adjacent
to the bicycle signal face. Unless the bicyclist is entering the intersection
to make another movement permitted by another bicycle symbol signal indication,
the bicyclist shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if there is no stop
line, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, shall stop before entering the
intersection; and shall remain stopped until a green bicycle signal indication
to proceed is displayed.
      (2)   Except when a traffic control device is in place prohibiting a turn
on red, bicyclists facing a steady red bicycle signal indication are permitted
to enter the intersection to turn right if there are no approach lanes for
motor vehicle traffic to their right. The right to proceed with the turn is
subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a stop
sign.
   (D)   A flashing green bicycle signal indication and a flashing yellow
bicycle signal indication have no meaning and shall not be used.
   (E)   A flashing red bicycle signal indication means that bicyclists shall
stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, shall stop
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or if there
is no crosswalk, shall stop at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where
the bicyclists have a view of approaching traffic on that roadway before
entering the intersection. The right to make the movement indicated by the
lane-use arrow displayed on the bicycle signal sign that is located immediately
adjacent to the bicycle signal face is subject to the provisions that are
applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
(R.C. § 4511.15)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Whoever violates any provision of this traffic code for
which no penalty otherwise is provided in the section violated is guilty of one
of the following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this
section, a minor misdemeanor;
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more predicate motor vehicle or
traffic offenses, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.99)
   (B)   Violations committed while distracted.
      (1)   As used in this section and each section referenced in division (B)
(2) of this section, all of the following apply:
         (a)   “Distracted” means doing either of the following while operating
a vehicle:
            1.   Using an electronic wireless communications device, as defined
in R.C. § 4511.204, in violation of that section.
            2.   Engaging in any activity that is not necessary to the
operation of a vehicle and impairs, or reasonably would be expected to impair,
the ability of the operator to drive the vehicle safely.
         (b)   “Distracted” does not include operating a motor vehicle while
wearing an earphone or earplug over or in both ears at the same time. A person
who so wears earphones or earplugs may be charged with a violation of R.C. §
4511.84, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         (c)   “Distracted” does not include conducting any activity while
operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or on behalf of a utility,
provided that the driver of the vehicle is acting in response to an emergency,
power outage, or a circumstance affecting the health or safety of individuals.
As used in this division (B)(1)(c):
            UTILITY. An entity specified in R.C. § 4905.03(A), (C), (D), (E),
or (G).
            UTILITY SERVICE VEHICLE. A vehicle owned or operated by a utility.
      (2)   If an offender violates R.C. § 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12,
4511.121, 4511.132, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25,
4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33,
4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41,
4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451, 4511.46, 4511.47,
4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.64,
4511.71, 4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, or 4511.73, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
violation, the offender is subject to the applicable penalty for the violation
and, notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, is subject to an additional fine of not
more than $100 as follows:
         (a)   1.   Subject to Traffic Rule 13, if a law enforcement officer
issues an offender a ticket, citation, or summons for a violation of any of the
aforementioned sections of the Ohio Revised Code, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that indicates that the offender was distracted
while committing the violation and that the distracting activity was a
contributing factor to the commission of the violation, the offender may enter
a written plea of guilty and waive the offender’s right to contest the ticket,
citation, or summons in a trial provided that the offender pays the total
amount of the fine established for the violation and pays the additional fine
of $100.
            2.   In lieu of payment of the additional fine of $100, the
offender instead may elect to attend a distracted driving safety course, the
duration and contents of which shall be established by the Ohio Director of
Public Safety. If the offender attends and successfully completes the course,
the offender shall be issued written evidence that the offender successfully
completed the course. The offender shall be required to pay the total amount of
the fine established for the violation, but shall not be required to pay the
additional fine of $100, so long as the offender submits to the court both the
offender’s payment in full and such written evidence within 90 days of the
underlying violation that resulted in the imposition of the additional fine
under division (B) of this section.
         (b)   1.   If the offender appears in person to contest the ticket,
citation, or summons in a trial and the offender pleads guilty to or is
convicted of the violation, the court, in addition to all other penalties
provided by law, may impose the applicable penalty for the violation and may
impose the additional fine of not more than $100.
            2.   If the court imposes upon the offender the applicable penalty
for the violation and an additional fine of not more than $100, the court shall
inform the offender that, in lieu of payment of the additional fine of not more
than $100, the offender instead may elect to attend the distracted driving
safety course described in division (B)(2)(a) of this section. If the offender
elects the course option and attends and successfully completes the course, the
offender shall be issued written evidence that the offender successfully
completed the course. The offender shall be required to pay the total amount of
the fine established for the violation, but shall not be required to pay the
additional fine of not more than $100, so long as the offender submits to the
court the offender’s payment and such written evidence within 90 days of the
underlying violation that resulted in the imposition of the additional fine
under division (B) of this section.
(Prior Code, § 408.02)
      (3)    If a law enforcement officer issues an offender a ticket,
citation, or summons for a violation of any of the sections of the Revised Code
listed in division (B)(2) of this section that indicates that the offender was
distracted while committing the violation and that the distracting activity was
a contributing factor to the commission of the violation, the officer shall do
both of the following:
         (a)   Report the issuance of the ticket, citation, or summons to the
officer’s law enforcement agency;
         (b)   Ensure that such report indicates the offender’s race.
(R.C. § 4511.991)
   (C)   Sentencing. Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor
or minor misdemeanor shall be sentenced in accordance with §
130.99.
(Prior Code, § 408.01)
Cross-reference:
   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor, see §
130.18
   Multiple sentences, see §
130.19
Statutory reference:
   Reimbursement for costs of confinement, see R.C. §§ 2929.36 et seq.
CHAPTER 71: LICENSING PROVISIONS
Section
Motor Vehicle Licensing
   
71.01   Display of license plates or validation stickers; registration
   
71.02   Improper use of noncommercial motor vehicle
   
71.03   Operating motor vehicle ordered immobilized; forfeiture
   
71.04   Operation or sale without certificate of title
   
71.05   Display of certificate of registration
   
71.06   Use of unauthorized plates
   
71.07   Operating without dealer or manufacturer license plates
Driver’s Licenses
   
71.20   Prohibited acts
   
71.21   Permitting minor to operate vehicle prohibited; temporary instruction
permit; probationary license
   
71.22   License required as driver or commercial driver on public or private
property; nonresident exemption
   
71.23   Employment of a minor to operate a taxicab prohibited
   
71.24   Restriction against owner lending vehicle for use of another
   
71.25   Suspension of driver’s licenses; license suspended by court of record
   
71.26   Display of license
   
71.27   Prohibition against false statements
   
71.28   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction
   
71.29   Operating motor vehicle or motorcycle without valid license
   
71.30   Driving under OVI suspension
   
71.31   Driving under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation;
driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension
   
71.32   Failure to reinstate license
Commercial Driver’s Licenses
   
71.45   Definitions
   
71.46   Use of actual gross weight in lieu of rating
   
71.47   Prohibited acts
   
71.48   Prerequisites to operation of commercial motor vehicle
   
71.49   Physical qualification to operate commercial motor vehicles
   
71.50   Criminal offenses
   
71.51   Application of federal regulations
   
71.52   Employment of drivers of commercial vehicles
 
   
71.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Commercial driver’s licenses, see R.C. Chapter 4506
   Driver’s licenses, see R.C. Chapter 4507
   Motor vehicle licensing, see R.C. Chapter 4504
   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
   Proof of financial responsibility required; civil penalties; peace officers
as agents of Registrar of Motor Vehicles; procedures and rules, see R.C. §§
4509.101 et seq.
   Suspension and revocation of driver’s licenses, see R.C. Chapter 4510
   Suspension of driver’s licenses; municipal power to suspend for a period not
to exceed time permitted or required by state law, see R.C. § 4510.05
MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSING
§ 71.01 DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES OR VALIDATION STICKERS; REGISTRATION.
   (A)   (1)    Subject to R.C. § 4503.211, no person who is the owner or
operator of a motor vehicle shall fail to display in plain view on the rear of
the motor vehicle a license plate that displays the distinctive number and
registration mark assigned to the motor vehicle by the Ohio Director of Public
Safety, including any county identification sticker and any validation sticker
when required by and issued under R.C. §§ 4503.19 and 4503.191. However, a
commercial tractor shall display the license plate on the front of the
commercial tractor.
      (2)   The license plate shall be securely fastened so as not to swing,
and shall not be covered by any material that obstructs its visibility.
      (3)    Subject to R.C. § 4503.211, no person to whom a temporary motor
vehicle license registration has been issued for the use of a motor vehicle
under R.C. § 4503.182, and no operator of that motor vehicle, shall fail to
display the temporary motor vehicle license registration in plain view from the
rear of the vehicle either in the rear window or on an external rear surface of
the motor vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall cover a temporary motor vehicle license
registration by any material that obstructs its visibility.
(R.C. § 4503.21(A))
   (B)    Except as otherwise provided by R.C. §§ 4503.103, 4503.107, 4503.173,
4503.41, 4503.43, and 4503.46, no person who is the owner or chauffeur of a
motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways shall fail
to file annually the application for registration or to pay the tax therefor.
(R.C. § 4503.11(A))
   (C)    (1)   Within 30 days of becoming a resident of this state, any person
who owns a motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways
shall register the vehicle in this state. If such a person fails to register a
vehicle owned by the person, the person shall not operate any motor vehicle in
this state under a license issued by another state.
      (2)   For purposes of division (C)(1) of this section, RESIDENT means any
person to whom any of the following applies:
         (a)   The person maintains their principal residence in this state and
does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States armed forces.
         (b)   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to
be a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under R.C.
§ 4507.01.
(R.C. § 4503.111(A), (C))
   (D)   Upon the transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle, the registration of
the motor vehicle expires, and the original owner immediately shall remove the
license plates from the motor vehicle, except as otherwise provided in R.C. §
4503.12.
(R.C. § 4503.12(A))
   (E)   No person shall operate or drive upon the highways of this
municipality a motor vehicle acquired from a former owner who has registered
the motor vehicle, while the motor vehicle displays the distinctive number or
identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration.
(R.C. § 4549.11(A))
   (F)   No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident of this
state shall operate or drive the motor vehicle upon the highways of this
municipality while it displays a distinctive number or identification mark
issued by or under the authority of another state, without complying with the
laws of this state relating to the registration and identification of motor
vehicles.
(R.C. § 4549.12(A))
   (G)   (1)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   The offenses established under division (A) of this section are
strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of
these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability,
is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4503.21(B), (C))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4503.11(D))
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   The offense established under division (G)(3)(a) of this section
is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
(R.C. § 4503.111(B))
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4503.12(D))
      (5)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of
operation of a motor vehicle bearing license plates or an identification mark
issued to another, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.11(B))
      (6)   Whoever violates division (F) of this section is guilty of illegal
operation by a resident of this state of a motor vehicle bearing the
distinctive number or identification mark issued by a foreign jurisdiction, a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4549.12(B))
(Prior Code, § 436.09)
§ 71.02 IMPROPER USE OF NONCOMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall use a motor vehicle registered as a noncommercial
motor vehicle for other than the purposes set forth in R.C. § 4501.01.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 4503.05)
§ 71.03 OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE ORDERED IMMOBILIZED; FORFEITURE.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or permit the operation of a
motor vehicle upon any public or private property used by the public for
vehicular travel or parking knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that
the motor vehicle has been ordered immobilized pursuant to an immobilization
order issued under R.C. § 4503.233.
   (B)   A motor vehicle that is operated by a person during a violation of
division (A) of this section shall be criminally forfeited to the state in
accordance with the procedures contained in R.C. § 4503.234.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 4503.236)
§ 71.04 OPERATION OR SALE WITHOUT CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this municipality a motor vehicle for which a
certificate of title is required without having that certificate in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 4505 or, if a physical certificate of title has not been
issued for a motor vehicle, operate the motor vehicle in this state knowing
that the ownership information relating to the vehicle has not been entered
into the automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common
Pleas;
      (2)   Display or display for sale or sell as a dealer or acting on behalf
of a dealer, a motor vehicle without having obtained a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate, a certificate of title, or an assignment of a
certificate of title for it as provided in R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title or any certificate of
registration or license plates upon cancellation of the same by the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed in R.C. Chapter
4505;
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 4505 in case of the destruction or
dismantling or change of a motor vehicle in such respect that it is not the
motor vehicle described in the certificate of title;
      (5)   Violate any rules adopted pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (6)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapters 4505 and 4517, sell
at wholesale a motor vehicle ownership of which is not evidenced by an Ohio
certificate of title, or the current certificate of title issued for the motor
vehicle, or the manufacturer’s certificate of origin, and all title assignments
that evidence the seller’s ownership of the motor vehicle, and an odometer
disclosure statement that complies with R.C. § 4505.06 and subchapter IV of the
“Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act”, 86 Stat. 961 (1972), 15
U.S.C. § 1981;
      (7)   Operate in this state a motor vehicle knowing that the certificate
of title to the vehicle or ownership of the vehicle as otherwise reflected in
the automated title processing system has been canceled.
   (B)   This section does not apply to persons engaged in the business of
warehousing or transporting motor vehicles for the purpose of salvage
disposition.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $200,
imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4505.18) (Prior Code, § 436.08)
§ 71.05 DISPLAY OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   (1)   The operator of a “commercial car”, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, when the commercial car is required to be registered under state law,
shall, when operating the commercial car, trailer or semitrailer on the
streets, roads, or highways of this municipality display inside or on the
vehicle the certificate of registration for the commercial car, trailer or
semitrailer provided for in R.C. § 4503.19, or shall carry the certificate on
the operator’s person and display it upon the demand of any peace officer.
      (2)   Every person operating a commercial car, trailer or semitrailer
required to be registered under state law shall permit the inspection of the
certificate of registration upon demand of any peace officer.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
commercial car certificate of registration violation, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4549.18)
§ 71.06 USE OF UNAUTHORIZED PLATES.
   (A)   No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the public roads
and highways in this municipality if it displays a license plate or a
distinctive number or identification mark that meets any of the following
criteria:
      (1)   It is fictitious;
      (2)   It is a counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any distinctive
number or identification mark;
      (3)   It belongs to another motor vehicle, provided that this section
does not apply to a motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads and
highways in this municipality when the motor vehicle displays license plates
that originally were issued for a motor vehicle that previously was owned by
the same person who owns the motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads
and highways in this municipality during the 30-day period described in R.C. §
4503.12(A)(4).
   (B)   A person who fails to comply with the transfer of registration
provisions of R.C. § 4503.12 and is charged with a violation of that section
shall not be charged with a violation of this section.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) of this section is
guilty of operating a motor vehicle bearing an invalid license plate or
identification mark, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and
a misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.08) (Prior Code, § 436.10)
§ 71.07 OPERATING WITHOUT DEALER OR MANUFACTURER LICENSE PLATES.
   (A)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated upon a public road or
highway a motor vehicle of a manufacturer or dealer unless the vehicle carries
and displays a placard, except as provided in R.C. § 4503.21, issued by the
Director of Public Safety that displays the registration number of its
manufacturer or dealer.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of illegal
operation of a manufacturer’s or dealer’s motor vehicle, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4549.10)
DRIVER’S LICENSES
§ 71.20 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Display or cause or permit to be displayed, or possess any
identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit
knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled, suspended, or
altered;
      (2)   Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly permit a person
not entitled thereto to use any identification card, driver’s or commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver’s license
temporary instruction permit issued to the person so lending or permitting the
use thereof;
      (3)   Display, or represent as one’s own, any identification card,
driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or
commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit not issued to the
person so displaying the same;
      (4)   Fail to surrender to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, upon the
Registrar’s demand, any identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit that has been suspended or canceled;
      (5)    In any application for an identification card, driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit or any renewal, reprint, or
duplicate thereof, knowingly conceal a material fact or present any statement
required under R.C. § 4507.08 or 4507.081 when knowing the same to be false or
fictitious.
   (B)   Whoever violates any division of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.30) (Prior Code, § 436.04)
Statutory reference:
   Use of license to violate liquor laws; suspension; procedures, see R.C. §
4510.33
§ 71.21 PERMITTING MINOR TO OPERATE VEHICLE PROHIBITED; TEMPORARY INSTRUCTION
PERMIT; PROBATIONARY LICENSE.
   (A)   No person shall cause or knowingly permit any minor to drive a motor
vehicle upon a highway as an operator, unless the minor has first obtained a
license or permit to drive a motor vehicle under R.C. Chapter 4507.
(R.C. § 4507.31(A))
   (B)   (1)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under R.C. §
4507.05(A) shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
in violation of the conditions established under R.C. § 4507.05(A).
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(b) of this section, no
holder of a temporary instruction permit that is issued under R.C. § 4507.05(A)
and that is issued on or after July 1, 1998, and who has not attained the age
of 18 years, shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.
         (b)   The holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under R.C. §
4507.05(A) on or after July 1, 1998, who has not attained the age of 18 years,
may operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposed of vehicular travel or parking between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. if, at the time of such operation, the holder
is accompanied by the holder’s parent, guardian, or custodian, and the parent,
guardian, or custodian holds a current valid driver’s or commercial driver’s
license issued by this state, is actually occupying a seat beside the permit
holder, and does not have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as provided in R.C. § 4511.19
(A).
(R.C. § 4507.05(F))
   (C)   (1)   (a)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held
the license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a
highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. unless
the holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
         (b)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for 12 months or longer shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless the
holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
      (2)   (a)   Subject to division (E)(1) of this section, division (C)(1)
(a) of this section does not apply to the holder of a probationary driver’s
license who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of midnight and 6:
00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided
that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written documentation
from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
         (b)   Division (C)(1)(b) of this section does not apply to the holder
of a probationary driver’s license who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.,
provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written
documentation from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
      (3)   An employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event is not liable in damages in a civil action for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises from, or is related
to, the fact that the employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event provided the holder of a probationary driver’s license with the
written documentation described in division (C)(2) of this section. The
Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall make available at no cost a form to serve as
the written documentation described in division (C)(2) of this section, and
employers, school officials, officials affiliated with religious events, and
holders of probationary driver’s licenses may utilize that form or may choose
to utilize any other written documentation to meet the requirements of that
division.
      (4)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking with more than one person who is not a family member
occupying the vehicle unless the probationary license holder is accompanied by
the probationary license holder’s parent, guardian, or custodian.
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of division (C)(1)(a) or
(C)(1)(b) of this section if, at the time of the violation, an emergency
existed that required the holder of the probationary driver’s license to
operate a motor vehicle in violation of division (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) of this
section or the holder was an emancipated minor.
   (E)   (1)   If a person is issued a probationary driver’s license prior to
attaining the age of 17 years and the person pleads guilty to, is convicted of,
or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a moving violation
during the six-month period commencing on the date on which the person is
issued the probationary driver’s license, the court with jurisdiction over the
violation may order that the holder must be accompanied by the holder’s parent
or guardian whenever the holder is operating a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking for a period not to exceed six months or the date the holder
attains the age of 17 years, whichever occurs first.
      (2)   Any person who is subject to the operating restrictions established
under division (E)(1) of this section as a result of a first moving violation
may petition the court for driving privileges without being accompanied by the
holder’s parent or guardian during the period of time determined by the court
under that division. In granting the driving privileges, the court shall
specify the purposes of the privileges and shall issue the person appropriate
forms setting forth the privileges granted. If a person is convicted of, pleads
guilty to, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a second or
subsequent moving violation, the court with jurisdiction over the violation may
terminate any driving privileges previously granted under this division.
      (3)   No person shall violate any operating restriction imposed under
division (E)(1) or (E)(2) of this section.
   (F)   No holder of a probationary license shall operate a motor vehicle upon
a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking unless the total number of occupants of the vehicle
does not exceed the total number of occupant restraining devices originally
installed in the motor vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the
vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device.
   (G)   A restricted license may be issued to a person who is 14 or 15 years
of age under proof of hardship satisfactory to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
   (H)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether each occupant of the motor vehicle is wearing all of the
available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device as
required by division (F) of this section, or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons if that requirement has been or is being violated,
or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a
violation of that requirement.
   (I)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) of this
section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons for such a violation or for causing the arrest or
commencing a prosecution of a person for such a violation.
   (J)   As used in this section:
      FAMILY MEMBER. A family member of a probationary license holder includes
any of the following:
         (a)   A spouse;
         (b)   A child or stepchild;
         (c)   A parent, stepparent, grandparent, or parent-in-law;
         (d)   An aunt or uncle;
         (e)   A sibling, whether of the whole or half blood or by adoption, a
brother-in-law, or a sister-in- law;
         (f)   A son or daughter of the probationary license holder’s
stepparent if the stepparent has not adopted the probationary license holder;
         (g)   An eligible adult, as defined in R.C. § 4507.05.
      MOVING VIOLATION. Means any violation of any statute or ordinance that
regulates the operation of vehicles on the highways or streets. The term does
not include a violation of R.C. § 4513.263 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or a violation of any statute or ordinance regulating
pedestrians or the parking of vehicles, vehicle size or load limitations,
vehicle fitness requirements, or vehicle registration.
      OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4513.263.
(R.C. § 4507.071(B) - (I))
   (K)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.31(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates divisions (B), (C)(1), (C)(4), (E)(3), or (F) of
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. §§ 4507.05(I), 4507.071(J)) (Prior Code, §§ 436.03, 436.035)
§ 71.22 LICENSE REQUIRED AS DRIVER OR COMMERCIAL DRIVER ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE
PROPERTY; NONRESIDENT EXEMPTION.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   No person shall permit the operation of a motor vehicle
upon any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking, knowing the operator does not have a valid
driver’s license issued to the operator by the Registrar of Motor Vehicle or a
deputy registrar under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid commercial driver’s license
issued under R.C. Chapter 4506. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates this division is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When
the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
         (b)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this
section or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   No person shall receive a driver’s license, or a motorcycle
operator’s endorsement of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card unless and until the person
surrenders to the Registrar or a deputy registrar all valid licenses, temporary
instruction permits, and identification cards issued to the person by another
jurisdiction recognized by this state.
      (3)   The Registrar shall report the cancellation of a license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card to the issuing authority, together
with information that the license, temporary instruction permit, or
identification card is now issued in this state. The Registrar or a deputy
registrar shall destroy any such license, temporary instruction permit, or
identification card that is not returned to the issuing authority.
      (4)   No person shall possess more than one valid license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card at any time.
(R.C. § 4507.02(A))
   (B)   (1)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving, or propelling a road roller or road machinery upon a street or highway.
      (2)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving, or propelling any agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a
street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
      (3)   No person shall drive, operate, draw, move, or propel any
agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a street or highway at a
speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the person has a current, valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (4)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate a
motorcycle having three wheels with a motor of not more than 50 cubic
centimeters piston displacement.
      (5)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate an
autocycle or a cab-enclosed motorcycle.
      (6)   Every person on active duty in the military or naval forces of the
United States, when furnished with a driver’s permit and when operating an
official motor vehicle in connection with such duty, is exempt from the license
requirements of R.C. Chapters 4506 and 4507. Every person on active duty in the
military or naval forces of the United States or in service with the peace
corps, volunteers in service to America, or the foreign service of the United
States, is exempt from the license requirements of such sections for the period
of the person’s active duty or service and for six months thereafter, provided
such person was a licensee under such sections at the time the person commenced
the person’s active duty or service. This section does not prevent such a
person or the person’s spouse or dependent from making an application, as
provided in R.C. § 4507.10(C), for the renewal of a driver’s license or
motorcycle operator’s endorsement or as provided in R.C. § 4506.14 for the
renewal of a commercial driver’s license during the period of the person’s
active duty or service.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.03)
   (C)   Nonresidents, permitted to drive upon the highways of their own state,
may operate any motor vehicle upon any highway in this state without
examination or license under R.C. §§ 4507.01 through 4507.39, inclusive, upon
condition that such nonresident may be required at any time or place to prove
lawful possession or their right to operate such motor vehicle, and to
establish proper identity.
(R.C. § 4507.04)
   (D)   Surrender of driver’s license from another state.
      (1)   Any person who becomes a resident of this state, within 30 days of
becoming a resident, shall surrender any driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card issued by another state to the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy registrar. If such a person intends to
operate a motor vehicle upon the public roads or highways, the person shall
apply for a temporary instruction permit or driver’s license in this state. If
the person fails to apply for a driver’s license or temporary instruction
permit or within 30 days of becoming a resident, the person shall not operate
any motor vehicle in this state under a license or permit issued by another
state.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (D)(1) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   The offense established under division (D)(2)(a) of this section
is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
      (3)   For purposes of division (D)(1) of this section, “resident” means
any person to whom any of the following applies:
         (a)   The person maintains their principal residence in this state and
does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States armed forces.
         (b)   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to
be a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under R.C.
§ 4507.01.
(R.C. § 4507.213) (Prior Code, §§ 436.01, 436.02)
§ 71.23 EMPLOYMENT OF A MINOR TO OPERATE A TAXICAB PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the definition of “chauffeur” in R.C. § 4501.01, no
person shall employ any minor for the purpose of operating a taxicab.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4507.321)
§ 71.24 RESTRICTION AGAINST OWNER LENDING VEHICLE FOR USE OF ANOTHER.
   (A)   No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or under
the person’s control to be driven by another if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person does not have a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or valid nonresident driving privileges;
      (2)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privileges have been suspended or canceled under R.C. Chapter 4510 or
any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (3)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving the motor vehicle would violate any prohibition
contained in R.C. Chapter 4509.
      (4)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving would violate R.C. § 4511.19 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (5)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
vehicle is the subject of an immobilization waiver order issued under R.C. §
4503.235 and the other person is prohibited from operating the vehicle under
that order.
   (B)   Without limiting or precluding the consideration of any other evidence
in determining whether a violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
or (A)(5) of this section has occurred, it shall be prima facie evidence that
the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator of the
motor vehicle owned by the offender or under the offender’s control is in a
category described in division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of
this section if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (A)(1), (A)(3), or (A)(5) of this section, the offender and the
operator of the motor vehicle reside in the same household and are related by
consanguinity or affinity.
      (2)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (A)(2) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle reside in the same household, and the offender knows or has reasonable
cause to believe that the operator has been charged with or convicted of any
violation of law or ordinance, or has committed any other act or omission, that
would or could result in the suspension or cancellation of the operator’s
license, permit, or privilege.
      (3)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (A)(4) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the offense.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful entrustment of a
motor vehicle, and shall be punished as provided in divisions (C) to (H) of
this section.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) of this section is guilty of an
unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the
offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   (a)   If, within three years of a violation of division (A)(1), (A)
(2), or (A)(3) of this section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to
or been convicted of two or more violations of division (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)
(3) of this section, R.C. § 4511.203(A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) or (A)(5) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   For any violation of this section, in addition to the penalties
imposed under this Code or R.C. Chapter 2929, the court may impose a class
seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7), and, if
the vehicle involved in the offense is registered in the name of the offender,
the court may order one of the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3)(b) or (C)(3)(c)
of this section, the court may order, for 30 days, the immobilization of the
vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license
plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §
4503.233.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order, for 60 days, the
immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of
that vehicle’s license plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and
enforced under R.C. § 4503.233.
         (c)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order the criminal
forfeiture to the state of the vehicle involved in the offense. If issued, the
order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234.
      (4)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for
criminal forfeiture under division (C)(3)(c) of this section is assigned or
transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in addition to or
independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the
offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National
Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine imposed under this
division shall be distributed in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).
   (D)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(C)(3)(a) or (C)(3)(b) of this section, the court shall not release the vehicle
from the immobilization before the termination of the period of immobilization
ordered unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
   (E)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(C)(3)(c) of this section, upon receipt of the order from the court, neither
the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor any deputy registrar shall accept any
application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor
vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the order. The period of denial
shall be five years after the date the order is issued, unless, during that
five-year period, the court with jurisdiction of the offense that resulted in
the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the
termination. If the court terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar,
the Registrar shall take all necessary measures to permit the person to
register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer the
registration of the vehicle.
   (F)   This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or motor
vehicle leasing dealers, as defined in R.C. § 4549.65.
   (G)   Evidence of a conviction of, plea of guilty to, or adjudication as a
delinquent child for a violation of this section shall not be admissible as
evidence in any civil action that involves the offender or delinquent child who
is the subject of the conviction, plea, or adjudication and that arises from
the wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle.
   (H)   For purposes of this section, a vehicle is owned by a person if, at
the time of a violation of this section, the vehicle is registered in the
person’s name.
(R.C. § 4511.203) (Prior Code, § 436.05)
§ 71.25 SUSPENSION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE; LICENSE SUSPENDED BY COURT OF RECORD.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4510.07 or in any other
provision of the Ohio Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a violation of any provision of this code that is
substantially equivalent to a provision of the Ohio Revised Code, and a court
is permitted or required to suspend a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to
any other penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or non resident operating privileges for
the period of time the court determines appropriate, but the period of
suspension imposed for the violation of the provision of this code shall not
exceed the period of suspension that is permitted or required to be imposed for
the violation of the provision of the Ohio Revised Code to which the provision
of this code is substantially equivalent.
(R.C. § 4510.05)
   (B)   Whenever a person is found guilty under the laws of this state or any
ordinance of any political subdivision of this state, of operating a motor
vehicle in violation of any such law or ordinance relating to reckless
operation, the trial court of any court of record, in addition to or
independent of all other penalties provided by law, may impose a class five
suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(5).
   (C)   Suspension of a commercial driver’s license under this section shall
be concurrent with any period of suspension disqualification under R.C. §
3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from holding a
commercial driver’s license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a driver’s
license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the commercial
driver’s license was suspended under this section, and no person whose
commercial driver’s license is suspended under this section shall be issued a
driver’s license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the suspension.
(R.C. § 4510.15)
(Prior Code, § 408.03, 698.07)
§ 71.26 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall display the operator’s driver’s
license, or furnish satisfactory proof that the operator has a driver’s
license, upon demand of any peace officer or of any person damaged or injured
in any collision in which the licensee may be involved. When a demand is
properly made, and the operator has the operator’s driver’s license on or about
the operator’s person, the operator shall not refuse to display the license. A
person’s failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that the person is licensed
under R.C. Chapter 4507 when the person does not have the person’s license on
or about the person’s person shall be prima facie evidence of the person’s not
having obtained a driver’s license.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section,
R.C. § 4507.35, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.35) (Prior Code, § 436.06)
§ 71.27 PROHIBITION AGAINST FALSE STATEMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement to any matter or
thing required by the provisions of this traffic code.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4507.36)
§ 71.28 DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE RESTRICTION.
   (A)   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) of this section, division (B)
of this section, §
71.31 and in R.C. §§ 4510.111 and 4510.16, no person whose driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended under any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, other than R.C.
Chapter 4509, or under any applicable law in any other jurisdiction in which
the person’s license or permit was issued shall operate any motor vehicle upon
the public roads and highways or upon any public or private property used by
the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking within this municipality
during the period of suspension unless the person is granted limited driving
privileges and is operating the vehicle in accordance with the terms of the
limited driving privileges.
      (2)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality in violation of any restriction of the person’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit imposed under R.C. § 4506.10
(D) or 4507.14.
      (3)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (A)(1) of this
section or the person operated a motor vehicle in violation of a restriction at
the time of the alleged violation of division (A)(2) of this section. The
person charged with a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (4)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court may impose upon the
offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(7).
         (b)   1.   Except as provided in division (A)(4)(b)2. or (A)(4)(b)3.
of this section, the court, in addition to any other penalty that it imposes on
the offender and if the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111
or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to or independent of any other sentence that it imposes upon the
offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense
for 30 days and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates for 30 days in
accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
            2.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, or any combination of
two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to any
other sentence that it imposes on the offender, may order the immobilization of
the vehicle involved in the offense for 60 days and the impoundment of that
vehicle’s license plates for 60 days in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
            3.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, or any
combination of three or more violations of this section or R.C. § 4510.11,
4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the
court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on the offender, may
order the criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the offense to the
state.
      (5)   Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this section
shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §§ 4503.233 and 4507.02, as applicable.
The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered under this
section unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
      (6)   Any order of criminal forfeiture under this section shall be issued
and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234. Upon receipt of the copy of the order from
the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a deputy registrar shall
accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any
motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the declaration of
forfeiture. The period of registration denial shall be five years after the
date of the order, unless, during that period, the court having jurisdiction of
the offense that led to the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the
Registrar of the termination. The Registrar then shall take necessary measures
to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to
transfer registration of the vehicle.
      (7)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.11)
   (B)   Driving under suspension in violation of other provisions.
      (1)    No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license
has been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2151.354, 2935.27, 3123.58, 4301.99,
4510.032, 4510.22, or 4510.33, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
      (2)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (B)(1) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under suspension at the
time of the alleged violation of division (B)(1) of this section. The person
charged with a violation of division (B)(1) of this section may offer evidence
to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is guilty of
driving under suspension and shall be punished as provided in division (B)(3)
(a) or division (B)(3)(b) of this section.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3)(b) of this
section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. The offender shall be
sentenced pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
         (b)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously
was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (B)(1)
of this section, or any combination of two or more violations of division (B)
(1) of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree, and the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in
an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident
or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s
operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for
which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.111)
   (C)   Repeat traffic offender; point system suspension. Any person whose
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privileges are suspended as a repeat traffic offender under R.C. § 4510.037 and
who, during the suspension, operates any motor vehicle upon any public roads
and highways is guilty of driving under a twelve-point suspension, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to a
minimum term of three days in jail. No court shall suspend the first three days
of jail time imposed pursuant to this division.
(R.C. § 4510.037(J))
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
(Prior Code, § 436.071)
§ 71.29 OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE OR MOTORCYCLE WITHOUT VALID LICENSE.
   (A)   (1)   No person, except those expressly exempted under R.C. §§
4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public
road or highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person
has a valid driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a commercial
driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506.
      (2)   No person, except a person expressly exempted under R.C. §§
4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motorcycle upon a public road
or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person has a valid
license as a motorcycle operator that was issued upon application by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. Chapter 4507. The license shall be in
the form of an endorsement, as determined by the Registrar, upon a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, if the person has a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle, or in the form of a restricted
license as provided in R.C. § 4507.14, if the person does not have a valid
license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle.
   (B)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the person did not have either a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license at the time of the alleged violation of
division (A)(1) of this section or a valid license as a motorcycle operator
either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or a restricted license at the time of the alleged violation of
division (A)(2) of this section. The person charged with a violation of
division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this
prima facie evidence.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or motorcycle without a valid license and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   If the trier of fact finds that the offender never has held a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license issued by this state or any other
jurisdiction, or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the
offender, if the offender has never held a valid license as a motorcycle
operator, either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or in the form of a restricted license, except as otherwise
provided in this division, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of this section or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the offender, the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license bearing the motorcycle
endorsement or the offender’s restricted license was expired at the time of the
offense, except as otherwise provided in this division, the offense is a minor
misdemeanor. If within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (D)   The court shall not impose a license suspension for a first violation
of this section or if more than three years have passed since the offender’s
last violation of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (E)   If the offender is sentenced under division (C)(2) of this section, if
within three years of the offense the offender previously was convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one or more violations of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and if the offender’s license was
expired for more than six months at the time of the offense, the court may
impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)
(7).
(R.C. § 4510.12) (Prior Code, § 436.072)
§ 71.30 DRIVING UNDER OVI SUSPENSION.
   (A)   No person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191, or 4511.196 or under R.C. § 4510.07 for a conviction of a violation
of a municipal OVI ordinance shall operate any motor vehicle upon the public
roads or highways within this municipality during the period of the suspension.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under OVI
suspension. The court shall sentence the offender under R.C. Chapter 2929,
subject to the differences authorized or required by this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this
section, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree. The
court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         (a)   A mandatory jail term of three consecutive days. The three-day
term shall be imposed, unless, subject to division (C) of this section, the
court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 30 consecutive days of house
arrest with electronic monitoring. A period of house arrest with electronic
monitoring imposed under this division shall not exceed six months. If the
court imposes a mandatory three-day jail term under this division, the court
may impose a jail term in addition to that term, provided that in no case shall
the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed six months;
         (b)   A fine of not less than $250 and not more than $1,000;
         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) of this section;
         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, immobilization for 30 days of the
offender’s vehicle and impoundment for 30 days of the identification license
plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment shall be
issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
      (2)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section or one
equivalent offense, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         (a)   A mandatory jail term of ten consecutive days. Notwithstanding
the jail terms provided in R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28, the court may
sentence the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The 10-
day mandatory jail term shall be imposed unless, subject to division (C) of
this section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 90
consecutive days of house arrest with electronic monitoring. The period of
house arrest with electronic monitoring shall not exceed one year;
         (b)   Notwithstanding the fines provided for in R.C. Chapter 2929, a
fine of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;
         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) of this section;
         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, immobilization of the offender’s
vehicle for 60 days and the impoundment for 60 days of the identification
license plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment
shall be issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
      (3)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or two or more equivalent offenses, driving under OVI suspension is a
misdemeanor. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         (a)   A mandatory jail term of 30 consecutive days. Notwithstanding
the jail terms provided in R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28, the court may
sentence the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The
court shall not sentence the offender to a term of house arrest with electronic
monitoring in lieu of the mandatory portion of the jail term;
         (b)   Notwithstanding the fines set forth in R.C. Chapter 2929, a fine
of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;
         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) of this section;
         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, criminal forfeiture to the state
of the offender’s vehicle. The order of criminal forfeiture shall be issued and
enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234. If title to a motor vehicle that
is subject to an order for criminal forfeiture under this division is assigned
or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, the court may fine
the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the
National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine so imposed
shall be distributed in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).
   (C)   (1)   No court shall impose an alternative sentence of house arrest
with electronic monitoring under division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section
unless, within 60 days of the date of sentencing, the court issues a written
finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail
where the offender is required to serve the jail term imposed, the offender
will not be able to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following
the date of sentencing.
      (2)   An offender sentenced under this section to a period of house
arrest with electronic monitoring shall be permitted work release during that
period.
   (D)   Fifty percent of any fine imposed by a court under division (B)(1),
(B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section shall be deposited into the municipal
Indigent Drivers Alcohol Treatment Fund under the control of that court, as
created by the municipality pursuant to R.C. § 4511.191(H).
   (E)   In addition to or independent of all other penalties provided by law
or ordinance, the trial judge of any court of record or the mayor of a mayor’s
court shall impose on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this section a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
      (1)   When permitted as specified in R.C. § 4510.021, if the court grants
limited driving privileges during a suspension imposed under this section, the
privileges shall be granted on the additional condition that the offender must
display restricted license plates, issued under R.C. § 4503.231, on the vehicle
driven subject to the privileges, except as provided in R.C. § 4503.231(B).
      (2)   A suspension of a commercial driver’s license under this section
shall be concurrent with any period of suspension or disqualification under
R.C. § 3123.58 or R.C. § 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from
holding a commercial driver’s license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a
driver’s license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the
commercial driver’s license was suspended under this section, and no person
whose commercial driver’s license is suspended under this section shall be
issued a driver’s license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the
suspension.
   (F)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree under this
section for which the offender is sentenced.
   (G)   As used in this section:
      ELECTRONIC MONITORING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Means any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of a municipal ordinance, law of another state, or
law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to division (A) of
this section;
         (b)   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to division (A) of this section.
      JAIL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Means the mandatory term in jail of 3, 10, or 30
consecutive days that must be imposed under division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3)
of this section upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (A) of
this section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         (a)   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
must be served in a jail.
         (b)   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to any provision
of the Ohio Revised Code.
(R.C. § 4510.14)
   (H)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
(Prior Code, § 436.073)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161
§ 71.31 DRIVING UNDER FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW SUSPENSION OR CANCELLATION;
DRIVING UNDER A NONPAYMENT OF JUDGMENT SUSPENSION.
   (A)    No person, whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or temporary
instruction permit or nonresident’s operating privilege has been suspended or
canceled pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4509, shall operate any motor vehicle within
this municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to
be operated by another person in the municipality, during the period of the
suspension or cancellation, except as specifically authorized by R.C. Chapter
4509.
   (B)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public
or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking in this municipality if the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 4509.37 or 4509.40 for nonpayment of a
judgment.
   (C)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A) or (B) of this section may be admitted into evidence
as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under either a
financial responsibility law suspension at the time of the alleged violation of
division (A) of this section or a nonpayment of judgment suspension at the time
of the alleged violation of division (B) of this section. The person charged
with a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section may offer evidence to
rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (D)    Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of driving
under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation and shall be
punished as provided in division (D)(1) to (D)(3) of this section. Whoever
violates division (B) of this section is guilty of driving under a nonpayment
of judgment suspension and shall be punished as provided in division (D)(1) to
(D)(3) of this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(2) of this section,
the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified
misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously was
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, or
any combination of two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or
4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in
an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident
or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s
operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for
which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.16)
   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
(Prior Code, § 436.074)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161
§ 71.32 FAILURE TO REINSTATE LICENSE.
   (A)   No person whose driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, or nonresident’s operating privilege has been
suspended shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public road or highway or any
public or private property after the suspension has expired unless the person
has complied with all license reinstatement requirements imposed by the court,
the bureau of motor vehicles, or another provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (B)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person had not been reinstated by
the person at the time of the alleged violation of division (A) of this
section. The person charged with a violation of division (A) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to reinstate a
license, and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of a violation of division (A) of this
section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two
or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   In all cases, the court may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
(R.C. § 4510.21)
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
(Prior Code, § 436.075)
COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSES
§ 71.45 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION. The concentration of alcohol in a person’s blood,
breath or urine. When expressed as a percentage, it means grams of alcohol per
the following: 100 milliliters of whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma;
210 liters of breath; or 100 milliliters of urine.
   COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE. A license issued in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 4506 that authorizes an individual to drive a commercial motor vehicle.
   COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE INFORMATION SYSTEM. The information system
established pursuant to the requirements of the “Commercial Motor Vehicle
Safety Act of 1986", 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 U.S.C. App. 2701.
   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Except when used in R.C. § 4506.25, any motor
vehicle designed or used to transport persons or property that meets any of the
following qualifications:
      (1)   Any combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight or combined
gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more, provided that the gross
vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle or vehicles being
towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds;
      (2)   Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle
weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more;
      (3)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is not a Class A
or Class B vehicle, but is designed to transport 16 or more passengers
including the driver;
      (4)   Any school bus with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight
rating of less than 26,001 pounds that is designed to transport fewer than 16
passengers including the driver;
      (5)   Is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is
required under 49 C.F.R. part 172, subpart F, as amended; or
      (6)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is designed to
be operated and to travel on a public street or highway and is considered by
the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration to be a commercial motor
vehicle, including but not limited to a motorized crane, a vehicle whose
function is to pump cement, a rig for drilling wells, and a portable crane.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Includes all of the following:
      (1)   Any substance classified as a controlled substance under the
“Controlled Substances Act”, 80 Stat. 1242 (1970), 21 U.S.C. § 802(6), as
amended;
      (2)   Any substance included in Schedules I through V of 21 C.F.R. part
1308, as amended;
      (3)   Any drug of abuse.
   CONVICTION. An unvacated adjudication of guilt or a determination that a
person has violated or failed to comply with the law in a court of original
jurisdiction or an authorized administrative tribunal, an unvacated forfeiture
of bail or collateral deposited to secure the person’s appearance in court, a
plea of guilty or nolo contendere accepted by the court, the payment of a fine
or court cost, or violation of a condition of release without bail, regardless
of whether or not the penalty is rebated, suspended or probated.
   DISQUALIFICATION. Means any of the following:
      (1)   The suspension, revocation, or cancellation of a person’s
privileges to operate a commercial motor vehicle;
      (2)   Any withdrawal of a person’s privileges to operate a commercial
motor vehicle as the result of a violation of state or local law relating to
motor vehicle traffic control other than parking, vehicle weight, or vehicle
defect violations;
      (3)   A determination by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
that a person is not qualified to operate a commercial motor vehicle under 49
C.F.R. § 391.
   DOMICILED. Having a true, fixed, principal, and permanent residence to which
an individual intends to return.
   DOWNGRADE. Any of the following, as applicable:
      (1)   A change in the commercial driver’s license, or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit, holder’s self-certified status as
described in R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1);
      (2)   A change to a lesser class of vehicle;
      (3)   Removal of commercial driver’s license privileges from the
individual’s driver’s license.
   DRIVE. To drive, operate or be in physical control of a motor vehicle.
   DRIVER. Any person who drives, operates or is in physical control of a
commercial motor vehicle or is required to have a commercial driver’s license.
   DRIVER’S LICENSE. A license issued by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles that
authorizes an individual to drive.
   DRUG OF ABUSE. Any controlled substance, dangerous drug as defined in R.C. §
4729.01, harmful intoxicant as defined in R.C. § 2925.01, or over-the-counter
medication that, when taken in quantities exceeding the recommended dosage, can
result in impairment of judgment or reflexes.
   ELECTRONIC DEVICE. Includes a cellular telephone, a personal digital
assistant, a pager, a computer, and any other device used to input, write,
send, receive, or read text.
   ELIGIBLE UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. A village, township, or county that has a
population of not more than 3,000 persons according to the most recent federal
census.
   EMPLOYER. Any person, including the federal government, any state, and a
political subdivision of any state, that owns or leases a commercial motor
vehicle or assigns a person to drive such a motor vehicle.
   ENDORSEMENT. An authorization on a person’s commercial driver’s license that
is required to permit the person to operate a specified type of commercial
motor vehicle.
   FARM TRUCK. A truck controlled and operated by a farmer for use in the
transportation to or from a farm, for a distance of not more than 150 miles, of
products of the farm, including livestock and its products, poultry and its
products, floricultural and horticultural products, and in the transportation
to the farm, from a distance of not more than 150 miles, of supplies for the
farm, including tile, fence and every other thing or commodity used in
agricultural, floricultural, horticultural, livestock, and poultry production,
and livestock, poultry, and other animals and things used for breeding,
feeding, or other purposes connected with the operation of the farm, when the
truck is operated in accordance with this definition and is not used in the
operations of a motor carrier, as defined in R.C. § 4923.01.
   FATALITY. The death of a person as the result of a motor vehicle accident
occurring not more than 365 days prior to the date of death.
   FELONY. Any offense under federal or state law that is punishable by death
or imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and includes any offense
specifically classified as a felony under the law of this state, regardless of
the penalty that may be imposed.
   FOREIGN JURISDICTION. Any jurisdiction other than a state.
   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING. The value specified by the manufacturer as the
maximum loaded weight of a single or a combination vehicle. The gross vehicle
weight rating of a combination vehicle is the gross vehicle weight rating of
the power unit plus the gross vehicle weight rating of each towed unit.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material that has been designated as hazardous
under 49 U.S.C. § 5103 and is required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. part
172, subpart F or any quantity of a material listed as a select agent or toxin
in 42 C.F.R. part 73, as amended.
   IMMINENT HAZARD. The existence of a condition that presents a substantial
likelihood that death, serious illness, severe personal injury, or a
substantial endangerment to health, property, or the environment may occur
before the reasonably foreseeable completion date of a formal proceeding begun
to lessen the risk of death, illness, injury, or endangerment.
   MEDICAL VARIANCE. One of the following received by a driver from the Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration that allows the driver to be issued a
medical certificate:
      (1)   An exemption letter permitting operation of a commercial motor
vehicle under 49 C.F.R. part 381, subpart C or 49 C.F.R. § 391.64;
      (2)   A skill performance evaluation certificate permitting operation of
a commercial motor vehicle pursuant to 49 C.F.R. § 391.49.
   MOBILE TELEPHONE. A mobile communication device that falls under or uses any
commercial mobile radio service as defined in 47 C.F.R. part 20, except that
mobile telephone does not include two-way or citizens band radio services.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer
propelled or drawn by mechanical power used on highways, except that such term
does not include a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer operated
exclusively on a rail.
   OUT-OF-SERVICE ORDER. A declaration by an authorized enforcement officer of
a federal, state, local, Canadian, or Mexican jurisdiction declaring that the
driver, commercial motor vehicle, or commercial motor carrier operation is out
of service as defined in 49 C.F.R. § 390.5.
   PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
   PORTABLE TANK. A liquid or gaseous packaging designed primarily to be loaded
onto or temporarily attached to a vehicle and equipped with skids, mountings,
or accessories to facilitate handling of the tank by mechanical means.
   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01(E)(1) and
(E)(3).
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Includes every vehicle that is defined as a
recreational vehicle in R.C. § 4501.01 and is used exclusively for purposes
other than engaging in business for profit.
   RESIDENCE. Any person’s residence determined in accordance with standards
prescribed in the rules adopted by the Registrar.
   SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   SERIOUS TRAFFIC VIOLATION. Any of the following:
      (1)   A conviction arising from a single charge of operating a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of any provision of R.C. § 4506.03;
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (2)(b) of this definition, a
violation while operating a commercial motor vehicle of a law of this state, or
any municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or any other
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, prohibiting either of the following:
            1.   Texting while driving;
            2.   Using a handheld mobile telephone.
         (b)   It is not a serious traffic violation if the person was texting
or using a handheld mobile telephone to contact law enforcement or other
emergency services.
      (3)   A conviction arising from the operation of any motor vehicle that
involves any of the following:
         (a)   A single charge of any speed in excess of the posted speed limit
by 15 miles per hour or more;
         (b)   Violations of R.C. § 4511.20 or R.C. § 4511.201 or any
substantially equivalent ordinance or resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state;
         (c)   Violation of a law of this state or an ordinance or resolution
relating to traffic control, other than a parking violation, or of any
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, that results in a fatal accident;
         (d)   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license with the proper class or endorsement for the specific vehicle
group being operated or for the passengers or type of cargo being transported;
         (e)   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license being in the person’s possession;
         (f)   Violation of R.C. § 4511.33 or R.C. § 4511.34, or any municipal
ordinance or county or township resolution substantially equivalent to either
of those sections, or any substantially equivalent law of another state or
political subdivision of another state;
         (g)   Violation of any other law of this state, any law of another
state, or any ordinance or resolution of a political subdivision of this state
or another state that meets both of the following requirements:
            1.   It relates to traffic control, other than a parking violation;
            2.   It is determined to be a serious traffic violation by the
United States Secretary of Transportation and is designated by the director as
such by rule.
   STATE. A state of the United States and includes the District of Columbia.
   TANK VEHICLE. Any commercial motor vehicle that is designed to transport any
liquid or gaseous materials within a tank or tanks that are either permanently
or temporarily attached to the vehicle or its chassis and have an individual
rated capacity of more than 119 gallons and an aggregate rated capacity of
1,000 gallons or more. The term does not include a commercial motor vehicle
transporting an empty storage container tank that is not designed for
transportation, has a rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or more, and is
temporarily attached to a flatbed trailer.
   TESTER. Means a person or entity acting pursuant to a valid agreement
entered into pursuant to R.C. § 4506.09(B).
   TEXTING. Manually entering alphanumeric text into, or reading text from, an
electronic device. Texting includes short message service (SMS), e-mail,
instant messaging, a command or request to access a world wide web page,
pressing more than a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone, or engaging in any other form of
electronic text retrieval or entry, for present or future communication.
Texting does not include the following:
      (1)   Using voice commands to initiate, receive, or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone;
      (2)   Inputting, selecting, or reading information on a global
positioning system or navigation system;
      (3)   Pressing a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone; or
      (4)   Using, for a purpose that is not otherwise prohibited by law, a
device capable of performing multiple functions, such as a fleet management
system, a dispatching device, a mobile telephone, a citizens band radio, or a
music player.
   TEXTING WHILE DRIVING. Texting while operating a commercial motor vehicle,
with the motor running, including while temporarily stationary because of
traffic, a traffic control device, or other momentary delays. Texting while
driving does not include operating a commercial motor vehicle with or without
the motor running when the driver has moved the vehicle to the side of, or off,
a highway and is stopped in a location where the vehicle can safely remain
stationary.
   UNITED STATES. The 50 states and the District of Columbia.
   UPGRADE. A change in the class of vehicles, endorsements, or self-certified
status as described in R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1) that expands the ability of a
current commercial driver’s license holder to operate commercial motor vehicles
under this chapter or R.C. Chapter 4506.
   USE OF A HANDHELD MOBILE TELEPHONE. Means:
      (1)   Using at least one hand to hold a mobile telephone to conduct a
voice communication;
      (2)   Dialing or answering a mobile telephone by pressing more than a
single button; or
      (3)   Reaching for a mobile telephone in a manner that requires a driver
to maneuver so that the driver is no longer in a seated driving position, or
restrained by a seat belt that is installed in accordance with 49 C.F.R. §
393.93 and adjusted in accordance with the vehicle manufacturer’s instructions.
   VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 4506.01) (Prior Code, § 442.01)
§ 71.46 USE OF ACTUAL GROSS WEIGHT IN LIEU OF RATING.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the actual gross weight of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles may be used in lieu of a gross vehicle weight rating to
determine whether a vehicle or combination of vehicles qualifies as a
commercial motor vehicle if the gross vehicle weight rating specified by the
manufacturer for the vehicle of combination of vehicles is not determinable, or
if the manufacturer of the vehicle has not specified a gross vehicle weight
rating.
(R.C. § 4506.011) (Prior Code, § 442.02)
§ 71.47 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having in the person’s
possession or otherwise under the person’s control more than one valid driver’s
license issued by this state, any other state, or by a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this municipality
in violation of an out-of-service order while the person’s driving privilege is
suspended, revoked, or cancelled, or while the person is subject to
disqualification;
      (3)   Drive a motor vehicle on a highway in the municipality under the
authority of a commercial driver’s license issued by another state or a foreign
jurisdiction, after having been a resident of this state for 30 days or longer;
      (4)   Knowingly give false information in any application or
certification required by R.C. § 4506.07;
      (5)   Knowingly provide false statements or engage in any fraudulent act
related to testing for a commercial driver’s license as required in R.C. §
4506.09.
   (B)   The municipality shall give every conviction occurring out of this
state and notice of which was received by the state Department of Public Safety
after December 31, 1989, full faith and credit and treat it for sanctioning
purposes under this chapter as though the conviction had occurred in this
state.
(R.C. § 4506.04(A), (B))
   (C)   No person shall drive any commercial motor vehicle for which an
endorsement is required under R.C. § 4506.12 unless the proper endorsement
appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit. No person shall drive a commercial motor
vehicle in violation of a restriction established under R.C. § 4506.12 that
appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit.
(R.C. § 4506.12(I))
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition, the provisions
of R.C. § 4507.19 apply.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(5) of this section is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition, the provisions
of R.C. § 4507.19 apply.
(R.C. § 4506.04(C))
      (4)   (a)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   The offenses established under division (C) of this section are
strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of
these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense for which there is no specified degree of culpability,
whether in this section or another section of this code or the Ohio Revised
Code, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4506.12(J))
(Prior Code, § 442.03)
§ 71.48 PREREQUISITES TO OPERATION OF COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (B) or (C) of this section, the
following shall apply:
      (1)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in
this state unless the person holds, and has in the person’s possession, any of
the following:
         (a)   A valid commercial driver’s license with proper endorsements for
the motor vehicle being driven, issued by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or by
another jurisdiction recognized by this state;
         (b)   A valid examiner’s commercial driving permit issued under R.C. §
4506.13;
         (c)   A valid restricted commercial driver’s license and waiver for
farm-related service industries issued under R.C. § 4506.24;
         (d)   A valid commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit
issued by the Registrar, provided that the person is accompanied by an
authorized state driver’s license examiner or tester or a person who has been
issued and has in the person’s immediate possession a current, valid commercial
driver’s license and who meets the requirements of R.C. § 4506.06(B).
      (2)   No person’s commercial driver’s license temporary instruction
permit shall be upgraded, and no commercial driver’s license shall be upgraded,
renewed, or issued to a person until the person surrenders to the registrar of
motor vehicles all valid licenses and permits issued to the person by this
state or by another jurisdiction recognized by this state. If the license or
permit was issued by any other state or another jurisdiction recognized by this
state, the Registrar shall report the surrender of a license or permit to the
issuing authority, together with information that a license or permit is now
issued in this state. The Registrar shall destroy any such license or permit
that is not returned to the issuing authority.
      (3)   No person who has been a resident of this state for 30 days or
longer shall drive a commercial motor vehicle under the authority of a
commercial driver’s license issued in another jurisdiction.
   (B)   Nothing in division (A) of this section applies to any qualified
person when engaged in the operation of any of the following:
      (1)   A farm truck;
      (2)   Fire equipment for a fire department, volunteer or nonvolunteer
fire company, fire district, joint fire district, or the State Fire Marshal;
      (3)   A public safety vehicle used to provide transportation or emergency
medical service for ill or injured persons;
      (4)   A recreational vehicle;
      (5)   A commercial motor vehicle within the boundaries of an eligible
unit of local government, if the person is employed by the eligible unit of
local government and is operating the commercial motor vehicle for the purpose
of removing snow or ice from a roadway by plowing, sanding, or salting, but
only if either the employee who holds a commercial driver’s license issued
under R.C. Chapter 4506 and ordinarily operates a commercial motor vehicle for
these purposes is unable to operate the vehicle, or the employing eligible unit
of local government determines that a snow or ice emergency exists that
requires additional assistance;
      (6)   A vehicle operated for military purposes by any member or uniformed
employee of the armed forces of the United States or their reserve components,
including the Ohio National Guard. This exception does not apply to United
States reserve technicians;
      (7)   A commercial motor vehicle that is operated for nonbusiness
purposes. “Operated for nonbusiness purposes” means that the commercial motor
vehicle is not used in commerce as “commerce” is defined in 49 C.F.R. § 383.5,
as amended, and is not regulated by the Public Utilities Commission pursuant to
R.C. Chapter 4905, 4921, or 4923;
      (8)   A motor vehicle that is designed primarily for the transportation
of goods and not persons, while that motor vehicle is being used for the
occasional transportation of personal property by individuals not for
compensation and not in the furtherance of a commercial enterprise;
      (9)   A police SWAT team vehicle;
      (10)   A police vehicle used to transport prisoners.
   (C)   Nothing contained in division (B)(5) of this section shall be
construed as preempting or superseding any law, rule or regulation of this
state concerning the safe operation of commercial motor vehicles.
(R.C. § 4506.03(A) - (C))
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a person may drive a
commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this municipality if all of the
following conditions are met:
      (1)   The person has a valid commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit issued by any state or
jurisdiction in accordance with the minimum standards adopted by the Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration under the “Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety
Act of 1986", 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 U.S.C. App., for issuance of commercial
driver’s licenses;
      (2)   The person’s commercial driver’s license or temporary instruction
permit is not suspended, revoked, or canceled, and the person has the
appropriate endorsements for the vehicle that is being driven;
      (3)   The person is not disqualified from driving a commercial motor
vehicle;
      (4)   The person is not subject to an out-of-service order;
      (5)   The person is medically certified as physically qualified to
operate a commercial motor vehicle in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4506.
         (a)   A person who submitted a medical examiner’s certificate to the
Registrar in accordance with R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1) and whose medical
certification information is maintained in the commercial driver’s license
information system is not required to have the medical examiner’s certificate
in the person’s possession when on duty.
         (b)   A person whose medical certification information is not
maintained in the commercial driver’s license information system shall have in
the person’s possession when on duty the original or a copy of the current
medical examiner’s certificate that was submitted to the Registrar. However,
the person may operate a commercial motor vehicle with such proof of medical
certification for not more than 15 days after the date the current medical
examiner’s certificate was issued to the person.
         (c)   A person who has a medical variance shall have in the person’s
possession the original or copy of the medical variance documentation at all
times while on duty.
   (E)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this
municipality if the person does not meet the conditions specified in division
(D) of this section.
   (F)   Except as set forth in 49 C.F.R. §§ 390.3(f), 391.2, 391.62, 391.67,
and 391.68, no person holding a commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit or a commercial driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter
4506 may drive a commercial motor vehicle in interstate commerce until the
person is at least 21 years of age.
(R.C. § 4506.05(A) - (C))
   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (2)   The offenses established under divisions (D), (E) and (F) of this
section are strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The
designation of these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be
construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no specified
degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. §§ 4506.03(D), 4506.05(D))
§ 71.49 PHYSICAL QUALIFICATION TO OPERATE COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person who holds a valid commercial driver’s license shall drive a
commercial motor vehicle unless the person is physically qualified to do so.
      (1)   Any person applying for a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit, the renewal or upgrade of a
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit, or the transfer of a commercial driver’s license from out
of state shall self-certify to the Registrar for purposes of 49 C.F.R. § 383.71
one of the following in regard to the applicant’s operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, as applicable:
         (a)   1.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a
commercial motor vehicle in interstate or foreign commerce and is subject to
and meets the requirements under 49 C.F.R. part 391, the applicant shall self-
certify that the applicant is non-excepted interstate and shall provide the
Registrar with the original or a copy of a medical examiner’s certificate and
each subsequently issued medical examiner’s certificate prepared by a qualified
medical examiner to maintain a medically certified status on the applicant’s
commercial driver licensing system driver record;
            2.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in interstate commerce, but engages in transportation or
operations excepted under 49 C.F.R. §§ 390.3(f), 391.2, 391.68, or 398.3 from
all or parts of the qualification requirements of 49 C.F.R. part 391, the
applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted interstate and is
not required to obtain a medical examiner’s certificate;
         (b)   1.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and
is subject to state driver qualification requirements, the applicant shall
self-certify that the applicant is non-excepted intrastate;
            2.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and is
excepted from all or parts of the state driver qualification requirements, the
applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted intrastate.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the expiration date on a person’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit,
every commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit holder shall provide the Registrar with the certification
required by this section on or after January 30, 2012, but prior to January 30,
2014.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4506.10(A), (E)) (Prior Code, § 442.04)
§ 71.50 CRIMINAL OFFENSES.
   (A)   No person who holds a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit or who operates a motor vehicle
for which a commercial driver’s license or permit is required shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having a measurable or
detectable amount of alcohol or of a controlled substance in the person’s
blood, breath, or urine;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath;
      (3)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of .048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma;
      (4)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of .056% or more by urine;
      (5)   Drive a motor vehicle while under the influence of a controlled
substance;
      (6)   Drive a motor vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a municipal
OVI ordinance as defined in R.C. § 4511.181;
      (7)   Use a vehicle in the commission of a felony;
      (8)   Refuse to submit to a test under R.C. § 4506.17 or R.C. § 4511.191,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (9)   Operate a commercial motor vehicle while the person’s commercial
driver’s license or permit or other commercial driving privileges are revoked,
suspended, cancelled, or disqualified;
      (10)   Cause a fatality through the negligent operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, including but not limited to the offenses of aggravated
vehicular homicide, vehicular homicide, and vehicular manslaughter;
      (11)   Fail to stop after an accident in violation of R.C. §§ 4549.02 to
4549.03, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (12)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle in violation of any provision of
R.C. §§ 4511.61 through 4511.63 or any federal or local law or ordinance
pertaining to railroad-highway grade crossings;
      (13)   Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony involving the
manufacture, distribution, or dispensing of a controlled substance as defined
in R.C. § 3719.01 or the possession with intent to manufacture, distribute, or
dispense a controlled substance;
      (14)   Use a commercial motor vehicle in the commission of a violation of
R.C. § 2905.32 or any other substantially equivalent offense established under
federal law or the laws of another state.
(R.C. § 4506.15(A))
   (B)   No person shall refuse to immediately surrender the person’s
commercial driver’s license or permit to a peace officer when required to do so
by R.C. § 4506.17.
(R.C. § 4506.17(H))
   (C)   (1)   Within the jurisdictional limits of the appointing authority,
any peace officer shall stop and detain any person found violating division (A)
of this section without obtaining a warrant. When there is reasonable ground to
believe that a violation of division (A) of this section has been committed and
a test or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood plasma or blood serum,
breath or urine is necessary, the peace officer shall take the person to an
appropriate place for testing. If a person refuses to submit to a test after
being warned as provided in R.C. § 4506.17(C), or submits to a test that
discloses the presence of a controlled substance or an alcohol concentration of
0.04% or more by whole blood or breath, an alcohol concentration of .048% or
more by blood serum or blood plasma, or an alcohol concentration of .056% or
more by urine, the peace officer shall require that the person immediately
surrender the person’s commercial driver’s license to the peace officer.
      (2)   As used in this division (C), JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS means the
limits within which a peace officer may arrest and detain a person without a
warrant under R.C. § 2935.03, except that the Superintendent and the troopers
of the State Highway Patrol may stop and detain, without warrant, any person
who, in the presence of the Superintendent or any trooper, is engaged in a
violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter or R.C. Chapter 4506.
(R.C. § 4506.23)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. §§ 4506.15(B), 4506.17(N))
(Prior Code, §§ 442.05, 442.08)
   (E)   The offenses established under division (A) of this section are strict
liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of these
offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply that any
other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a
strict liability offense.
(R.C. §§ 4506.15(C))
Statutory reference:
   Alcohol or controlled substance testing, disqualification of drivers, see
R.C. § 4506.17
   Disqualification of drivers for violations, see R.C. § 4506.16
§ 71.51 APPLICATION OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of 49 C.F.R. part 383, subpart C (Notification
Requirements and Employer Responsibilities), as amended, shall apply to all
commercial drivers or persons who apply for employment as commercial drivers.
No person shall fail to make a report to the person’s employer as required by
this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4506.19) (Prior Code, § 442.06)
§ 71.52 EMPLOYMENT OF DRIVERS OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   Each employer shall require every applicant for employment as a driver
of a commercial vehicle to provide the applicant’s employment history for the
ten years preceding the date the employment application is submitted to the
prospective employer. The following information shall be submitted:
      (1)   A list of the names and addresses of the applicant’s previous
employers for which the applicant was the operator of a commercial motor
vehicle;
      (2)   The dates the applicant was employed by these employers;
      (3)   The reason for leaving each of these employers.
   (B)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize any driver employed by
the employer to drive a commercial motor vehicle during any period in which any
of the following apply:
      (1)   The driver’s commercial driver’s license is suspended, revoked, or
cancelled by any state or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   The driver has lost the privilege to drive, or currently is
disqualified from driving, a commercial motor vehicle in any state or foreign
jurisdiction;
      (3)   The driver, the commercial motor vehicle the driver is driving, or
the motor carrier operation is subject to an out-of-service order in any state
or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (4)   The driver has more than one driver’s license.
   (C)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4506.15.
   (D)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle if the driver does not hold a valid, current
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit bearing the proper class or endorsements for the vehicle. No
employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of the restrictions on the driver’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A), (B) or (D) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 4506.20) (Prior Code, § 442.07)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty
otherwise is provided in the section that contains the provision violated is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. §§ 4506.99, 4507.99)
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
General Provisions
   
72.001   Lanes of travel upon roadways
   
72.002   Driving through safety zone
   
72.003   Vehicles traveling in opposite directions
   
72.004   Rules governing overtaking and passing of vehicles
   
72.005   Permission to overtake and pass on the right
   
72.006   Driving to left of center line
   
72.007   Prohibition against driving upon left side of roadway
   
72.008   Hazardous zones
   
72.009   One-way highways and rotary traffic islands
   
72.010   Rules for driving in marked lanes
   
72.011   Space between moving vehicles
   
72.012   Divided roadways
   
72.013   Rules for turns at intersections
   
72.014   U-turns and turning in roadway prohibited
   
72.015   Starting and backing vehicles
   
72.016   Turn and stop signals
   
72.017   Hand and arm signals
   
72.018   Entering and exiting controlled-access highway
   
72.019   Weaving; full time and attention
Right-of-Way
   
72.030   Right-of-way at intersections
   
72.031   Right-of-way when turning left
   
72.032   Right-of-way at through highways; stop signs; yield signs
   
72.033   Stop at sidewalk area; stop signs on private roads
   
72.034   Right-of-way on public highway
   
72.035   Pedestrian on sidewalk has right-of-way
   
72.036   Right-of-way of public safety vehicles
   
72.037   Funeral procession has right-of-way
   
72.038   Pedestrians yield right-of-way to public safety vehicle
   
72.039   Pedestrian on crosswalk has right-of-way
   
72.040   Right-of-way yielded to blind person
   
72.041   Right-of-way yielded by pedestrian
Pedestrians
   
72.055   Pedestrian movement in crosswalks
   
72.056   Pedestrian walking along highway
   
72.057   Prohibition against soliciting rides; riding on outside of vehicle
   
72.058   Pedestrian on bridge or railroad crossing
   
72.059   (Reserved)
   
72.060   Intoxicated or drugged pedestrian hazard on highway
   
72.061   Operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices
   
72.062   Operation of personal delivery device on sidewalks and crosswalks
   
72.063   Low-speed micromobility devices
Grade Crossings
   
72.075   Stop signs at grade crossings
   
72.076   Driving vehicle across railroad grade crossing
   
72.077   Vehicles required to stop at grade crossings
   
72.078   Slow-moving vehicles or equipment crossing railroad tracks
School Buses
   
72.090   Regulations concerning school buses
   
72.091   Violation of regulations; report; investigation; citation; warning
   
72.092   Restrictions on the operation of school buses
   
72.093   School bus inspection
   
72.094   School bus not used for school purposes
   
72.095   Licensing by Department of Public Safety
   
72.096   Registration and identification of school buses
   
72.097   School bus marking
   
72.098   Flashing light signal lamps
   
72.099   Occupant restraining device for operator
   
72.100   Citing vehicle operators who fail to stop for school buses
Prohibitions
   
72.115   Obstruction and interference affecting view and control of driver
   
72.116   Occupying travel trailer, fifth wheel vehicle, or manufactured or
mobile home while in motion
   
72.117   Driving upon closed highway prohibited
   
72.118   Driving upon sidewalk area or paths exclusively for bicycles
   
72.119   Obstructing passage of other vehicles
   
72.120   Following an emergency or public vehicle prohibited; approaching
stationary public safety vehicle and certain other vehicles with caution
   
72.121   Driving over unprotected fire hose
   
72.122   Placing injurious material on highway or depositing litter from motor
vehicle
   
72.123   Transporting child not in child-restraint system prohibited
   
72.124   Occupant restraining devices
   
72.125   Use of engine brakes prohibited
   
72.126   Operating motor vehicle while wearing earphones or earplugs
   
72.127   Chauffeured limousines and livery services
   
72.128   Operating traction engine upon improved highway
   
72.129   Cracking exhaust noises; peeling out
   
72.130   Shortcutting across private property
   
72.131   Texting while driving prohibited
   
72.132   Use of electronic wireless communication devices by minors or
probationary drivers while driving prohibited
   
72.133   Zones of quiet
   
72.134   Play streets
   
72.135   Toy vehicles on roadway
Statutory reference:
   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.001 LANES OF TRAVEL UPON ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction, or when making a left turn under the rules governing such movements;
      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      (3)   When driving upon a roadway divided into three or more marked lanes
for traffic under the rules applicable thereon;
      (4)   When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for
one-way traffic;
      (5)   When otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic-control
device.
   (B)   (1)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the
prevailing and lawful speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available
for traffic, and far enough to the right to allow passing by faster vehicles if
such passing is safe and reasonable, except under any of the following
circumstances:
         (a)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction;
         (b)   When preparing for a left turn;
         (c)   When the driver must necessarily drive in a lane other than the
right-hand lane to continue on the driver’s intended route.
      (2)   Nothing in division (B)(1) of this section requires a driver of a
slower vehicle to compromise the driver’s safety to allow overtaking by a
faster vehicle.
   (C)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and
providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the
left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left of the center of
the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the lanes, or
except as permitted under division (A)(2) of this section. This division shall
not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the center line in making a
left turn into or from an alley, private road, or driveway.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.25) (Prior Code, § 432.01)
§ 72.002 DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.
   (A)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety
zone.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.60) (Prior Code, § 432.27)
§ 72.003 VEHICLES TRAVELING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   (A)   Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass
each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one
line of traffic in each direction, each operator shall give to the other one-
half of the main traveled portion of the roadway or as nearly one-half as is
reasonably possible.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.26) (Prior Code, § 432.02)
§ 72.004 RULES GOVERNING OVERTAKING AND PASSING OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction:
      (1)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction shall, except as provided in division (A)(3) of this
section, signal to the vehicle to be overtaken, shall pass to the left thereof
at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway
until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. When a motor vehicle overtakes and
passes a bicycle or electric bicycle, three feet or greater is considered a
safe passing distance.
      (2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
operator of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle at the latter’s audible signal, and the operator shall not
increase the speed of the operator’s vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle.
      (3)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction on a divided highway as defined in R.C. §
4511.35, a limited access highway as defined in R.C. § 5511.02, or a highway
with four or more traffic lanes is not required to signal audibly to the
vehicle being overtaken and passed.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.27) (Prior Code, § 432.03)
§ 72.005 PERMISSION TO OVERTAKE AND PASS ON THE RIGHT.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass on the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
or
      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for
two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled
by the overtaking vehicle.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle only
under conditions permitting the movement in safety. The movement shall not be
made by driving off the roadway.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.28) (Prior Code, § 432.04)
§ 72.006 DRIVING TO LEFT OF CENTER LINE.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing traffic proceeding in the same direction, unless the
left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic approaching from the
opposite direction or any traffic overtaken. In every event, the overtaking
vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable, and
in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for the
traffic approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet
of any approaching vehicle.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.29) (Prior Code, § 432.05)
§ 72.007 PROHIBITION AGAINST DRIVING UPON LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven upon the left side of the roadway under the
following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway, where the operator’s view is obstructed within such a distance as to
create a hazard in the event traffic might approach from the opposite
direction;
      (2)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any
bridge, viaduct, or tunnel; or
      (3)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad grade crossing.
   (B)   This section does not apply to vehicles upon a one-way roadway, upon a
roadway where traffic is lawfully directed to be driven to the left side, or
under the conditions described in R.C. § 4511.25(A)(2) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.30) (Prior Code, § 432.06)
§ 72.008 HAZARDOUS ZONES.
   (A)   The Department of Transportation may determine those portions of any
state highway where overtaking and passing other traffic or driving to the left
of the center or center line of the roadway would be especially hazardous, and
may, by appropriate signs or markings on the highway, indicate the beginning
and end of such zones. When signs or markings are in place and clearly visible,
every operator of a vehicle shall obey the directions of the signs or markings,
notwithstanding the distances set out in R.C. § 4511.30.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply when all of the following
apply:
      (1)   The slower vehicle is proceeding at less than half the speed of the
speed limit applicable to that location.
      (2)   The faster vehicle is capable of overtaking and passing the slower
vehicle without exceeding the speed limit.
      (3)   There is sufficient clear sight distance to the left of the center
or center line of the roadway to meet the overtaking and passing provisions of
R.C. § 4511.29, considering the speed of the slower vehicle.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.31) (Prior Code, § 432.07)
§ 72.009 ONE-WAY HIGHWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (A)   (1)   Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way
traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
      (2)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven
only to the right of the rotary traffic island.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.32) (Prior Code, § 432.28)
§ 72.010 RULES FOR DRIVING IN MARKED LANES.
   (A)   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, or wherever within the municipality traffic is lawfully
moving in two or more substantially continuous lines in the same direction, the
following rules apply:
      (1)   A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as is practicable, entirely
within a single lane or line of traffic and shall not be moved from the lane or
line until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with
safety.
      (2)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for
the two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center
lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is
clearly visible and the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance,
or when preparing for a left turn, or where the center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is
proceeding, and is posted with signs to give notice of such allocation.
      (3)   Official signs may be erected directing specified traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction, regardless of the center of the roadway, or restricting
the use of a particular lane to only buses during certain hours or during all
hours, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of such signs.
      (4)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey
the directions of every such device.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.33) (Prior Code, § 432.08)
§ 72.011 SPACE BETWEEN MOVING VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle
more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of
the vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
      (2)   The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle,
when traveling upon a roadway outside a business or residence district, shall
maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions permit, between the vehicle
and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor vehicle may enter and occupy
the space without danger. This division does not prevent overtaking and passing
nor does it apply to any lane specially designated for use by trucks.
      (3)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business
or residence district in a caravan or motorcade shall maintain a sufficient
space between the vehicles so an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy the
space without danger. This division shall not apply to funeral processions.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.34) (Prior Code, § 432.09)
§ 72.012 DIVIDED ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by an
intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or a clearly indicated dividing
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over,
across, or within any dividing space, barrier, or section, except through an
opening, crossover, or intersection established by public authority. This
section does not prohibit the occupancy of the dividing space, barrier, or
section for the purpose of an emergency stop, or in compliance with an order of
a police officer.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.35) (Prior Code, § 432.29)
§ 72.013 RULES FOR TURNS AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall be
governed by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
center line thereof and by passing to the right of the center line where it
enters the intersection, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn
shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line
of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made
in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.
      (3)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on
one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at
any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left- hand
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of the
vehicle, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so
as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left hand lane
of the roadway being entered lawfully available to traffic moving in that lane.
   (B)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities may cause
markers, buttons, or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections,
and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in
this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when
markers, buttons, or signs are so placed, no operator of a vehicle shall turn
the vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by the
markers, buttons, or signs.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.36) (Prior Code, § 432.10)
§ 72.014 U-TURNS AND TURNING IN ROADWAY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.13 and division (B) of this section,
no vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any
curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, if such vehicle
cannot be seen within 500 feet by the driver of any other vehicle approaching
from either direction.
   (B)   The driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, may turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction. This division applies only when the emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle, and when the driver of the vehicle is giving an audible signal by
siren, exhaust whistle, or bell. This division does not relieve the driver of
an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.37) (Prior Code, § 432.11)
§ 72.015 STARTING AND BACKING VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or
parked until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.
      (2)   Before backing, operators of vehicles shall give ample warning, and
while backing they shall exercise vigilance not to injure person or property on
the street or highway.
      (3)   No person shall back a motor vehicle on a freeway, except:
         (a)   In a rest area;
         (b)   In the performance of public works or official duties;
         (c)   As a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown
of a motor vehicle.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.38) (Prior Code, § 432.12)
§ 72.016 TURN AND STOP SIGNALS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall turn a vehicle or move right or left upon a
highway unless and until the person has exercised due care to ascertain that
the movement can be made with reasonable safety, nor without giving an
appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided.
      (2)   When required, a signal of intention to turn or move right or left
shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by
the vehicle before turning, except that in the case of a person operating a
bicycle or electric bicycle, the signal shall be made not less than one time
but is not required to be continuous. A bicycle or electric bicycle operator is
not required to make a signal if the bicycle is in a designated turn lane, and
a signal shall not be given when the operator’s hands are needed for the safe
operation of the bicycle or electric bicycle.
      (3)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to
give a signal.
      (4)   Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given
either by means of the hand and arm, or by signal lights that clearly indicate
to both approaching and following traffic the intention to turn or move right
or left, except that any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped
with, and the required signal shall be given by, signal lights when the
distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside
limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when
the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit
of the body or load thereof exceeds 14 feet, whether a single vehicle or a
combination of vehicles.
      (5)   The signal lights required by this section shall not be flashed on
one side only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or “do pass” signal
to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear, nor be flashed on one
side only of a parked vehicle except as may be necessary for compliance with
this section.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.39) (Prior Code, § 432.13)
§ 72.017 HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, all signals
required by the provisions of this traffic code, when given by hand and arm,
shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and
the signals shall indicate as follows:
      (1)   Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally;
      (2)   Right turn, hand and arm extended upward;
      (3)   Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward.
   (B)   As an alternative to division (A)(2) of this section, a person
operating a bicycle or electric bicycle may give a right turn signal by
extending the right hand and arm horizontally and to the right side of the
bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.40) (Prior Code, § 432.14)
§ 72.018 ENTERING AND EXITING CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access highway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
(Prior Code, § 432.37)
§ 72.019 WEAVING; FULL TIME AND ATTENTION.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon any street
or highway in a weaving or zigzag course unless the irregular course is
necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle without giving
his or her full time and attention to the operation of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 432.38)
RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 72.030 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different
streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle
on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (B)   The right-of-way rule declared in division (A) of this section is
modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this traffic code or
R.C. Chapter 4511.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.41) (Prior Code, § 432.15)
§ 72.031 RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT.
   (A)   The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an
intersection or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-
of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within
the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.42) (Prior Code, § 432.16)
§ 72.032 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT THROUGH HIGHWAYS; STOP SIGNS; YIELD SIGNS.
   (A)   Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer, every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-
way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so
closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is
moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a
speed reasonable for the existing conditions, and if required for safety to
stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After
slowing, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways. Whenever a driver is involved in a
collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways, after
driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision shall be prima facie
evidence of the driver’s failure to yield the right-of-way.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.43) (Prior Code, § 432.17)
§ 72.033 STOP AT SIDEWALK AREA; STOP SIGNS ON PRIVATE ROADS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private
road, or driveway within a business or residence district shall stop the
vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area
extending across the alley, building entrance, road, or driveway, or in the
event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street to
be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon.
(R.C. § 4511.431(A))
   (B)   The owner of a private road located in a private residential area
containing 20 or more dwelling units may erect stop signs at places where the
road intersects with another private road in the residential area, in
compliance with all of the following requirements:
      (1)   The stop sign is sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily
observant person and meets the specifications of and is placed in accordance
with the manual adopted by the Department of Transportation pursuant to R.C. §
4511.09;
      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road
that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road that they
are entering private property, stop signs have been posted and must be obeyed,
and the signs are enforceable by law enforcement officers under state law. The
sign required by this division, where appropriate, may be incorporated with the
sign required by R.C. § 4511.211(A)(2), or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (C)   The provisions of R.C. § 4511.43(A) and R.C. § 4511.46, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be deemed to apply to the
driver of a vehicle on a private road where a stop sign is placed in accordance
with division (B) of this section and to a pedestrian crossing such a road at
an intersection where a stop sign is in place.
   (D)   When a stop sign is placed in accordance with division (B) of this
section, any law enforcement officer may apprehend a person found violating the
stop sign and may stop and charge the person with violating the stop sign.
   (E)   As used in this section, and for the purpose of applying R.C. §
4511.43(A) and R.C. § 4511.46, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, to conduct under this section:
      INTERSECTION. Means:
         (a)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two private roads which join one another at, or approximately at,
right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
private roads joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
         (b)   Where a private road includes two roadways 30 feet or more
apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such private roads shall be
regarded as a separate intersection.
      OWNER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.211.
      PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING UNITS. Has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.211.
      ROADWAY. Means that portion of a private road improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel and parking lanes, not including the berm,
sidewalk, or shoulder, even if the berm, sidewalk, or shoulder is used by a
person operating a bicycle or other human-powered vehicle. If a private road
includes two or more separate roadways, the term means any such roadway
separately but not all such roadways collectively.
(R.C.§ 4511.432(A) - (C), (E))
   (F)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. §§ 4511.431(B), 4511.432(D))
   (G)   If the offender violates division (A) of this section while distracted
and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. §§ 4511.431(B))
(Prior Code, §§ 432.155, 432.205)
§ 72.034 RIGHT-OF-WAY ON PUBLIC HIGHWAY.
   (A)   The operator of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from any
place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all traffic
approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender violates division (A) of this section while distracted
and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.44) (Prior Code, § 432.20)
§ 72.035 PEDESTRIAN ON SIDEWALK HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
on a sidewalk.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.441) (Prior Code, § 432.09)
§ 72.036 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner’s vehicle,
equipped with at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible
under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of
the vehicle, and the driver is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust
whistle, or bell, no driver of any other vehicle shall fail to yield the right-
of-way, immediately drive if practical to a position parallel to, and as close
as possible to, the right edge or curb of the highway clear of any
intersection, and stop and remain in that position until the public safety
vehicle or coroner’s vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer.
   (B)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle or
coroner’s vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons and property upon the highway.
   (C)   This section applies to a coroner’s vehicle only when the vehicle is
operated in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. As used in this section, CORONER’S VEHICLE means a vehicle
used by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator that is equipped
with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and a siren, exhaust
whistle or bell capable of giving an audible signal.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (E), whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense. On a second offense within one year after the first
offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree, and, on
each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 4511.45)
   (E)   (1)   When the failure of a motor vehicle operator to yield the right-
of-way to a public safety vehicle as required by division (A) of this section
impedes the ability of the public safety vehicle to respond to an emergency,
any emergency personnel in the public safety vehicle may report the license
plate number and a general description of the vehicle and the operator of the
vehicle to the law enforcement agency exercising jurisdiction over the area
where the alleged violation occurred.
      (2)   (a)   Upon receipt of a report under division (E)(1) of this
section, the law enforcement agency may conduct an investigation to attempt to
determine or confirm the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation.
         (b)   If the identity of the operator at the time of an alleged
violation of division (A) of this section is established, the law enforcement
agency has probable cause to issue either a written warning or a citation for
that violation, and the agency shall issue a written warning or a citation to
the operator.
         (c)   If the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement agency may
issue a written warning to the person who owned the vehicle at the time of the
alleged violation. However, in the case of a leased or rented vehicle, the law
enforcement agency shall issue the written warning to the person who leased or
rented the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation.
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section based on a
report filed under division (E)(1) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined $150.
         (b)   If a person who is issued a citation for a violation of division
(A) of this section based on a report filed under division (E)(1) of this
section does not enter a written plea of guilty and does not waive the person’s
right to contest the citation but instead appears in person in the proper court
to answer the charge, the trier of fact cannot find beyond a reasonable doubt
that the person committed that violation unless the emergency personnel who
filed the report appears in person in the court and testifies.
      (4)   As used in this division (E):
         LICENSE PLATE. Includes any temporary motor vehicle license
registration issued under R.C. § 4503.182 or similar law of another
jurisdiction.
         PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Does not include an unmarked public safety
vehicle or a vehicle used by a public law enforcement officer or other person
sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state or a vehicle used
by the motor carrier enforcement unit for the enforcement of orders and rules
of the public utilities commission.
(R.C. § 4511.454)
(Prior Code, § 416.08, 432.19)
§ 72.037 FUNERAL PROCESSION HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   As used in this section, FUNERAL PROCESSION means two or more vehicles
accompanying the cremated remains or the body of a deceased person in the
daytime when each of the vehicles has its headlights lighted and is displaying
a purple and white or an orange and white pennant attached to each vehicle in
such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from any
direction.
   (B)   Excepting public safety vehicles proceeding in accordance with R.C. §
4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or when directed
otherwise by a police officer, pedestrians and the operators of all vehicles
shall yield the right-of-way to each vehicle that is a part of a funeral
procession. Whenever the lead vehicle in a funeral procession lawfully enters
an intersection, the remainder of the vehicles in the procession may continue
to follow the lead vehicle through the intersection, notwithstanding any
traffic-control devices or right-of- way provisions of the Ohio Revised Code,
provided that the operator of each vehicle exercises due care to avoid
colliding with any other vehicle or pedestrian.
   (C)   No person shall operate any vehicle as a part of a funeral procession
without having the headlights of the vehicle lighted and without displaying a
purple and white or an orange and white pennant in such a manner as to be
clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.451) (Prior Code, § 432.21)
§ 72.038 PEDESTRIANS YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY TO PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE.
   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of a public safety vehicle, as stated in
R.C. § 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, every
pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the public safety vehicle.
   (B)   This section shall not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle
from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.452)
§ 72.039 PEDESTRIAN ON CROSSWALK HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)    When highway traffic signals are not in place, not in operation, or
are not clearly assigning the right-of-way, the driver of a vehicle shall yield
the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, or if
required by R.C. § 4511.132 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is
upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the
pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as
to be in danger.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply under the conditions
stated in R.C. § 4511.48(B), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (F)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.46) (Prior Code, § 416.01)
§ 72.040 RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED TO BLIND PERSON.
   (A)   (1)   As used in this section BLIND PERSON or BLIND PEDESTRIAN means a
person having not more than 20/200 visual acuity in the better eye with
correcting lenses, or visual acuity greater than 20/200, but with a limitation
in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field
subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees.
      (2)   The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to every
blind pedestrian guided by a guide dog, or carrying a cane which is
predominantly white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip.
   (B)   No person, other than a blind person, while on any public highway,
street, alley, or other public thoroughfare, shall carry a white or metallic
cane, with or without a red tip.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.47) (Prior Code, § 416.02)
§ 72.041 RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED BY PEDESTRIAN.
   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all traffic upon the roadway.
   (C)    Between adjacent intersections at which highway traffic signals are
in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (D)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic-control devices; and when authorized to cross
diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official
traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
   (E)   This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle from
exercising due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway.
   (F)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.48) (Prior Code, § 416.03)
PEDESTRIANS
§ 72.055 PEDESTRIAN MOVEMENT IN CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.49) (Prior Code, § 416.04)
§ 72.056 PEDESTRIAN WALKING ALONG HIGHWAY.
   (A)   Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be
unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the
edge of the roadway.
   (C)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian
walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an
outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk only on
the left side of the roadway.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. §§ 4511.13 and 4511.46, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, any pedestrian upon a roadway
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.50) (Prior Code, § 416.05)
§ 72.057 PROHIBITION AGAINST SOLICITING RIDES; RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person while on a roadway outside a safety zone shall solicit a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, no person
shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting employment, business, or
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.
      (2)   The Legislative Authority, by ordinance, may authorize the issuance
of a permit to a charitable organization to allow a person acting on behalf of
the organization to solicit charitable contributions from the occupant of a
vehicle by standing on a highway, other than a freeway as provided in R.C. §
4511.051(A)(1), that is under the jurisdiction of the municipality. The permit
shall be valid for only one period of time, which shall be specified in the
permit, in any calendar year. The Legislative Authority also may specify the
locations where contributions may be solicited and may impose any other
restrictions on or requirements regarding the manner in which the solicitations
are to be conducted that the Legislative Authority considers advisable.
      (3)   As used in division (B)(2) of this section, CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION
means an organization that has received from the Internal Revenue Service a
currently valid ruling or determination letter recognizing the tax-exempt
status of the organization pursuant to IRC § 501(c)(3).
   (C)   No person shall hang onto or ride on the outside of any motor vehicle
while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making
repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or street
maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency.
   (D)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto or ride on
the outside of any motor vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except
mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers
performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under
authority of a public agency.
   (E)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall knowingly permit
any person who has not attained the age of 16 years to ride in the unenclosed
or unroofed cargo storage area of the driver’s vehicle if the vehicle is
traveling faster than 25 miles per hour, unless either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a properly
secured seat to which is attached a seat safety belt that is in compliance with
federal standards for an occupant restraining device as defined in R.C. §
4513.263(A)(2), the seat and seat safety belt were installed at the time the
vehicle was originally assembled, and the person riding in the cargo storage
area is in the seat and is wearing the seat safety belt; or
      (2)   An emergency exists that threatens the life of the driver or the
person being transported in the cargo storage area of the truck, trailer, or
semitrailer.
   (F)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall permit any person,
except for those workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance
or construction under authority of a public agency, to ride in the cargo
storage area or on a tailgate of the driver’s vehicle while the tailgate is
unlatched.
   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
any provision of divisions (A) through (D) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates any provision of divisions (A) through (D) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any provision of
divisions (A) through (D) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (E) or (F) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.51) (Prior Code, § 416.06)
§ 72.058 PEDESTRIAN ON BRIDGE OR RAILROAD CROSSING.
   (A)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate, or barrier after a bridge operation
signal indication has been given.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.511) (Prior Code, § 416.07)
§ 72.059 (RESERVED)
§ 72.060 INTOXICATED OR DRUGGED PEDESTRIAN HAZARD ON HIGHWAY.
   (A)   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol, any drug of abuse,
or any combination of them to a degree that renders the pedestrian a hazard
shall not walk or be upon a highway.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.481) (Prior Code, § 416.10)
§ 72.061 OPERATION OF ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)    Electric personal assistive mobility devices, as defined in
R.C. § 4501.01, may be operated on the public streets, highways, sidewalks, and
paths and portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in
accordance with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this Traffic Code that by their nature are applicable to an electric personal
assistive mobility device apply to the device and the person operating it
whenever it is operated upon any public street, highway, sidewalk, or path or
upon any portion of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
      (3)   The municipality may regulate or prohibit the operation of electric
personal assistive mobility devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks, and
paths, or portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
under its jurisdiction.
   (B)   No operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and human-powered
vehicles at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         (a)   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet;
         (b)   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle;
      (4)   Operate the device on any portion of a street or highway that has
an established speed limit of 55 miles per hour or more;
      (5)   Operate the device upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of
pedestrians or other specialized use when an appropriate sign giving notice of
the specialized use is posted on the path;
      (6)   If under 18 years of age, operate the device unless wearing a
protective helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened;
      (7)   If under 16 years of age, operate the device unless, during the
operation, the person is under the direct visual and audible supervision of
another person who is 18 years of age or older and is responsible for the
immediate care of the person under 16 years of age.
   (C)   No person who is under 14 years of age shall operate an electric
personal assistive mobility device.
   (D)   No person shall distribute or sell an electric personal assistive
mobility device unless the device is accompanied by a written statement that is
substantially equivalent to the following: “WARNING: TO REDUCE THE RISK OF
SERIOUS INJURY, USE ONLY WHILE WEARING FULL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT – HELMET,
WRIST GUARDS, ELBOW PADS, AND KNEE PADS”.
   (E)   Nothing in this section affects or shall be construed to affect any
rule of the Director of Natural Resources or a board of park district
commissioners governing the operation of vehicles on lands under the control of
the Director or board, as applicable.
   (F)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (B) or (C) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows:
         (a)   The offender shall be fined $10;
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (B) or (C) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to imposing
the fine required under division (F)(1)(a) of this section, shall do one of the
following:
            1.   Order the impoundment for not less than one day but not more
than 30 days of the electric personal assistive mobility device that was
involved in the current violation of that division. The court shall order the
device to be impounded at a safe indoor location designated by the court and
may assess storage fees of not more than $5 per day; provided the total
storage, processing, and release fees assessed against the offender or the
device in connection with the device’s impoundment or subsequent release shall
not exceed $50.
            2.    If the court does not issue an impoundment order pursuant to
division (F)(1)(b)1. of this section, issue an order prohibiting the offender
from operating any electric personal assistive mobility device on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions of roadways set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles for not less than one day but not more than 30
days.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.512)
   (G)   As used in this code, ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE
means a self- balancing two non-tandem wheeled device that is designed to
transport only one person, has an electric propulsion system of an average of
750 watts, and when ridden on a paved level surface by an operator who weighs
170 pounds has a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour.
(R.C. § 4501.01(TT)) (Prior Code, § 416.12)
§ 72.062 OPERATION OF PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE ON SIDEWALKS AND CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ELIGIBLE ENTITY. Means a corporation, partnership, association, firm,
sole proprietorship, or other entity engaged in business.
      PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE. Means an electrically powered device to which
all of the following apply:
         (a)   The device is intended primarily to transport property and cargo
on sidewalks and crosswalks.
         (b)   The device weighs less than 250 pounds excluding any property or
cargo being carried in the device.
         (c)   The device has a maximum speed of ten miles per hour.
         (d)   The device is equipped with technology that enables the
operation of the device with active control or monitoring by a person, without
active control or monitoring by a person, or both with or without active
control or monitoring by a person.
      PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE OPERATOR. Means an agent of an eligible entity
who exercises direct physical control over, or monitoring of, the navigation
and operation of a personal delivery device. The phrase does not include, with
respect to a delivery or other service rendered by a personal delivery device,
the person who requests the delivery or service. The phrase also does not
include a person who only arranges for and dispatches a personal delivery
device for a delivery or other service.
   (B)   An eligible entity may operate a personal delivery device on sidewalks
and crosswalks so long as all of the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The personal delivery device is operated in accordance with all
regulations, if any, established by each local authority within which the
personal delivery device is operated.
      (2)   A personal delivery device operator is actively controlling or
monitoring the navigation and operation of the personal delivery device.
      (3)   The eligible entity maintains an insurance policy that includes
general liability coverage of not less than $100,000 for damages arising from
the operation of the personal delivery device by the eligible entity and any
agent of the eligible entity.
      (4)   The device is equipped with all of the following:
         (a)   A marker that clearly identifies the name and contact
information of the eligible entity operating the personal delivery device and a
unique identification number;
         (b)   A braking system that enables the personal delivery device to
come to a controlled stop;
         (c)   If the personal delivery device is being operated between sunset
and sunrise, a light on both the front and rear of the personal delivery device
that is visible in clear weather from a distance of at least 500 feet to the
front and rear of the personal delivery device when directly in front of low
beams of headlights on a motor vehicle.
   (C)   No personal delivery device operator shall allow a personal delivery
device to do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with traffic or pedestrian control devices and
signals;
      (2)   Unreasonably interfere with pedestrians or traffic;
      (3)   Transport any hazardous material that would require a permit issued
by the Public Utilities Commission;
      (4)   Operate on a street or highway, except when crossing the street or
highway within a crosswalk.
   (D)   A personal delivery device has all of the rights and obligations
applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances, except that a personal
delivery device shall yield the right-of-way to human pedestrians on sidewalks
and crosswalks.
   (E)   (1)   No person shall operate a personal delivery device unless the
person is authorized to do so under this section and complies with the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   An eligible entity is responsible for both of the following:
         (a)   Any violation of this section that is committed by a personal
delivery device operator; and
         (b)   Any other circumstance, including a technological malfunction,
in which a personal delivery device operates in a manner prohibited by
divisions (C)(1) to (C)(4) of this section.
(R.C. § 4511.513) (Prior Code, § 416.13) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.063 LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   A low-speed micromobility device may be operated on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks, and shared-use paths, and may be operated on any
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance
with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this title that by their nature could apply to a low-speed micromobility device
do apply to the device and the person operating it whenever it is operated upon
any public street, highway, sidewalk, or shared-use path, or upon any portion
of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (B)   No operator of a low-speed micromobility device shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         (a)   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet;
         (b)   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
   (C)   (1)   No person who is under 16 years of age shall rent a low-speed
micromobility device.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly rent a low-speed micromobility device to
a person who is under 16 years of age.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly rent a low-speed micromobility device on
behalf of a person who is under 16 years of age.
   (D)   No person shall operate a low-speed micromobility device at a speed
greater than 20 miles per hour.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Unless a mens rea is otherwise specified in this section, an
offense established under this section is a strict liability offense and R.C. §
2901.20 does not apply. The designation of that offense as a strict liability
offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for which there
is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
   (F)   Notwithstanding division (A)(1) of this section, the municipality,
county, township, metropolitan park district, township park district,
recreation district, or any division of the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources if the division has the approval of the Ohio Director of Natural
Resources may do any of the following:
      (1)   Regulate or prohibit the operation of low-speed micromobility
devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks, and shared-use paths, and
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, under its
jurisdiction;
      (2)   Include low-speed micromobility devices that are adapted to expand
access for people with various physical limitations into a shared bicycle,
shared electric bicycle, or similar vehicle sharing program, under its
jurisdiction;
      (3)   Require the owner or operator of a low-speed micromobility device
rental service or low-speed micromobility device sharing program to maintain
commercial general liability insurance related to the operation of the devices,
with limits of up to $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 per aggregate.
(R.C. § 4511.514) (Prior Code, § 416.14)
GRADE CROSSINGS
§ 72.075 STOP SIGNS AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   As used in this section, GRADE CROSSING WARNING SYSTEM means the
flashing- light signals, with or without automatic gates together with the
necessary control equipment that is used to inform road users of the approach
and presence of rail traffic at a grade crossing.
   (B)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities, with the
approval of the Department, may designate dangerous highway crossings over
railroad tracks and erect stop signs thereat.
   (C)   (1)   The Department and local authorities shall erect stop signs at a
railroad highway grade crossing in either of the following circumstances:
         (a)    New warning devices that are not grade crossing warning systems
are being installed at the grade crossing, and railroad crossbucks were the
only warning devices at the grade crossing prior to the installation of the new
warning devices.
         (b)   The grade crossing is constructed after July 1, 2013, and only
warning devices that are not grade crossing warning devices systems are
installed at the grade crossing.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a railroad
highway grade crossing that the Director of Transportation has exempted from
that division because of traffic flow or other considerations or factors.
   (D)   When stop signs are erected pursuant to division (B) or (C) of this
section, the operator of any vehicle shall stop within 50, but not less than
15, feet from the nearest rail of the railroad tracks and shall exercise due
care before proceeding across such grade crossing.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (D) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (F)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.61)
§ 72.076 DRIVING VEHICLE ACROSS RAILROAD GRADE CROSSING.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad
grade crossing, the person shall stop within 50 feet, but not less than 15 feet
from the nearest rail of the railroad if any of the following circumstances
exist at the crossing:
         (a)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a train or other on-track equipment.
         (b)   A crossing gate is lowered.
         (c)   A flagperson gives or continues to give a signal of the approach
or passage of a train or other on-track equipment.
         (d)   There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians, or trains,
notwithstanding any highway traffic signal indication to proceed.
         (e)   An approaching train is emitting an audible signal or is plainly
visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.
         (f)   There is insufficient undercarriage clearance to safely
negotiate the crossing.
         (g)   There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without
obstructing the passage of other on-track equipment.
         (h)   Approaching on-track equipment is emitting an audible signal or
is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.
      (2)   (a)   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a
railroad grade crossing shall not proceed as long as any of the circumstances
described in divisions (A)(1)(a) to (A)(1)(f) of this section exist at the
crossing.
         (b)   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a railroad
grade crossing shall not recklessly proceed as long as any of the circumstances
described in division (A)(1)(g) or (A)(1)(h) of this section exist at the
crossing.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed unless the person is signaled by a law
enforcement officer or flagperson that it is permissible to do so.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
      (2)   In lieu of a fine or jail term for a violation of this section, a
court may instead order the offender to attend and successfully complete a
remedial safety training or presentation regarding rail safety that is offered
by an authorized and qualified organization that is selected by the court. The
offender shall complete the presentation within a time frame determined by the
court, not to exceed 180 days after the court issues the order. The offender
shall notify the court of the successful completion of the presentation. When
the offender notifies the court of the successful completion of the
presentation, the court shall waive any fine or jail term that it otherwise
would have imposed for a violation of this section.
(R.C. § 4511.62) (Prior Code, § 432.31)
§ 72.077 VEHICLES REQUIRED TO STOP AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)    Except as provided in division (B) of this section, the operator of
any bus, any school vehicle, or any vehicle transporting a material or
materials required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. Parts 100 through 185,
before crossing at grade any track of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle and,
while so stopped, shall listen through an open door or open window and look in
both directions along the track for any approaching train or other on-track
equipment, and for signals indicating the approach of a train or other on-track
equipment, and shall proceed only upon exercising due care after stopping,
looking, and listening as required by this section. Upon proceeding, the
operator of such a vehicle shall cross only in a gear that will ensure there
will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing the crossing and shall
not shift gears while crossing the tracks.
   (B)   This section does not apply at grade crossings when any local
authority has filed an application with the Public Utilities Commission
requesting the approval of an exempt crossing, and the Public Utilities
Commission has authorized and approved an exempt crossing as provided in R.C. §
4511.63(B).
   (C)   As used in this section:
      BUS. Means any vehicle originally designed by its manufacturer to
transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver, or carries 16 or more
passengers, including the driver.
      EXEMPT CROSSING. Means a highway rail grade crossing authorized and
approved by the Public Utilities Commission under R.C. § 4511.63(B) at which
vehicles may cross without making the stop otherwise required by this section.
      SCHOOL VEHICLE. Means any vehicle used for the transportation of pupils
to and from a school or school-related function if the vehicle is owned or
operated by, or operated under contract with, a public or nonpublic school.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764, 4511.77, or 4511.79, or
a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of those
sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.63) (Prior Code, § 432.32)
§ 72.078 SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES OR EQUIPMENT CROSSING RAILROAD TRACKS.
   (A)    No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor, steam
shovel, derrick, roller, or any equipment or structure having a normal
operating speed of six or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load
clearance of less than nine inches above the level surface of a roadway, upon
or across any tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying with
divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section.
      (1)   Before making any such crossing, the person operating or moving any
such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same, and while stopped the
person shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any
approaching train or other on-track equipment and for signals indicating the
approach of a train or other on-track equipment, and shall proceed only upon
exercising due care.
      (2)   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic
signal or crossing gates or a flagperson or otherwise of the immediate approach
of a train or car or other on-track equipment.
   (B)   If the normal sustained speed of the vehicle, equipment, or structure
is not more than three miles per hour, the person owning, operating, or moving
the same shall also give notice of the intended crossing to a station agent or
superintendent of the railroad, and a reasonable time shall be given to the
railroad to provide proper protection for the crossing. Where the vehicles or
equipment are being used in constructing or repairing a section of highway
lying on both sides of a railroad grade crossing, and in this construction or
repair it is necessary to repeatedly move the vehicles or equipment over the
crossing, one daily notice specifying when the work will start and stating the
hours during which it will be prosecuted is sufficient.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.64) (Prior Code, § 432.33)
SCHOOL BUSES
§ 72.090 REGULATIONS CONCERNING SCHOOL BUSES.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle, upon meeting or overtaking from either
direction any school bus stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging
any school child, person attending programs offered by community boards of
mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child
attending a program offered by a head start agency, shall stop at least ten
feet from the front or rear of the school bus and shall not proceed until such
school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by the school bus driver to
proceed. It is no defense to a charge under this division that the school bus
involved failed to display or be equipped with an automatically extended stop
warning sign as required by division (B) of this section.
   (B)   Every school bus shall be equipped with amber and red visual signals
meeting the requirements of R.C. § 4511.771 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type
approved by the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce, which shall be
actuated by the driver of the bus whenever but only whenever the bus is stopped
or stopping on the roadway for the purpose of receiving or discharging school
children, persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental
health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or children attending
programs offered by head start agencies. A school bus driver shall not actuate
the visual signals or the stop warning sign in designated school bus loading
areas where the bus is entirely off the roadway or at school buildings when
children or persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental
health and county boards of developmental disabilities are loading or unloading
at curbside or at buildings when children attending programs offered by head
start agencies are loading or unloading at curbside. The visual signals and
stop warning sign shall be synchronized or otherwise operated as required by
the Ohio Administrative Code.
   (C)   Where a highway has been divided into four or more traffic lanes, a
driver of a vehicle need not stop for a school bus approaching from the
opposite direction which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school child, persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or
children attending programs offered by head start agencies. The driver of any
vehicle overtaking the school bus shall comply with division (A) above.
   (D)   School buses operating on divided highways or on highways with four or
more traffic lanes shall receive and discharge all school children, persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of developmental disabilities, and children attending programs offered
by head start agencies on their residence side of the highway.
   (E)   No school bus driver shall start the driver’s bus until after any
child, person attending programs offered by community boards of mental health
and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending a program
offered by a head start agency who may have alighted therefrom has reached a
place of safety on the child’s or person’s residence side of the road.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section may be fined an
amount not to exceed $500. A person who is issued a citation for a violation of
division (A) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty
and waive the person’s right to contest the citation in a trial but instead
must appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.
      (2)   In addition to and independent of any other penalty provided by
law, the court or mayor may impose upon an offender who violates this section a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7). When a
license is suspended under this section, the court or mayor shall cause the
offender to deliver the license to the court, and the court or clerk of the
court immediately shall forward the license to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles,
together with notice of the court’s action.
   (G)   As used in this section:
      HEAD START AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3301.32.
      SCHOOL BUS. As used in relation to children who attend a program offered
by a head start agency, means a bus that is owned and operated by a head start
agency, is equipped with an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type
approved by the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce, is painted the
color and displays the markings described in R.C. § 4511.77, and is equipped
with amber and red visual signals meeting the requirements of R.C. § 4511.77,
irrespective of whether or not the bus has 15 or more children aboard at any
time. The term does not include a van owned and operated by a head start
agency, irrespective of its color, lights or markings.
(R.C. § 4511.75) (Prior Code, § 432.30) (Ord. 93-27, passed 11-9-1993)
§ 72.091 VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS; REPORT; INVESTIGATION; CITATION; WARNING.
   (A)   As used in this section, LICENSE PLATE includes but is not limited to
any temporary motor vehicle license registration issued under R.C. § 4503.182
or substantially equivalent law of another jurisdiction.
   (B)   When the operator of a school bus believes that a motorist has
violated R.C. § 4511.75(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
the operator shall report the license plate number and general description of
the vehicle and of the operator of the vehicle to the law enforcement agency
exercising jurisdiction over the area where the alleged violation occurred. The
information contained in the report relating to the license plate number and to
the general description of the vehicle and the operator of the vehicle at the
time of the alleged violation may be supplied by any person with first-hand
knowledge of the information. Information of which the operator of the school
bus has first-hand knowledge also may be corroborated by any other person.
   (C)   Upon receipt of the report of the alleged violation of R.C. § 4511.75
(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the law enforcement
agency shall conduct an investigation to attempt to determine the identity of
the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. If the
identity of the operator at the time of the alleged violation is established,
the reporting of the license plate number of the vehicle shall establish
probable cause for the law enforcement agency to issue a citation for the
violation of R.C. § 4511.75(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance. However, if the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time
of the alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement agency
shall issue a warning to the owner of the vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation, except in the case of a leased or rented vehicle when the warning
shall be issued to the lessee at the time of the alleged violation.
(R.C. § 4511.751)
§ 72.092 RESTRICTIONS ON THE OPERATION OF SCHOOL BUSES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle used for pupil transportation within
this municipality in violation of the rules of the Ohio Department of Education
and Workforce or the Ohio Department of Public Safety. No person, being the
owner thereof, or having the supervisory responsibility therefor, shall permit
the operation of a vehicle used for pupil transportation within this
municipality in violation of the rules of the Ohio Department of Education and
Workforce or the Ohio Department of Public Safety.
   (B)   As used in this section, VEHICLE USED FOR PUPIL TRANSPORTATION means
any vehicle that is identified as such by the Ohio Department of Education and
Workforce by rule and that is subject to O.A.C. Chapter 3301-83.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.76, or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764, 4511.77, or
4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.76(C), (H)(2), (I))
§ 72.093 SCHOOL BUS INSPECTION.
   (A)   No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner thereof,
or having supervisory responsibility therefor, permit the operation of, a
school bus within this municipality, unless there is displayed thereon the
decals issued by the state highway patrol bearing the proper date of inspection
for the calendar year for which the inspection decals were issued.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.761, or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.762, 4511.764, 4511.77, or
4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (C)   Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a violation
of this section, the trial judge, in addition to or independent of all other
penalties provided by law, may suspend for any period of time not exceeding
three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership, association, or
corporation, issued under R.C. § 4511.763.
(R.C. § 4511.761)
§ 72.094 SCHOOL BUS NOT USED FOR SCHOOL PURPOSES.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no person who is
the owner of a bus that previously was registered as a school bus that is used
or is to be used exclusively for purposes other than the transportation of
children shall operate the bus or permit it to be operated within this
municipality unless the bus has been painted a color different from that
prescribed for school buses by R.C. § 4511.77 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance and painted in such a way that the words “stop” and “school
bus” are obliterated.
   (B)   Any church bus that previously was registered as a school bus and is
registered under R.C. § 4503.07 may retain the paint color prescribed for
school buses by R.C. § 4511.77 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance if the bus complies with all of the following:
      (1)   The words “school bus” required by R.C. § 4511.77 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance are covered or obliterated and the
bus is marked on the front and rear with the words “church bus” painted in
black lettering not less than ten inches in height.
      (2)   The automatically extending stop warning sign required by R.C. §
4511.75 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance is removed and the
word “stop” required by R.C. § 4511.77 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance is covered or obliterated.
      (3)   The flashing red and amber lights required by R.C. § 4511.771 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance are covered or removed.
      (4)   The inspection decal required by R.C. § 4511.761 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance is covered or removed.
      (5)   The identification number assigned under R.C. § 4511.764 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance and marked in black lettering on
the front and rear of the bus is covered or obliterated.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.762, or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.764, 4511.77, or
4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (D)   Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a violation
of this section, the trial judge, in addition to or independent of all other
penalties provided by law, may suspend for any period of time not exceeding
three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership, association, or
corporation, issued under R.C. § 4511.763.
(R.C. § 4511.762)
§ 72.095 LICENSING BY DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY.
   (A)   No person, partnership, association, or corporation shall transport
pupils to or from school on a school bus or enter into a contract with a board
of education of any school district for the transportation of pupils on a
school bus without being licensed by the Department of Public Safety.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.763)
§ 72.096 REGISTRATION AND IDENTIFICATION OF SCHOOL BUSES.
   (A)   No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner thereof
or having supervisory responsibility therefor, permit the operation of a school
bus within this municipality unless there is displayed thereon an identifying
number in accordance with R.C. § 4511.764.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of R.C. § 4511.63,
4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.77, or 4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that
is substantially equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.764)
§ 72.097 SCHOOL BUS MARKING.
   (A)   No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner thereof
or having supervisory responsibility therefor permit the operation of, a school
bus within this municipality unless it is painted national school bus yellow
and is marked on both front and rear with the words “school bus” in black
lettering not less than eight inches in height and on the rear of the bus with
the word “stop” in black lettering not less than ten inches in height.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.77, or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764, or
4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (C)   Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a violation
of this section, the trial judge, in addition to or independent of all other
penalties provided by law, may suspend, for any period of time not exceeding
three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership, association, or
corporation issued under R.C. § 4511.763.
(R.C. § 4511.77)
§ 72.098 FLASHING LIGHT SIGNAL LAMPS.
   (A)   Every school bus shall, in addition to any other equipment and
distinctive markings required pursuant to R.C. §§ 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.764
and 4511.77, and any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, be equipped
with signal lamps mounted as high as practicable, which shall display to the
front two alternately flashing red lights and two alternately flashing amber
lights located at the same level and to the rear two alternately flashing red
lights and alternately flashing amber lights located at the same level, and
these lights shall be visible at 500 feet in normal sunlight. The alternately
flashing red lights shall be spaced as widely as practicable, and the
alternately flashing amber lights shall be located next to them.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.771)
§ 72.099 OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE FOR OPERATOR.
   (A)   On and after May 6, 1986, no person, school board, or governmental
entity shall purchase, lease, or rent a new school bus unless the school bus
has an occupant restraining device, as defined in R.C. § 4513.263, installed
for use in its operator’s seat.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.772)
§ 72.100 CITING VEHICLE OPERATORS WHO FAIL TO STOP FOR SCHOOL BUS.
   (A)   As used in this section, LICENSE PLATE means and includes, but is not
limited to, any temporary license placard issued under R.C. § 4503.182 or
similar law of another jurisdiction.
   (B)   When the operator of a school bus believes that a motorist has
violated §
72.090(A), the operator shall report the license plate number and a general
description of the vehicle and of the operator of the vehicle to the law
enforcement agency exercising jurisdiction over the area where the alleged
violation occurred. The information contained in the report relating to the
license plate number and to the general description of the vehicle and the
operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation may be supplied by
any person with first-hand knowledge of the information. Information of which
the operator of the school bus has first-hand knowledge may also be
corroborated by any other person.
   (c)   Upon receipt of the report of the alleged violation of §
72.090(A), the law enforcement agency shall conduct an investigation to attempt
to determine or confirm the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time
of the alleged violation. If the identity of the operator at the time of the
alleged violation is established, the reporting of the license plate number of
the vehicle shall establish probable cause for the law enforcement agency to
issue a citation for the violation of §
72.090(A). However, if the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time
of the alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement agency
shall issue a warning to the owner of the vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation, except that in the case of a leased or rented vehicle the warning
shall be issued to the lessee at the time of the alleged violation.
(Prior Code, § 432.305) (Ord. 93-27, passed 11-9-1993)
PROHIBITIONS
§ 72.115 OBSTRUCTION AND INTERFERENCE AFFECTING VIEW AND CONTROL OF DRIVER.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the
driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in a position as to interfere
with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.70) (Prior Code, §§ 432.23, 452.07)
§ 72.116 OCCUPYING TRAVEL TRAILER, FIFTH WHEEL VEHICLE, OR MANUFACTURED OR
MOBILE HOME WHILE IN MOTION.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      FIFTH WHEEL TRAILER, MOBILE HOME, and TRAVEL TRAILER. Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      MANUFACTURED HOME. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3781.06(C)(4).
   (B)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, no person shall
occupy any travel trailer, fifth wheel trailer, or manufactured or mobile home
while it is being used as a conveyance upon a street or highway.
   (C)   (1)   Division (B) of this section does not apply to a fifth wheel
trailer when both of the following apply:
         (a)   Any child riding in the fifth wheel trailer is properly secured
in the manner provided in R.C. § 4511.81.
         (b)   The operator of the vehicle towing the fifth wheel trailer has
some means of viable communication with the passengers riding in the trailer.
      (2)   As used in this division, “viable communication” includes a
cellular or satellite telephone, a radio, or any other similar electronic
wireless communications device.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
(R.C. § 4511.701) (Prior Code, § 440.08)
§ 72.117 DRIVING UPON CLOSED HIGHWAY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall drive upon, along, or across a street or highway, or
any part of a street or highway that has been closed in the process of its
construction, reconstruction, or repair, and posted with appropriate signs by
the authority having jurisdiction to close the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.71(A))
   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on or onto a public street or
highway that is temporarily covered by a rise in water level, including
groundwater or an overflow of water, and that is clearly marked by a sign that
specifies that the road is closed due to the rise in water level and that any
person who uses the closed portion of the road may be fined up to $2,000.
      (2)   A person who is issued a citation for a violation of division (B)
(1) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty and
waive the person’s right to contest the citation in court, but instead must
appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.
(R.C. § 4511.714(A), (B))
   (C)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
         (b)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.71(B))
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required
under R.C. § 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required under
any provision of law, the court imposing the sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (B) of this section
shall order the offender to reimburse one or more rescuers for the cost any
such rescuer incurred in rescuing the person, excluding any cost of
transporting the rescued person to a hospital or other facility for treatment
of injuries, up to a cumulative maximum of $2,000. If more than one rescuer was
involved in the emergency response, the court shall allocate the reimbursement
proportionately, according to the cost each rescuer incurred. A financial
sanction imposed under this section is a judgment in favor of the rescuer and,
subject to a determination of indigency under R.C. § 2929.28(B), a rescuer may
collect the financial sanction in the same manner as provided in R.C. §
2929.28.
(R.C. § 4511.714(C))
   (D)   As used in this section:
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Has the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 9.60.
      FIREFIGHTING AGENCY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.
      PRIVATE FIRE COMPANY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.
      RESCUER. Means a state agency, political subdivision, firefighting
agency, private fire company, or emergency medical service organization.
(R.C. § 4511.714(D))
(Prior Code, § 432.24)
§ 72.118 DRIVING UPON SIDEWALK AREA OR PATHS EXCLUSIVELY FOR BICYCLES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall drive any vehicle, other than a bicycle or an
electric bicycle if the motor is not engaged, upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area,
except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.
      (2)   This prohibition does not apply to a law enforcement officer, or
other person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state, using
an electric bicycle with the motor engaged while in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting local
authorities from regulating the operation of bicycles or electric bicycles,
except that no local authority may require that bicycles or electric bicycles
be operated on sidewalks.
(R.C. § 4511.711(A))
   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, snowmobile, or all-
purpose vehicle upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, when
an appropriate sign giving notice of such use is posted on the path.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any rule of
the Director of Natural Resources governing the operation of motor vehicles,
snowmobiles, all-purpose vehicles, and bicycles on lands under the Director’s
jurisdiction.
(R.C. § 4511.713(A))
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. §§ 4511.711(B), 4511.713(B))
(Prior Code, §§ 432.22, 432.39)
§ 72.119 OBSTRUCTING PASSAGE OF OTHER VEHICLES.
   (A)   No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk or drive
onto any railroad grade crossing unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection, crosswalk, or grade crossing to accommodate the
vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles, pedestrians, or trains, notwithstanding any highway traffic signal
indication to proceed.
   (B)   This section does not apply to a bicyclist using a two-stage bicycle
turn box.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.712) (Prior Code, § 432.34)
§ 72.120 FOLLOWING AN EMERGENCY OR PUBLIC VEHICLE PROHIBITED; APPROACHING
STATIONARY PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE AND CERTAIN OTHER VEHICLES WITH CAUTION.
   (A)   Following an emergency or public vehicle prohibited. The driver of any
vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle on official
business, shall not follow any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle
traveling in response to an alarm closer than 500 feet, or drive into or park
the vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus has stopped in answer to
a fire alarm, unless directed to do so by a police officer or a firefighter.
(R.C. § 4511.72(A))
   (B)   Approaching stationary public safety vehicle with caution.
      (1)   The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary public
safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection
vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor
vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a
highway maintenance vehicle that is displaying the appropriate visual signals
by means of flashing, oscillating, or rotating lights, as prescribed in R.C. §
4513.17, shall do either of the following:
         (a)   If the driver of the motor vehicle is traveling on a highway
that consists of at least two lanes that carry traffic in the same direction of
travel as that of the driver’s motor vehicle, the driver shall proceed with due
caution and, if possible and with due regard to the road, weather, and traffic
conditions, shall change lanes into a lane that is not adjacent to that of the
stationary public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle,
waste collection vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to
conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and
4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle.
         (b)   If the driver is not traveling on a highway of a type described
in division (B)(1)(a) of this section, or if the driver is traveling on a
highway of that type but it is not possible to change lanes or if to do so
would be unsafe, the driver shall proceed with due caution, reduce the speed of
the motor vehicle, and maintain a safe speed for the road, weather, and traffic
conditions.
      (2)   This division (B) does not relieve the driver of a public safety
vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection vehicle,
vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle
inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway
maintenance vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of
all persons and property upon the highway.
      (3)   No person shall fail to drive a motor vehicle in compliance with
divisions (B)(1)(a) or (B)(1)(b) of this section when so required by division
(B) of this section.
(R.C. § 4511.213(A) - (C))
   (C)   Penalty.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding §
130.99 or R.C. § 2929.28, upon a finding that a person operated a motor vehicle
in violation of division (B)(3) of this section, the court, in addition to all
other penalties provided by law, shall impose a fine of two times the usual
amount imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. §§ 4511.213(D), 4511.72(B))
   (D)   The offense established under division (B) of this section is a strict
liability offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this
offense as a strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any
other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a
strict liability offense.
(R.C. §§ 4511.213(E))
(Prior Code, §§ 432.195, 432.25)
§ 72.121 DRIVING OVER UNPROTECTED FIRE HOSE.
   (A)   No vehicle shall, without the consent of the fire department official
in command, be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department that is
laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of
fire.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.73) (Prior Code, § 432.26)
§ 72.122 PLACING INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON HIGHWAY OR DEPOSITING LITTER FROM MOTOR
VEHICLE.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a
highway, lane, road, street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails,
or other articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or animal
traveling along or upon the highway, except such substances that may be placed
upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
      (2)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any
highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the
same.
      (3)   Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a
highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the
highway from such vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a highway without
proper authority.
   (B)   No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or a
vehicle, shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway, lane, road,
street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails, or other articles
which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or animal traveling along or
upon such highway, except such substances that may be placed upon the roadway
by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
(R.C. § 4511.74(A), (B))
   (C)   No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless of
intent, throw, drop, discard, or deposit litter from any motor vehicle in
operation upon any street, road, or highway, except into a litter receptacle in
a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (D)   No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road, or
highway shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded, or deposited from
the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents
its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (E)   As used in this section, LITTER means garbage, trash, waste, rubbish,
ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts, furniture,
glass, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
(R.C. § 4511.82(A), (B), (D))
   (F)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4511.74(C))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.82(C))
(Prior Code, § 412.01)
§ 72.123 TRANSPORTING CHILD NOT IN CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM PROHIBITED.
   (A)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child
restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (B)    When any child who is in either or both of the following categories
is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, that is owned,
leased, or otherwise under the control of a nursery school or child care
center, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured
in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child restraint system
that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (C)   When any child who is less than eight years of age and less than four
feet nine inches in height, who is not required by division (A) or (B) of this
section to be secured in a child restraint system, is being transported in a
motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 4511.01 or a vehicle that is regulated under R.C. § 5104.015, that is
required by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with
seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor
vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions on a booster seat that meets federal motor vehicle
safety standards.
   (D)   When any child who is at least eight years of age but not older than
15 years of age, and who is not otherwise required by division (A), (B), or (C)
of this section to be secured in a child restraint system or booster seat, is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly restrained either in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions
in a child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards
or in an occupant restraining device as defined in R.C. § 4513.263.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section or causing the
arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of division
(C) or (D) of this section, and absent another violation of law, a law
enforcement officer’s view of the interior or visual inspection of a motor
vehicle being operated on any street or highway may not be used for the purpose
of determining whether a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section has
been or is being committed.
   (F)   The Director of Public Safety shall adopt such rules as are necessary
to carry out this section.
   (G)   The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a child in a
child restraint system, a booster seat, or an occupant restraining device as
required in this section is not negligence imputable to the child, is not
admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the rights of the child
against any other person allegedly liable for injuries to the child, is not to
be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the operator of the motor
vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section, and is not
admissible as evidence in any criminal action involving the operator of the
motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
   (H)    This section does not apply when an emergency exists that threatens
the life of any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle that is being
used to transport a child who otherwise would be required to be restrained
under this section. This section does not apply to a person operating a motor
vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4731, a clinical nurse specialist or certified nurse
practitioner licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4723, or a
chiropractor licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that
states that the child who otherwise would be required to be restrained under
this section has a physical impairment that makes use of a child restraint
system, booster seat, or an occupant restraining device impossible or
impractical, provided that the person operating the vehicle has safely and
appropriately restrained the child in accordance with any recommendations of
the physician, nurse, or chiropractor as noted on the affidavit.
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person to
carry with the person the birth certificate of a child to prove the age of the
child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for a child showing that
the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a defense against
any ticket, citation, or summons issued for violating this section.
   (J)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A), (B), (C), or (D) of this section
shall be punished as follows, provided that the failure of an operator of a
motor vehicle to secure more than one child in a child restraint system,
booster seat, or occupant restraining device as required by this section that
occurred at the same time, on the same day, and at the same location is deemed
to be a single violation of this section:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (J)(1)(b) of this
section, the offender is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not
less than $25 nor more than $75.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (A), (B), (C), or (D) of this section or of a
state law or municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent any of those
divisions, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   All fines imposed pursuant to division (J)(1) of this section shall
be forwarded to the State Treasurer for deposit in the Child Highway Safety
Fund created by R.C. § 4511.81(I).
(R.C. § 4511.81(A) - (H), (K), (L)) (Prior Code, § 438.28)
§ 72.124 OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICES.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      AUTOMOBILE. Means any commercial tractor, passenger car, commercial car,
or truck that is required to be factory-equipped with an occupant restraining
device for the operator or any passenger by regulations adopted by the United
States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the “National Traffic and Motor
Vehicle Safety Act of 1966”, 80 Stat. 719, 15 U.S.C. § 1392.
      COMMERCIAL CAR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      COMMERCIAL TRACTOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE. A seat safety belt, shoulder belt, harness,
or other safety device for restraining a person who is an operator of or
passenger in an automobile and that satisfies the minimum federal vehicle
safety standards established by the United States Department of Transportation.
      PASSENGER. Any person in an automobile, other than its operator, who is
occupying a seating position for which an occupant restraining device is
provided.
      PASSENGER CAR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      TORT ACTION. A civil action for damages for injury, death, or loss to
person or property. The term includes a product liability claim, as defined in
R.C. § 2307.71, and as asbestos claim, as defined in R.C. § 2307.91, but does
not include a civil action for damages for breach of contract or another
agreement between persons.
      VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE. As used in the definitions of the terms set
forth above, VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE have the same meanings as in R.C. §
4511.01.
   (B)   Prohibited acts. No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless he or she is
wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device, or operate a school bus that has an occupant restraining
device installed for use in its operator’s seat unless he or she is wearing all
of the available elements of the device, as properly adjusted.
      (2)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless each
passenger in the automobile who is subject to the requirement set forth in
division (B)(3) of this section is wearing all of the available elements of a
properly adjusted occupant restraining device.
      (3)   Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front seat of an
automobile being operated on any street or highway unless he or she is wearing
all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining
device.
      (4)   Operate a taxicab on any street or highway unless all factory-
equipped occupant restraining devices in the taxicab are maintained in usable
form.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Division (B)(3) of this section does not apply to a person who is
required by R.C. § 4511.81 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to
be secured in a child restraint device or booster seat.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
an employee of the United States Postal Service or of a newspaper home delivery
service, during any period in which the person is engaged in the operation of
an automobile to deliver mail or newspapers to addressees.
      (3)   Divisions (B)(1) and (B)(3) of this section do not apply to a
person who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that states the following:
         (a)   That the person has a physical impairment that makes use of an
occupant restraining device impossible or impractical;
         (b)   Whether the physical impairment is temporary, permanent, or
reasonably expected to be permanent;
         (c)   If the physical impairment is temporary, how long the physical
impairment is expected to make the use of an occupant restraining device
impossible or impractical.
      (4)   Divisions (B)(1) and (B)(3) of this section do not apply to a
person who has registered with the Registrar of Motor Vehicles in accordance
with division (C)(5) of this section.
      (5)   A person who has received an affidavit under division (C)(3) of
this section stating that the person has a permanent or reasonably expected to
be permanent physical impairment that makes use of an occupant restraining
device impossible or impracticable may register with the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles attesting to that fact. Upon such registration, the Registrar shall
make that information available in the law enforcement automated data system. A
person included in the database under division (C)(5) of this section is not
required to have the affidavit obtained in accordance with division (C)(3) of
this section in their possession while operating or occupying an automobile.
      (6)   A physician or chiropractor who issues an affidavit for the
purposes of division (C)(3) or (C)(4) of this section is immune from civil
liability arising from any injury or death sustained by the person who was
issued the affidavit due to the failure of the person to wear an occupant
restraining device unless the physician or chiropractor, in issuing the
affidavit, acted in a manner that constituted willful, wanton, or reckless
misconduct.
      (7)   The Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 establishing a process for a person to be included in the
database under division (C)(5) of this section. The information provided and
included in the database under division (C)(5) of this section is not a public
record subject to inspection or copying under R.C. § 149.43.
   (D)   Officers not permitted to stop cars to determine violation.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement
officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on any street
or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of determining whether a
violation of division (B) of this section has been or is being committed or for
the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or summons for the violation or
for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for the
violation. No law enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually
inspect any automobile being operated on any street or highway for the sole
purpose of determining whether the violation has been or is being committed.
   (E)   Use of fines for educational program. All fines collected for
violations of division (B) of this section shall be forwarded to the State
Treasurer for deposit in the funds as set forth in R.C. § 4513.263(E).
   (F)   Limitations on evidence used for prosecution.
      (1)   Subject to division (F)(2) of this section, the failure of a person
to wear all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device in violation of division (B)(1) or (B)(3) of this section or
the failure of a person to ensure that each minor who is a passenger of an
automobile being operated by that person is wearing all of the available
elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device in violation of
division (B)(2) of this section shall not be considered or used by the trier of
fact in a tort action as evidence of negligence or contributory negligence.
But, the trier of fact may determine based on evidence admitted consistent with
the Ohio Rules of Evidence that the failure contributed to the harm alleged in
the tort action and may diminish a recovery of compensatory damages that
represents non-economic loss, as defined in R.C. § 2307.011, in a tort action
that could have been recovered but for the plaintiff’s failure to wear all of
the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device.
Evidence of that failure shall not be used as a basis for a criminal
prosecution of the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this
section; and shall not be admissible as evidence in a criminal action involving
the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
      (2)   If, at the time of an accident involving a passenger car equipped
with occupant restraining devices, any occupant of the passenger car who
sustained injury or death was not wearing an available occupant restraining
device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a device, or was
not wearing such a device as properly adjusted, then, consistent with the Rules
of Evidence, the fact that the occupant was not wearing the available occupant
restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a
device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted is admissible in
evidence in relation to any claim for relief in a tort action to the extent
that the claim for relief satisfies all of the following:
         (a)   It seeks to recover damages for injury or death to the occupant;
         (b)   The defendant in question is the manufacturer, designer,
distributor, or seller of the passenger car;
         (c)   The claim for relief against the defendant in question is that
the injury or death sustained by the occupant was enhanced or aggravated by
some design defect in the passenger car or that the passenger car was not
crashworthy.
   (G)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section shall be fined
$30.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) shall be subject to the penalty
set forth in §
70.99(B).
      (3)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section shall be fined
$20.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (B)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (B)(4) of this section, whoever violates division (B)(4) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4513.263) (Prior Code, § 438.29)
Cross-reference:
   Child restraint systems, see §
72.123
   Installation and sale of seat safety belts, see §
74.33
   School bus operators, restraining devices, see §
72.099
§ 72.125 USE OF ENGINE BRAKES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The non-emergency use of engine brakes within the municipality is
prohibited.
   (B)   As used in this section, ENGINE BRAKES shall be defined to include but
is not limited to Jake Brakes, Jacobs Brakes, C Brakes, PacBrakes, TekBrakes,
and any other type of engine retarders commonly utilized within the trucking
industry.
   (C)   This section does not apply to emergency vehicles operated by fire,
police, or military units.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 72.126 OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE WHILE WEARING EARPHONES OR EARPLUGS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      EARPHONES. Any device that covers all or a portion of both ears and that
does either of the following:
         (a)   Through either a physical connection to another device or a
wireless connection, provides the listener with radio programs, music, or other
information;
         (b)   Provides hearing protection.
      EARPHONES does not include speakers or other listening devices that are
built into protective headgear.
      EARPLUGS. Any device that can be inserted into one or both ears and that
does either of the following:
         (a)   Through either a physical connection to another device or a
wireless connection, provides the listener with radio programs, music, or other
information;
         (b)   Provides hearing protection.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing earphones over,
or earplugs in, both ears.
   (C)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Any person wearing a hearing aid;
      (2)   Law enforcement personnel while on duty;
      (3)   Fire Department personnel and emergency medical service personnel
while on duty;
      (4)   Any person engaged in the operation of equipment for use in the
maintenance or repair of any highway;
      (5)   Any person engaged in the operation of refuse collection equipment;
      (6)   Any person wearing earphones or earplugs for hearing protection
while operating a motorcycle.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.84) (Prior Code, § 432.40)
§ 72.127 CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINES AND LIVERY SERVICES.
   (A)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine shall accept passengers only
on the basis of prearranged contracts, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, and shall
not cruise in search of patronage unless the limousine is in compliance with
any statute or ordinance governing the operation of taxicabs or other similar
vehicles for hire.
   (B)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine may provide transportation to
passengers who arrange for the transportation through an intermediary,
including a digital dispatching service. Notwithstanding any law to the
contrary, when providing transportation arranged through an intermediary, the
operator of a chauffeured limousine may establish the fare and method of fare
calculation, so long as the method of fare calculation is provided to the
passenger upon request.
   (C)   No person shall advertise or hold himself or herself out as doing
business as a limousine service or livery service or other similar designation
unless each vehicle used by the person to provide the service is registered in
accordance with R.C. § 4503.24 and is in compliance with R.C. § 4509.80.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.85) (Prior Code, § 440.11)
Statutory reference:
   Chauffeured limousine, motor vehicle licensing, see R.C. § 4503.24
   Proof of financial responsibility, see R.C. § 4509.80
§ 72.128 OPERATING TRACTION ENGINE UPON IMPROVED HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   No person shall drive over the improved highways of this municipality
a traction engine or tractor with tires or wheels equipped with ice picks,
spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any kind extending beyond the
cleats, and no person shall tow or in any way pull another vehicle over the
improved highways of this municipality which towed or pulled vehicle has tires
or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections
of any kind. As used in this section, “traction engine” or “tractor” applies to
all self-propelling engines equipped with metal-tired wheels operated or
propelled by any form of engine, motor or mechanical power.
   (B)   This municipality shall not adopt, enforce, or maintain any ordinance,
rule or regulation contrary to or inconsistent with division (A), nor shall
this municipality require any license tax upon or registration fee for any
traction engine, tractor, or trailer, or any permit or license to operate.
Operators of traction engines or tractors shall have the same rights upon the
public streets and highways as the drivers of any other vehicles, unless some
other safe and convenient way is provided, and no public road open to traffic
shall be closed to traction engines or tractors.
(R.C. § 5589.08)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
§ 72.129 CRACKING EXHAUST NOISES; PEELING OUT.
   No person shall operate any motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe
operation, or in compliance with law, in such a manner that the vehicle is so
rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position, or in the shifting of
gears while in motion, that the exhaust system emits a loud, cracking or
chattering noise unusual to its normal operation, or that the rubber tires of
such vehicle squeal or leave tire marks on the roadway, commonly known as
“peeling out”.
(Prior Code, § 432.35)
§ 72.130 SHORTCUTTING ACROSS PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No operator of a motor vehicle shall enter upon private property for the
sole purpose of driving across such property, between abutting streets or other
public ways thereof. The failure to stop on such property in connection with or
in furtherance of the enterprise or activities being conducted on the property
shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation.
(Prior Code, § 432.36) (Ord. 2009-4, passed 3-4-2009)
§ 72.131 TEXTING WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or
property open to the public for vehicular traffic while using, holding, or
physically supporting with any part of the person’s body an electronic wireless
communications device.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device to make
contact, for emergency purposes, with a law enforcement agency, hospital or
health care provider, fire department, or other similar emergency agency or
entity;
      (2)   A person driving a public safety vehicle while using an electronic
wireless communications device in the course of the person’s duties;
      (3)    A person using an electronic wireless communications device when
the person’s motor vehicle is in a stationary position and is outside a lane of
travel, at a highway traffic signal that is currently directing traffic to
stop, or parked on a road or highway due to an emergency or road closure;
      (4)   A person using and holding an electronic wireless communications
device directly near the person’s ear for the purpose of making, receiving, or
conducting a telephone call, provided that the person does not manually enter
letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
      (5)   A person receiving wireless messages on an electronic wireless
communications device regarding the operation or navigation of a motor vehicle;
safety-related information, including emergency, traffic, or weather alerts; or
data used primarily by the motor vehicle, provided that the person does not
hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (6)   A person using the speaker phone function of the electronic
wireless communications device, provided that the person does not hold or
support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (7)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
navigation purposes, provided that the person does not do either of the
following during the use:
         (a)   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         (b)   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (8)   A person using a feature or function of the electronic wireless
communications device with a single touch or single swipe, provided that the
person does not do either of the following during the use:
         (a)   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         (b)   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (9)   A person operating a commercial truck while using a mobile data
terminal that transmits and receives data;
      (10)   A person operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or
on behalf of a utility, if the person is acting in response to an emergency,
power outage, or circumstance that affects the health or safety of individuals;
      (11)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device in
conjunction with a voice-operated or hands-free feature or function of the
vehicle or of the device without the use of either hand except to activate,
deactivate, or initiate the feature or function with a single touch or swipe,
provided the person does not hold or support the device with any part of the
person’s body;
      (12)   A person using technology that physically or electronically
integrates the device into the motor vehicle, provided that the person does not
do either of the following during the use:
         (a)   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         (b)   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body.
      (13)   A person storing an electronic wireless communications device in a
holster, harness, or article of clothing on the person’s body.
   (C)   If a law enforcement officer issues an offender a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of division (A) of this section, the officer shall do
both of the following:
      (1)   Report the issuance of the ticket, citation, or summons to the
officer’s law enforcement agency;
      (2)   Ensure that such report indicates the offender’s race.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of operating a
motor vehicle while using an electronic wireless communication device, an
unclassified misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in divisions (D)(1)
to (D)(5) of this section.
      (1)   The offender shall be fined, and is subject to a suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege, as follows:
         (a)   Except as provided in divisions (D)(1)(b), (D)(1)(c), (D)(1)(d),
and (D)(2) of this section, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine of
not more than $150.
         (b)   If, within two years of the violation, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one prior violation of this section, R.C. §
4511.204, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court shall
impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $250.
         (c)   If, within two years of the violation, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more prior violations of this section,
R.C. § 4511.204, or a substantially equivalent or municipal ordinance, the
court shall impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $500. The court
also may impose a suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege for 90 days.
         (d)   Notwithstanding divisions (D)(1)(a) to (D)(1)(c) of this
section, if the offender was operating the motor vehicle at the time of the
violation in a construction zone where a sign was posted in accordance with
R.C. § 4511.98, the court, in addition to all other penalties provided by law,
shall impose upon the offender a fine of two times the amount imposed for the
violation under division (D)(1)(a), (D)(1)(b), or (D)(1)(c) of this section, as
applicable.
      (2)   If the offender is in the category of offenders to whom division
(D)(1)(a) of this section applies, in lieu of payment of the fine of $150 under
division (D)(1)(a) of this section and the assessment of points under division
(D)(4) of this section, the offender instead may elect to attend the distracted
driving safety course, as described in R.C. § 4511.991. If the offender attends
and successfully completes the course, the offender shall be issued written
evidence that the offender successfully completed the course. The offender
shall not be required to pay the fine and shall not have the points assessed
against that offender’s driver’s license if the offender submits the written
evidence to the court within 90 days of the violation of division (A) of this
section. However, successful completion of the course does not result in a
dismissal of the charges for the violation, and the violation is a prior
offense under divisions (D)(1)(b) and (D)(1)(c) of this section if the offender
commits a subsequent violation or violations of division (A) of this section
within two years of the offense for which the course was completed. This
division does not apply with respect to any offender in the category of
offenders to whom division (D)(1)(b), (D)(1)(c), or (D)(1)(d) of this section
applies.
      (3)   The court may impose any other penalty authorized under R.C. §§
2929.21 to 2929.28. However, the court shall not impose a fine or a suspension
not otherwise specified in division (D)(1) of this section. The court also
shall not impose a jail term or community residential sanction.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (D)(2) of this section, points shall
be assessed for a violation of division (A) of this section in accordance with
R.C. § 4510.036.
      (5)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
   (E)   A prosecution for an offense in violation of this section does not
preclude a prosecution for an offense in violation of R.C. § 4511.204 based on
the same conduct. However, the two offenses are allied offenses of similar
import under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (F)   (1)   A law enforcement officer does not have probable cause and shall
not stop the operator of a motor vehicle for purposes of enforcing this section
unless the officer visually observes the operator using, holding, or physically
supporting with any part of the person’s body the electronic wireless
communications device.
      (2)   A law enforcement officer who stops the operator of a motor vehicle
for a violation of division (A) of this section shall inform the operator that
the operator may decline a search of the operator’s electronic wireless
communications device. The officer shall not do any of the following:
         (a)   Access the device without a warrant, unless the operator
voluntarily and unequivocally gives consent for the officer to access the
device;
         (b)   Confiscate the device while awaiting the issuance of a warrant
to access the device;
         (c)   Obtain consent from the operator to access the device through
coercion or any other improper means. Any consent by the operator to access the
device shall be voluntary and unequivocal before the officer may access the
device without a warrant.
   (G)   As used in this section:
      ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Includes any of the following:
         (a)   A wireless telephone;
         (b)   A text-messaging device;
         (c)   A personal digital assistant;
         (d)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
         (e)   Any device capable of displaying a video, movie, broadcast
television image, or visual image;
         (f)   Any other substantially similar wireless device that is designed
or used to communicate text, initiate or receive communication, or exchange
information or data.
      An “electronic wireless communications device” does not include a two-way
radio transmitter or receiver used by a person who is licensed by the federal
communications commission to participate in the amateur radio service.
      UTILITY. An entity specified in R.C. § 4905.03(A), (C), (D), (E), or (G).
      UTILITY SERVICE VEHICLE. A vehicle owned or operated by a utility.
      VOICE-OPERATED OR HANDS-FREE FEATURE OR FUNCTION. A feature or function
that allows a person to use an electronic wireless communications device
without the use of either hand, except to activate, deactivate, or initiate the
feature or function with a single touch or single swipe.
(R.C. § 4511.204)
Statutory reference:
   No preemption for local regulations imposing greater penalties, see R.C. §
4511.204(E)
§ 72.132 USE OF ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICES BY MINORS OR
PROBATIONARY DRIVERS WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit who has not attained the
age of 18 years and no holder of a probationary driver’s license shall drive a
motor vehicle on any street, highway, or property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking while using in any manner an
electronic wireless communications device.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to either of the
following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law enforcement
agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or other similar
emergency agency or entity;
      (2)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device whose
motor vehicle is in a stationary position and the motor vehicle is outside a
lane of travel;
      (3)   A person using a navigation device in a voice-operated or hands-
free manner who does not manipulate the device while driving.
   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (A) of this section shall be fined $150. In addition, the
court shall impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license
or permit for a definite period of 60 days.
      (2)   If the person previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or
a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section, whoever violates
this section shall be fined $300. In addition, the court shall impose a class
seven suspension of the person’s driver’s license or permit for a definite
period of one year.
   (D)   The filing of a sworn complaint against a person for a violation of
this section does not preclude the filing of a sworn complaint for a violation
of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same conduct. However, if a person is adjudicated a
delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section
and is also adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a
violation of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same conduct, the two offenses are allied
offenses of similar import under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (E)   As used in this section, ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE
includes any of the following:
      (1)   A wireless telephone;
      (2)   A personal digital assistant;
      (3)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
      (4)   A text-messaging device;
      (5)   Any other substantially similar electronic wireless device that is
designed or used to communicate via voice, image, or written word.
(R.C. § 4511.205) (Prior Code, § 432.42)
§ 72.133 ZONES OF QUIET.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person
operating a vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning
device of the vehicle except in an emergency.
(Prior Code, § 412.02)
§ 72.134 PLAY STREETS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that any street or part
thereof is a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street
or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose
residences are within the closed area and then the drivers shall exercise the
greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
(Prior Code, § 412.03)
§ 72.135 TOY VEHICLES ON ROADWAY.
   No person riding upon any coaster, roller skates, sled, toy vehicle or other
similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a
crosswalk, and when so crossing the person shall be granted all of the rights
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This
section shall not apply to any street set aside as a play street.
(Prior Code, § 412.04)
CHAPTER 73: MOTOR VEHICLE CRIMES
Section
General Provisions
   
73.01   Driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs
   
73.02   Implied consent
   
73.03   Physical control of vehicle while under the influence
   
73.04   Driving commercial vehicle with impaired alertness or ability; use of
drugs
   
73.05   Reckless operation of vehicles
   
73.06   Reckless operation off streets and highways; competitive operation
   
73.07   Operator to be in reasonable control
   
73.08   Immobilizing or disabling device violation
   
73.09   Street racing, stunt driving and street takeovers prohibited
   
73.10   Speed limits
   
73.11   Slow speed or stopping
   
73.12   Emergency vehicles excepted from speed limitation
   
73.13   Speed regulations on bridges
   
73.14   Presenting false name or information to officer
   
73.15   Prohibition against resisting officer
   
73.16   Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low-speed, under-speed, or
utility vehicles
   
73.17   Vehicular homicide; vehicular manslaughter; vehicular assault
Stopping After Accident
   
73.30   Failure to stop after accident
   
73.31   Stopping after accident on other than public roads or highways
   
73.32   Accident involving damage to realty
   
73.33   Failure to report accident
Statutory reference:
   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 73.01 DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate any vehicle within this municipality,
if, at the time of the operation, any of the following apply:
         (a)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse,
or a combination of them.
         (b)   The person has a concentration of 0.08% or more but less than
0.17% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         (c)   The person has a concentration of 0.096% or more but less than
0.204% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma.
         (d)   The person has a concentration of 0.08 grams or more but less
than 0.17 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
         (e)   The person has a concentration of 0.11 grams or more but less
than 0.238 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s
urine.
         (f)   The person has a concentration of 0.17% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         (g)   The person has a concentration of 0.204% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
         (h)   The person has a concentration of 0.17 grams or more by weight
of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
         (i)   The person has a concentration of 0.238 grams or more by weight
of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
         (j)   Except as provided in division (K) of this section, the person
has a concentration of any of the following controlled substances or
metabolites of a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds any of the following:
            1.   The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s
urine of at least 500 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            2.   The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s
urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s urine
or has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            3.   The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of
cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            4.   The person has a concentration of heroin in the person’s urine
of at least 2,000 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s urine or
has a concentration of heroin in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            5.   The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-
monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s urine of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s urine or has
a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma.
            6.   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s urine
of at least 25 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s urine or a
concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of
at least ten nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma.
            7.   The person has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s
urine of at least ten nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least two nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            8.   Either of the following applies:
               a.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or a combination of them, and the person has a concentration of
marihuana metabolite in the person’s urine of at least 15 nanograms of
marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a
concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least five nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
               b.   The person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in
the person’s urine of at least 35 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite
in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms
of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma.
            9.   The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the
person’s urine of at least 500 nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of
the person’s urine or has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of
methamphetamine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            10.   The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the
person’s urine of at least 25 nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of phencyclidine per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            11.   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a rule pursuant to
R.C. § 4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia divinorum and the amount of
salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of salvia divinorum and salvinorin
A in a person’s urine, in a person’s whole blood, or in a person’s blood serum
or plasma at or above which the person is impaired for purposes of operating
any vehicle within this state, the rule is in effect, and the person has a
concentration of salvia divinorum or salvinorin A of at least that amount so
specified by rule in the person’s urine, in the person’s whole blood, or in the
person’s blood serum or plasma.
      (2)   No person who, within 20 years of the conduct described in division
(A)(2)(a) of this section, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of this division or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or any other
equivalent offense shall do both of the following:
         (a)   Operate any vehicle within this municipality while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         (b)   Subsequent to being arrested for operating the vehicle as
described in division (A)(2)(a) of this section, being asked by a law
enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and being advised by the
officer in accordance with R.C. § 4511.192 or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance of the consequences of the person’s refusal or submission
to the test or tests, refuse to submit to the test or tests.
   (B)   No person under 21 years of age shall operate any vehicle within this
municipality, if, at the time of the operation, any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02% but less than
0.08% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.03% but less than
0.096% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma.
      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02 grams but less than
0.08 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
      (4)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.028 grams but less
than 0.11 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
   (C)   In any proceeding arising out of one incident, a person may be charged
with a violation of division (A)(1)(a) or (A)(2) and a violation of division
(B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section, but the person may not be convicted
of more than one violation of these divisions.
   (D)   (1)   (a)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding
for a violation of division (A)(1)(a) of this section or for an equivalent
offense that is vehicle-related, the result of any test of any blood, oral
fluid, or urine withdrawn and analyzed at any health care provider, as defined
in R.C. § 2317.02, may be admitted with expert testimony to be considered with
any other relevant and competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence
of the defendant.
         (b)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of division (A) or
(B) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, the
court may admit evidence on the presence and concentration of alcohol, drugs of
abuse, controlled substances, metabolites of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them in the defendant’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, urine, oral fluid, or other bodily substance at the time of the alleged
violation as shown by chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn within three
hours of the time of the alleged violation. The three- hour time limit
specified in this division regarding the admission of evidence does not extend
or affect the two-hour time limit specified in R.C. § 4511.192(A) as the
maximum period of time during which a person may consent to a chemical test or
tests as described in that section. The court may admit evidence on the
presence and concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse, or a combination of them
as described in this division when a person submits to a blood, breath, urine,
oral fluid, or other bodily substance test at the request of a law enforcement
officer under R.C. § 4511.191 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or a blood or urine sample is obtained pursuant to a search warrant.
Only a physician, a registered nurse, an emergency medical technician-
intermediate, an emergency medical technician-paramedic, or a qualified
technician, chemist, or phlebotomist shall withdraw a blood sample for the
purpose of determining the alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a
controlled substance, or combination content of the whole blood, blood serum,
or blood plasma. This limitation does not apply to the taking of breath, oral
fluid, or urine specimens. A person authorized to withdraw blood under this
division may refuse to withdraw blood under this division, if in that person’s
opinion, the physical welfare of the person would be endangered by the
withdrawing of blood. The bodily substance withdrawn under this division (D)(1)
(b) shall be analyzed in accordance with methods approved by the Director of
Health by an individual possessing a valid permit issued by the Director
pursuant to R.C. § 3701.143.
         (c)   As used in division (D)(1)(b) of this section, EMERGENCY MEDICAL
TECHNICIAN-INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.
      (2)   In a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (A) of this
section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, if there was at
the time the bodily substance was withdrawn a concentration of less than the
applicable concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (A)(1)(b), (A)(1)
(c), (A)(1)(d) and (A)(1)(e) of this section or less than the applicable
concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance specified for a violation of division (A)(1)(j) of this
section, that fact may be considered with other competent evidence in
determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant. This division does not
limit or affect a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (B) of this
section.
      (3)   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of the
chemical test shall be made available to the person or the person’s attorney,
immediately upon the completion of the chemical test analysis. If the chemical
test was obtained pursuant to division (D)(1)(b) of this section, the person
tested may have a physician, a registered nurse, or a qualified technician,
chemist, or phlebotomist of the person’s own choosing administer a chemical
test or tests, at the person’s expense, in addition to any administered at the
request of a law enforcement officer. If the person was under arrest as
described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the arresting officer shall advise the
person at the time of the arrest that the person may have an independent
chemical test taken at the person’s own expense. If the person was under arrest
other than described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the form to be read to the
person to be tested, as required under §
73.02, shall state that the person may have an independent test performed at
the person’s expense. The failure or inability to obtain an additional chemical
test by a person shall not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the
chemical test or tests taken at the request of a law enforcement officer.
      (4)   (a)   As used in division (D)(4)(b) and (D)(4)(c) of this section,
NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION means the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration established as an administration of the United
States Department of Transportation under 96 Stat. 2415 (1983), 49 U.S.C. §
105.
         (b)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (A) or (B) of this section, of a municipal ordinance
relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse, or of a municipal ordinance relating to
operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine, if a law enforcement officer has
administered a field sobriety test to the operator of the vehicle involved in
the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible, and generally accepted field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including
but not limited to any testing standards then in effect that were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (D)(4)(b)1. or (D)(4)(b)2. of this section and if the testimony or
evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the
testimony or evidence and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the
trier of fact considers to be appropriate.
         (c)   Division (D)(4)(b) of this section does not limit or preclude a
court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (D)(4)(b) of this section.
   (E)   (1)   Subject to division (E)(3) of this section, in any criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division (A)(1)(b),
(A)(1)(c), (A)(1)(d), (A)(1)(e), (A)(1)(f), (A)(1)(g), (A)(1)(h), (A)(1)(i), or
(A)(1)(j) or (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), or (B)(4) of this section or for an
equivalent offense that is substantially equivalent to any of those divisions,
a laboratory report from any laboratory personnel issued a permit by the
Department of Health authorizing an analysis as described in this division that
contains an analysis of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine,
or other bodily substance tested and that contains all of the information
specified in this division shall be admitted as prima facie evidence of the
information and statements that the report contains. The laboratory report
shall contain all of the following:
         (a)   The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the
analysis;
         (b)   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them that was found;
         (c)   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director of a
designee of the director that contains the name of each certified analyst or
test performer involved with the report, the analyst’s or test performer’s
employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a
notation that performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the
analyst’s or test performer’s regular duties;
         (d)   An outline of the analyst’s or test performer’s education,
training, and experience in performing the type of analysis involved and a
certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate quality control
standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the
Department of Health.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission
of evidence, a report of the type described in division (E)(1) of this section
is not admissible against the defendant to whom it pertains in any proceeding,
other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless the
prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant’s attorney or, if
the defendant has no attorney, on the defendant.
      (3)   A report of the type described in division (E)(1) of this section
shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity, or amount of any
substance if, within seven days after the defendant to whom the report pertains
or the defendant’s attorney receives a copy of the report, the defendant or the
defendant’s attorney demands the testimony of the person who signed the report.
The judge in the case may extend the seven-day time limit in the interest of
justice.
   (F)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, any physician,
registered nurse, emergency medical technician-intermediate, emergency medical
technician-paramedic, or qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist who
withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.192, and any hospital, first-aid station, or clinic at which
blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.192, is immune from criminal liability and civil liability
based upon a claim of assault and battery or any other claim that is not a
claim of malpractice, for any act performed in withdrawing blood from the
person. The immunity provided in this division also extends to an emergency
medical service organization that employs an emergency medical technician-
intermediate or emergency medical technician- paramedic who withdraws blood
under this section. The immunity provided in this division is not available to
a person who withdraws blood if the person engages in willful or wanton
misconduct.
      (2)   As used in division (F)(1), EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-
INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have the same meanings
as in R.C. § 4765.01.
   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates any provisions of divisions (A)(1)(a) through
(A)(1)(i) or (A)(2) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them. Whoever
violates division (A)(1)(j) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle
while under the influence of a listed controlled substance or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance. The court shall sentence the offender for
either offense under R.C. Chapter 2929, except as otherwise authorized or
required by divisions (G)(1)(a) through (G)(1)(e) of this section:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(b), (G)(1)(c),
(G)(1)(d), or (G)(1)(e) of this section, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree, and the court shall sentence the offender to
all of the penalties and sanctions provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a)(i)
through (G)(1)(a)(iv).
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e) of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of division (A) of this section
or one other equivalent offense is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
The court shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions
provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) through (G)(1)(b)(v).
         (c)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e) of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division (A) of this
section or other equivalent offenses is guilty of a misdemeanor. The court
shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions provided in
R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c)(i) through (G)(1)(c)(vi).
         (d)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e) of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of division (A) of
this section or other equivalent offenses or an offender who, within 20 years
of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to five or
more violations of that nature, or an offender who previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a specification of the type described in R.C.
§ 2941.1413, is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
         (e)   An offender who previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) that was a felony, regardless of
when the violation and the conviction or guilty plea occurred, is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   An offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (A) of this section and who subsequently seeks reinstatement of the
driver’s or occupational driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege suspended under this section or R.C. § 4511.19 as a result of the
conviction or guilty plea shall pay a reinstatement fee as provided in R.C. §
4511.191(F)(2).
      (3)   (a)   If an offender is sentenced to a jail term under R.C. §
4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) or (G)(1)(b)(ii) or (G)(1)(c)(i) or (G)(1)(c)(ii) and if,
within 60 days of sentencing of the offender, the court issues a written
finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail
where the offender is required to serve the term, the offender will not be able
to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following the date of
sentencing, the court may impose an alternative sentence as specified in R.C. §
4511.19(G)(3) that includes a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring,
with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and
continuous alcohol monitoring.
         (b)   As an alternative to the mandatory jail terms as required by
R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1), the court may sentence the offender as provided in R.C. §
4511.19(G)(3).
      (4)   If an offender’s driver’s or occupational driver’s license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under division (G) of
this section or R.C. § 4511.19(G) and if R.C. § 4510.13 permits the court to
grant limited driving privileges, the court may grant the limited driving
privileges in accordance with that section. If division (A)(7) of that section
requires the court impose as a condition of the privileges that the offender
must display on the vehicle that is driven subject to the privileges restricted
license plates that are issued under R.C. § 4503.231, except as provided in
division (B) of that section, the court shall impose that condition as one of
the conditions of the limited driving privileges granted to the offender,
except as provided in R.C. § 4503.231(B).
      (5)   Fines imposed under this section for a violation of division (A) of
this section shall be distributed as provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(5).
      (6)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order of criminal
forfeiture under division (G)(1)(c), (G)(1)(d), or (G)(1)(e) of this section is
assigned or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in
addition to or independent of any other penalty established by law, the court
may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of
the National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds of any fine so
imposed shall be distributed in accordance with division (C)(2) of that
section.
      (7)   In all cases in which an offender is sentenced under division (G)
of this section, the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, the court, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, may order restitution pursuant to §
130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for
any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under division
(G) of this section.
      (8)    A court may order an offender to reimburse a law enforcement
agency for any costs incurred by the agency with respect to a chemical test or
tests administered to the offender if all of the following apply:
         (a)   The offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (A) of this section.
         (b)   The test or tests were of the offender’s whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, oral fluid, or urine.
         (c)   The test or tests indicated that the offender had one of the
following at the time of the offense:
            1.   A prohibited concentration of a controlled substance or a
metabolite of a controlled substance in the offender’s whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine;
            2.   A drug of abuse or a metabolite of a drug of abuse in the
offender’s oral fluid.
      (9)   A court may warn any person who is convicted of or who pleads
guilty to a violation of division (A) of this section or an equivalent offense
that a subsequent violation of this section or an equivalent offense that
results in the death of another or the unlawful termination of another’s
pregnancy may result in the person being guilty of aggravated vehicular
homicide under R.C. § 2903.06. The court may warn the person of the applicable
penalties for that violation under R.C. §§ 2903.06 and 2929.142.
      (10)   As used in division (G) of this section, ELECTRONIC MONITORING has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   (H)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of operating a
motor vehicle after underage alcohol consumption and shall be punished as
follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (H)(2) of this section,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. In addition to
any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class six
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6). The court may grant
limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under R.C. §§ 4510.021
and 4510.13. The court may grant unlimited driving privileges with an ignition
interlock device relative to the suspension and may reduce the period of
suspension as authorized under R.C. § 4510.022. If the court grants unlimited
driving privileges under R.C. § 4510.022, the court shall suspend any jail term
imposed under division (H)(1) of this section as required under that section.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of division (A)
of this section or other equivalent offenses, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition to any other sanction imposed for
the offense, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the offender’s
driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4). The court may grant limited driving
privileges relative to the suspension under R.C. §§ 4510.021 and 4510.13.
      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the violation of division (B) of this section.
   (I)   (1)   No court shall sentence an offender to an alcohol treatment
program under this section unless the treatment program complies with the
minimum standards for alcohol treatment programs adopted under R.C. Chapter
5119 by the Director of Mental Health and Addiction Services.
      (2)   An offender who stays in a drivers’ intervention program or in an
alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this section shall pay
the cost of the stay in the program. However, if the court determines that an
offender who stays in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under
this section is unable to pay the cost of the stay in the program, the court
may order that the cost be paid from the court’s Indigent Drivers’ Alcohol
Treatment Fund.
   (J)   If a person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege is suspended under this section or R.C. §
4511.19 files an appeal regarding any aspect of the person’s trial or sentence,
the appeal itself does not stay the operation of the suspension.
   (K)   Division (A)(1)(j) of this section does not apply to a person who
operates a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a listed controlled
substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the amount
specified in that division, if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
   (L)   The prohibited concentrations of a controlled substance or a
metabolite of a controlled substance listed in division (A)(1)(j) of this
section also apply in a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2923.16(D) in the
same manner as if the offender is being prosecuted for a prohibited
concentration of alcohol.
   (M)   All terms defined in R.C. § 4510.01 apply to this section. If the
meaning of a term defined in R.C. § 4510.01 conflicts with the meaning of the
same term as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or 4511.01, the term as defined in R.C.
§ 4510.01 applies to this section.
(R.C. § 4511.19(A) - (M))
   (N)   As used in this section, §
73.02 and §
73.03:
      COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL SANCTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2929.01.
      CONTINUOUS ALCOHOL MONITORING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.01.
      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Means any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A);
         (b)   A violation of a municipal OVI ordinance;
         (c)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in a case in which the offender
was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that section;
         (d)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(1) or R.C. § 2903.08 or a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to either of those
divisions;
         (e)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(2), (A)(3), or (A)(4), R.C. §
2903.08(A)(2), or former R.C. § 2903.07, or a municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any of those divisions or that former section, in a
case in which a judge or jury as the trier of fact found that the offender was
under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         (f)   A violation of R.C. § 1547.11(A);
         (g)   A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from
operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or from
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device on the waters of this
state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of
any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar
device on the waters of this state with a prohibited concentration of alcohol,
a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine;
         (h)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
R.C. § 4511.19(A) or R.C. § 1547.11(A);
         (i)   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or R.C. § 1547.11(A).
      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE THAT IS VEHICLE-RELATED. Means an equivalent offense
that is any of the following:
         (a)   A violation described in division (a), (b), (c), (d), or (e) of
the definition for “equivalent offense” provided in this division (N);
         (b)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
R.C. § 4511.19(A);
         (c)   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A).
      JAIL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Means the mandatory term in jail of 3, 6, 10, 20,
30, or 60 days that must be imposed under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a), (G)(1)(b),
or (G)(1)(c) upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (A) of that
section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         (a)   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. § 4511.19, the term
must be served in a jail.
         (b)   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. § 4511.19, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to R.C. §§ 2929.21
through 2929.28 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
      MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      MANDATORY TERM OF LOCAL INCARCERATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2929.01.
      MUNICIPAL OVI ORDINANCE and MUNICIPAL OVI OFFENSE. Mean any municipal
ordinance prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or prohibiting
a person from operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a
controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine.
      PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      SANCTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
(R.C. § 4511.181) (Prior Code, § 434.01)
Cross-reference:
   Endangering children, see §
135.14
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory suspension periods; immobilizing or disabling device; restricted
license, see R.C. § 4510.13
   Trial judge to suspend driver’s license, see R.C. § 4510.05
§ 73.02 IMPLIED CONSENT.
   (A)   (1)   As used in this section:
         ALCOHOL MONITORING DEVICE. Means any device that provides for
continuous alcohol monitoring, any ignition interlock device, any immobilizing
or disabling device other than an ignition interlock device that is constantly
available to monitor the concentration of alcohol in a person’s system, or any
other device that provides for the automatic testing and periodic reporting of
alcohol consumption by a person and that a court orders a person to use as a
sanction imposed as a result of the person’s conviction of or plea of guilty to
an offense.
         COMMUNITY ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 5119.01.
         PHYSICAL CONTROL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.194.
      (2)    Any person who operates a vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for vehicular travel or parking within this
municipality or who is in physical control of a vehicle shall be deemed to have
given consent to a chemical test or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine to determine the alcohol, drug of
abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath,
oral fluid, or urine if arrested for a violation of §
73.01(A) or (B), §
73.03, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or any other municipal OVI ordinance.
      (3)   The chemical test or tests under division (A)(2) of this section
shall be administered at the request of a law enforcement officer having
reasonable grounds to believe the person was operating or in physical control
of a vehicle in violation of a division, section, or ordinance identified in
division (A)(2) of this section. The law enforcement agency by which the
officer is employed shall designate which of the tests shall be administered.
      (4)   Any person who is dead or unconscious, or who otherwise is in a
condition rendering the person incapable of refusal, shall be deemed to have
consented as provided in division (A)(2) of this section, and the test or tests
may be administered, subject to R.C. §§ 313.12 through 313.16.
      (5)   (a)    If a law enforcement officer arrests a person for a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a municipal OVI ordinance and if the person
if convicted would be required to be sentenced under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c),
(d), or (e), the law enforcement officer shall request the person to submit,
and the person shall submit, to a chemical test or tests of the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine for the purpose of
determining the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a
controlled substance, or combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine. A law enforcement officer who
makes a request pursuant to this division that a person submit to a chemical
test or tests is not required to advise the person of the consequences of
submitting to, or refusing to submit to, the test or tests and is not required
to give the person the form described in division (C) of this section, but the
officer shall advise the person at the time of the arrest that if the person
refuses to take a chemical test the officer may employ whatever reasonable
means are necessary to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma. The officer shall also advise
the person at the time of the arrest that the person may have an independent
chemical test taken at the person’s own expense. Divisions (A)(3) and (A)(4) of
this section apply to the administration of a chemical test or tests pursuant
to this division.
         (b)   If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test upon a request
made pursuant to division (A)(5)(a) of this section, the law enforcement
officer who made the request may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary
to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma. A law enforcement officer who acts pursuant to
this division to ensure that a person submits to a chemical test of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma is immune from criminal and civil
liability based upon a claim for assault and battery or any other claim for the
acts, unless the officer so acted with malicious purpose, in bad faith, or in a
wanton or reckless manner.
(R.C. § 4511.191(A))
   (B)   Except as provided in division (A)(5) of this section, the arresting
law enforcement officer shall give advice in accordance with this section to
any person under arrest for a violation of §
73.01(A) or (B), §
73.03, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or any other municipal OVI ordinance. The officer shall
give that advice in a written form that contains the information described in
division (C) of this section and shall read the advice to the person. The form
shall contain a statement that the form was shown to the person under arrest
and read to the person by the arresting officer. One or more persons shall
witness the arresting officer’s reading of the form, and the witnesses shall
certify to this fact by signing the form. The person must submit to the
chemical test or tests, subsequent to the request of the arresting officer,
within two hours of the time of the alleged violation and, if the person does
not submit to the test or tests within that two-hour time limit, the failure to
submit automatically constitutes a refusal to submit to the test or tests.
   (C)    Except as provided in division (A)(5) of this section, if a person is
under arrest as described in division (B) of this section, before the person
may be requested to submit to a chemical test or tests to determine the
alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled
substance, or combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood serum or
plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine, the arresting officer shall read the
following form to the person:
You now are under arrest for (specifically state the offense under state law or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for which the person was
arrested – operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, a drug, or a
combination of them; operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed
controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance;
operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption; or having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence).
If you refuse to take any chemical test required by law, your Ohio driving
privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay a fee to
have the privileges reinstated. If you have a prior conviction of OVI or
operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed controlled substance
or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance under state or municipal law
within the preceding 20 years, you are now under arrest for state OVI, and, if
you refuse to take a chemical test, you will face increased penalties if you
subsequently are convicted of the state OVI.
(Read this part unless the person is under arrest for solely having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence.) If you take any chemical test
required by law and are found to be at or over the prohibited amount of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
your whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as set by law, your
Ohio driving privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay
a fee to have the privileges reinstated.
If you take a chemical test, you may have an independent chemical test taken at
your own expense.
   (D)   If the arresting law enforcement officer does not ask a person under
arrest as described in division (B) of this section or division (A)(5) of this
section to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this
section, the arresting officer shall seize the Ohio or out-of-state driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit of the person and immediately forward it
to the court in which the arrested person is to appear on the charge. If the
arrested person is not in possession of the person’s license or permit or it is
not in the person’s vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it
to the law enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after
the arrest, and, upon the surrender, the agency immediately shall forward the
license or permit to the court in which the person is to appear on the charge.
Upon receipt of the license or permit, the court shall retain it pending the
arrested person’s initial appearance and any action taken under R.C. §
4511.196.
   (E)   (1)   If a law enforcement officer asks a person under arrest as
described in division (A)(5) of this section to submit to a chemical test or
tests under that division and the test results indicate a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense, or if a law enforcement
officer asks a person under arrest as described in division (B) of this section
to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this section, if
the officer advises the person in accordance with this section of the
consequences of the person’s refusal or submission, and if either the person
refuses to submit to the test or tests or, unless the arrest was for a
violation of §
73.03, R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the
person submits to the test or tests and the test results indicate a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense, the arresting officer
shall do all of the following:
         (a)   On behalf of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, notify the person
that, independent of any penalties or sanctions imposed upon the person, the
person’s Ohio driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege is suspended immediately, that the suspension will last at
least until the person’s initial appearance on the charge, which will be held
within five days after the date of the person’s arrest or the issuance of a
citation to the person, and that the person may appeal the suspension at the
initial appearance or during the period of time ending 30 days after that
initial appearance;
         (b)   Seize the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit of
the person and immediately forward it to the Registrar. If the arrested person
is not in possession of the person’s license or permit or it is not in the
person’s vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it to the law
enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after the person is
given notice of the suspension, and, upon the surrender, the officer’s
employing agency immediately shall forward the license or permit to the
Registrar;
         (c)   Verify the person’s current residence and, if it differs from
that on the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, notify
the Registrar of the change;
         (d)   Send to the Registrar, within 48 hours after the arrest of the
person, a sworn report that includes all of the following statements:
            1.   That the officer had reasonable grounds to believe that, at
the time of the arrest, the arrested person was operating a vehicle in
violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or a municipal OVI ordinance or for being
in physical control of a stationary vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.194 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
            2.   That the person was arrested and charged with a violation of
R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or a municipal OVI ordinance;
            3.   Unless division (E)(1)(d)5. of this section applies, that the
officer asked the person to take the designated chemical test or tests, advised
the person in accordance with this section of the consequences of submitting
to, or refusing to take, the test or tests, and gave the person the form
described in division (C) of this section;
            4.   Unless division (E)(1)(d)5. of this section applies, that
either the person refused to submit to the chemical test or tests or, unless
the arrest was for a violation of R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the person submitted to the chemical test or tests and the
test results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the time of the alleged
offense.
            5.   If the person was under arrest as described in division (A)(5)
of this section and the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance
with that division, that the person was under arrest as described in that
division, that the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance with
that division, and that test results indicated a prohibited concentration of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the time
of the alleged offense.
      (2)    Division (E)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
arrested for a violation of §
73.03, R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, who
is asked by a law enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests
under this section, and who submits to the test or tests, regardless of the
amount of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled
substance that the test results indicate is present in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine.
   (F)   The arresting officer shall give the officer’s sworn report that is
completed under this section to the arrested person at the time of the arrest,
or the Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall send the report to the person by
regular first class mail as soon as possible after receipt of the report, but
not later than 14 days after receipt of it. An arresting officer may give an
unsworn report to the arrested person at the time of the arrest provided the
report is complete when given to the arrested person and subsequently is sworn
to by the arresting officer. As soon as possible, but not later than 48 hours
after the arrest of the person, the arresting officer shall send a copy of the
sworn report to the court in which the arrested person is to appear on the
charge for which the person was arrested.
   (G)   The sworn report of an arresting officer completed under this section
is prima facie proof of the information and statements that it contains. It
shall be admitted and considered as prima facie proof of the information and
statements that it contains in any appeal under R.C. § 4511.197 relative to any
suspension of a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege that results from the arrest covered by the
report.
(R.C. § 4511.192)
   (H)   (1)   A suspension of a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit or nonresident operating privilege under this section for the
time described in R.C. § 4511.191(B) or (C) is effective immediately from the
time at which the arresting officer serves the notice of suspension upon the
arrested person. Any subsequent finding that the person is not guilty of the
charge that resulted in the person’s being requested to take the chemical test
or tests under division (A) of this section does not affect the suspension.
      (2)   If a person arrested for operating a vehicle in violation of §
73.01(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), or any other municipal OVI
ordinance, or for being in physical control of a vehicle in violation of §
73.03 or R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
regardless of whether the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is or is not suspended under R.C. §
4511.191(B) or (C) or R.C. Chapter 4510, the person’s initial appearance on the
charge resulting from the arrest shall be held within five days of the persons’
arrest or the issuance of the citation to him or her, subject to any
continuance granted by the court pursuant to R.C. § 4511.197 regarding the
issues specified in that section.
(R.C. § 4511.191(D))
Statutory reference:
   Continuous alcohol monitoring, see R.C. § 4511.198
   Disposition of fines, immobilization of vehicle and impoundment of license
plates, criminal forfeiture for municipal ordinance conviction, see R.C. §
4511.193
   Effect of refusal to submit to test, seizure of license, suspension periods,
appeal procedures, occupational driving privileges, and Indigent Drivers
Alcohol Treatment Funds, see R.C. § 4511.191
   Judicial pretrial suspension, initial appearance, see R.C. § 4511.196
   Mandatory suspension periods; immobilizing or disabling device; restricted
license, see R.C. § 4510.13
   Seizure of vehicles upon arrest, see R.C. § 4511.195
§ 73.03 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF VEHICLE WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE.
   (A)   As used in this section, PHYSICAL CONTROL means being in the driver’s
position of the front seat of a vehicle and having possession of the vehicle’s
ignition key or other ignition device.
   (B)   No person shall be in physical control of a vehicle if, at the time of
the physical control, any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them.
      (2)   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine
contains at least the concentration of alcohol specified in §
73.01(A)(1)(b), (A)(1)(c), (A)(1)(d), or (A)(1)(e).
      (3)   Except as provided in division (E) of this section, the person has
a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds the concentration specified in §
73.01(A)(1)(j).
   (C)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of this section, if a law enforcement officer has administered a
field sobriety test to the person in physical control of the vehicle involved
in the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible, and generally acceptable field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including
but not limited to any testing standards then in effect what were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
         (a)   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
         (b)   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field sobriety
test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal prosecution
or juvenile court proceeding.
         (c)   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) of this section and if the testimony or
evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the
testimony or evidence, and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the
trier of fact considers to be appropriate.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not limit or preclude a court,
in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (C)(1) of this section.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having physical control of
a vehicle while under the influence, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In
addition to other sanctions imposed, the court may impose on the offender a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
   (E)   Division (B)(3) of this section does not apply to a person who is in
physical control of a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a listed
controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the
person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds
the amount specified in §
73.01(A)(1)(j) if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
(R.C. § 4511.194)
§ 73.04 DRIVING COMMERCIAL VEHICLE WITH IMPAIRED ALERTNESS OR ABILITY; USE OF
DRUGS.
   (A)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle, as defined in R.C. §
4506.01, or a commercial car or commercial tractor, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, while the person’s ability or alertness is so impaired by fatigue,
illness, or other causes that it is unsafe for the person to drive such
vehicle. No driver shall use any drug which would adversely affect the driver’s
ability or alertness.
   (B)   No owner, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, of a commercial motor vehicle,
commercial car or commercial tractor, or a person employing or otherwise
directing the driver of such vehicle, shall require or knowingly permit a
driver in any such condition described in division (A) of this section to drive
such vehicle upon any street or highway.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.79, or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764, or
4511.77 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.79) (Prior Code, § 442.09)
§ 73.05 RECKLESS OPERATION OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway in willful
or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.20) (Prior Code, § 442.02)
Cross-reference:
   License suspension, see §
71.25
§ 73.06 RECKLESS OPERATION OFF STREETS AND HIGHWAYS; COMPETITIVE OPERATION.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or private
property other than streets or highways in willful or wanton disregard of the
safety of persons or property.
      (2)   This section does not apply to the competitive operation of
vehicles on public or private property when the owner of such property
knowingly permits such operation thereon.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.201) (Prior Code, § 434.02)
Cross-reference:
   License suspension, see §
71.25
§ 73.07 OPERATOR TO BE IN REASONABLE CONTROL.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, agricultural tractor, or
agricultural tractor that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of
farm machinery on any street, highway, or property open to the public for
vehicular traffic without being in reasonable control of the vehicle,
agricultural tractor, or unit of farm machinery.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or agricultural tractor without being in control of it, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.202) (Prior Code, § 434.025)
§ 73.08 IMMOBILIZING OR DISABLING DEVICE VIOLATION.
   (A)   (1)   No offender who has been granted limited or unlimited driving
privileges, during any period that the offender is required to operate only a
motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, shall request
or permit any other person to breathe into the device if it is an ignition
interlock device or another type of device that monitors the concentration of
alcohol in a person’s breath or to otherwise start the motor vehicle equipped
with the device, for the purpose of providing the offender with an operable
motor vehicle.
      (2)   No person shall breathe into an immobilizing or disabling device
that is an ignition interlock device or another type of device that monitors
the concentration of alcohol in a person’s breath or otherwise start a motor
vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, for the purpose of
providing an operable motor vehicle to another person who has been granted
limited or unlimited driving privileges under the condition that the person
operate only a motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device.
      (3)   No unauthorized person shall tamper with or circumvent the
operation of an immobilizing or disabling device.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an immobilizing or
disabling device violation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4510.44) (Prior Code, § 434.011)
§ 73.09 STREET RACING, STUNT DRIVING AND STREET TAKEOVERS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      BURNOUT. A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby the
vehicle is kept in a stationary position, but the wheels of the vehicle are
spun, which may cause the tires of the vehicle to become heated and emit smoke
from the friction.
      DOUGHNUT. A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby the
front or rear of the vehicle is rotated around the opposite set of wheels in a
continuous motion, which may cause a circular skid-mark pattern of rubber on
the driving surface, or the tires of the vehicle to become heated and emit
smoke from the friction, or both.
      DRIFTING. A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby the
vehicle is driven in a manner that causes a controlled, sideways skid during a
turn, with the front wheels pointing in a direction that is the opposite of the
direction of the turn.
      STREET RACING. The operation of two or more vehicles from a point side by
side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to out-distance each other
or the operation of one or more vehicles over a common selected course, from
the same point to the same point, wherein timing is made of the participating
vehicles  involving competitive accelerations or speeds. The operation of two
or more vehicles side by side either at speeds in excess of prima-facie lawful
speeds established by R.C. § 4511.21(B)(1)(a) to (B)(9) or rapidly accelerating
from a common starting point to a speed in excess of such prima-facie lawful
speeds shall be prima-facie evidence of street racing.
      STREET TAKEOVER. Blocking or impeding the regular flow of vehicle or
pedestrian traffic on a public road, street, or highway or on private property
that is open to the general public for the purpose of street racing or stunt
driving.
      STUNT DRIVING. Performing or engaging in burnouts, doughnuts, drifting,
or wheelies, or allowing a passenger to ride either partially or fully outside
of the vehicle while operating that vehicle.
      WHEELIE. A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby the front
wheel or wheels of the vehicle are raised off of the ground or whereby two
wheels that are on the same side of the vehicle are raised off of the ground.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly participate in street racing, stunt driving,
or street takeover upon any public road, street, or highway, or on private
property that is open to the general public.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of street racing, stunt
driving, or street takeover, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to
any other sanctions, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege for not less than 30 days or more
than three years. No judge shall suspend the first 30 days of any suspension of
an offender’s license, permit, or privilege imposed under this division.
   (D)   Persons rendering assistance in any manner to street racing, stunt
driving, or street takeover shall be equally charged as the participants.
   (E)   This section does not apply to the competitive operation of vehicles
on public or private property when the political subdivision with jurisdiction
of the location or owner of the property knowingly permits such operation
thereon.
(R.C. § 4511.251) (Prior Code, § 434.07)
§ 73.10 SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater or less
than is reasonable or proper, having due regard for the traffic, surface, and
width of the street or highway and any other conditions, and no person shall
drive any motor vehicle in and upon any street or highway at a greater speed
than will permit him or her to bring it to a stop within the assured clear
distance ahead.
   (B)   It is prima facie lawful, in the absence of a lower limit declared or
established pursuant to this section by the Director of Transportation or local
authorities, for the operator of a motor vehicle to operate the same at a speed
not exceeding the following:
      (1)   (a)   Twenty miles per hour in school zones during school recess
and while children are going to or leaving school during the opening or closing
hours, and when 20 miles per hour school speed limit signs are erected, except
that on controlled-access highways and expressways, if the right-of-way line
fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed
by division (B)(4) of this section, and on freeways, if the right-of-way line
fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed
by divisions (B)(10) and (B)(11) of this section. The end of every school zone
may be marked by a sign indicating the end of the zone. Nothing in this section
or in the Manual and Specifications for a Uniform System of Traffic- Control
Devices shall be construed to require school zones to be indicated by signs
equipped with flashing or other lights, or giving other special notice of the
hours in which the school zone speed limit is in effect.
         (b)   As used in this section, SCHOOL means all of the following:
            1.   Any school chartered under R.C. § 3301.16;
            2.    Any nonchartered school that during the preceding year filed
with the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce in compliance with O.A.C. §
3301-35-08, a copy of the school’s report for the parents of the school’s
pupils certifying that the school meets state minimum standards for
nonchartered, nontax-supported schools and presents evidence of this filing to
the jurisdiction from which it is requesting the establishment of a school
zone;
            3.   Any special elementary school that in writing requests the
County Engineer to create a school zone at the location of the school. Upon
receipt of such written request, the County Engineer shall create a school zone
at that location by erecting appropriate signs;
            4.    Any preschool education program operated by an educational
service center that is located on a street or highway with a speed limit of 45
miles per hour or more, when the educational service center in writing requests
that either the Director of Transportation or the County Engineer, as
applicable based on who has jurisdiction of the street or highway, to create a
school zone at the location of that program. Upon receipt of such a written
request, the Director of Transportation or the County Engineer shall create a
school zone at that location by erecting the appropriate signs.
         (c)   As used in this section, SCHOOL ZONE means that portion of a
street or highway passing a school fronting upon the street or highway that is
encompassed by projecting the school property lines to the fronting street or
highway, and also includes that portion of a state highway. Upon request from
local authorities for streets and highways under their jurisdiction and that
portion of a state highway under the jurisdiction of the Director of
Transportation or a request from a County Engineer in the case of a school zone
for a special elementary school, the Director may extend the traditional school
zone boundaries. The distances in divisions (B)(1)(c)1. through (B)(1)(c)3.
below shall not exceed 300 feet per approach per direction, and are bounded by
whichever of the following distances or combination thereof the Director
approves as most appropriate:
            1.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school building
lines normal to the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            2.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school property
lines intersecting the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            3.   The distance encompassed by the special marking of the
pavement for a principal school pupil crosswalk plus a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction of the highway.
         (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the
Director’s initial action on August 9, 1976, establishing all school zones at
the traditional school zone boundaries defined by projecting school property
lines, except when those boundaries are extended as provided in divisions (B)
(1)(a) and (B)(1)(c) of this section.
         (e)   As used in this division, CROSSWALK has the meaning given that
term in R.C. § 4511.01(LL)(2).
         (f)   The Director may, upon request by resolution of the Legislative
Authority and upon submission by the municipality of such engineering, traffic,
and other information as the Director considers necessary, designate a school
zone on any portion of a state route lying within the municipality that
includes a crosswalk customarily used by children going to or leaving a school
during recess and opening and closing hours, whenever the distance, as measured
in a straight line, from the school property line nearest the crosswalk to the
nearest point of a crosswalk is no more than 1,320 feet. Such a school zone
shall include the distance encompassed by the crosswalk and extending 300 feet
in each appropriate direction of the state route.
         (g)   As used in this section, SPECIAL ELEMENTARY SCHOOL means a
school that meets all of the following:
            1.   It is not chartered and does not receive tax revenue from any
source.
            2.   It does not educate children beyond the eighth grade.
            3.   It is located outside the limits of a municipal corporation.
            4.   A majority of the total number of students enrolled at the
school are not related by blood.
            5.   The principal or other person in charge of the special
elementary school annually sends a report to the superintendent of the school
district in which the special elementary school is located indicating the total
number of students enrolled at the school, but otherwise the principal or other
person in charge does not report any other information or data to the
superintendent.
      (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour in all other portions of the
municipality, except on state routes outside business districts, through
highways outside business districts, and alleys;
      (3)   Thirty-five miles per hour on all state routes or through highways
within the municipality outside business districts, except as provided in
divisions (B)(4) and (B)(6) of this section;
      (4)   Fifty miles per hour on controlled-access highways and expressways
within the municipality, except as provided in divisions (B)(12), (B)(13), (B)
(14), (B)(15), and (B)(16) of this section;
      (5)   Fifty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality,
other than highways within island jurisdictions as provided in division (B)(8)
of this section, highways as provided in divisions (B)(9) and (B)(10) of this
section, and highways, expressways and freeways as provided in divisions (B)
(12), (B)(13), (B)(14), and (B)(16) of this section;
      (6)   Fifty miles per hour on state routes within the municipality
outside urban districts unless a lower prima facie speed is established as
further provided in this section;
      (7)   Fifteen miles per hour on all alleys within the municipality;
      (8)   Thirty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality
that are within an island jurisdiction;
      (9)   Thirty-five miles per hour on through highways, except state
routes, that are outside municipal corporations and that are within a national
park with boundaries extending through two or more counties;
      (10)   Sixty miles per hour on two-lane state routes outside municipal
corporations as established by the Director under R.C. § 4511.21(H)(2);
      (11)   Fifty-five miles per hour on freeways with paved shoulders inside
the municipality, other than freeways as provided in divisions (B)(14) and (B)
(16) of this section;
      (12)   Sixty miles per hour on rural expressways with traffic control
signals and on all portions of rural divided highways, except as provided in
divisions (B)(13) and (B)(14) of this section;
      (13)   Sixty-five miles per hour on all rural expressways without traffic
control signals;
      (14)   Seventy miles per hour on all rural freeways;
      (15)   Fifty-five miles per hour on all portions of freeways or
expressways in congested areas as determined by the Director and that are
located within a municipal corporation or within an interstate freeway
outerbelt, except as provided in division (B)(16) of this section;
      (16)   Sixty-five miles per hour on all portions of freeways or
expressways without traffic control signals in urbanized areas.
   (C)   It is prima facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed
limitations in divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)
(8) and (B)(9) of this section or any declared or established pursuant to this
section by the Director or local authorities and it is unlawful for any person
to exceed any of the speed limitations in division (D) of this section. No
person shall be convicted of more than one violation of this section for the
same conduct, although violations of more than one provision of this section
may be charged in the alternative in a single affidavit.
   (D)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or highway as
follows:
      (1)   At a speed exceeding 55 miles per hour, except upon a two-lane
state route as provided in division (B)(10) of this section and upon a highway,
expressway or freeway as provided in divisions (B)(12), (B)(13), (B)(14), and
(B)(16) of this section;
      (2)   At a speed exceeding 60 miles per hour upon a two-lane state route
as provided in division (B)(10) of this section and upon a highway as provided
in division (B)(12) of this section;
      (3)   At a speed exceeding 65 miles per hour upon an expressway as
provided in division (B)(13) of this section or upon a freeway as provided in
division (B)(16) of this section, except upon a freeway as provided in division
(B)(14) of this section;
      (4)   At a speed exceeding 70 miles per hour upon a freeway as provided
in division (B)(14) of this section;
      (5)   At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a highway,
expressway or freeway for which the Director has determined and declared a
speed limit pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(I)(2) or (L)(2).
   (E)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(E), in every charge of violating this
section, the affidavit and warrant shall specify the time, place and speed at
which the defendant is alleged to have driven, and in charges made in reliance
upon division (C) of this section also the speed which division (B)(1)(a), (B)
(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of, or a limit declared
or established pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21 declares is prima
facie lawful at the time and place of such alleged violation, except that in
affidavits where a person is alleged to have driven at a greater speed than
will permit the person to bring the vehicle to stop within the assured clear
distance ahead, the affidavit and warrant need not specify the speed at which
the defendant is alleged to have driven.
   (F)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(F), when a speed in excess of both a prima
facie limitation and a limitation in division (D) of this section is alleged,
the defendant shall be charged in a single affidavit, alleging a single act,
with a violation indicated of both division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4),
(B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of this section, or of a limit declared or
established pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.21 by the Director or local
authorities, and of the limitation in division (D) of this section. If the
court finds a violation of division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6),
(B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of, or a limit declared or established pursuant to,
this section or R.C. § 4511.21 has occurred, it shall enter a judgment of
conviction under such division and dismiss the charge under division (D) of
this section. If it finds no violation of division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3),
(B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of, or a limit declared or established
pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21, it shall then consider whether the
evidence supports a conviction under division (D) of this section.
   (G)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(G), points shall be assessed for a
violation of a limitation under division (D) of this section in accordance with
R.C. § 4510.036.
(R.C. § 4511.21(A) - (G))
   (H)   Whenever, in accordance with R.C. § 4511.21(H) through (N), the
maximum prima facie speed limitations as established herein have been altered,
either higher or lower, and the appropriate signs giving notice have been
erected as required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by the speed
limitations set forth on such signs. It is prima facie unlawful for any person
to exceed the speed limits posted upon such signs.
   (I)   As used in this section:
      COMMERCIAL BUS. Means a motor vehicle designed for carrying more than
nine passengers and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
      DIVIDED. Means a roadway having two or more travel lanes for vehicles
moving in opposite directions and that is separated by a median of more than
four feet, excluding turn lanes.
      INTERSTATE SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. § 101.
      NONCOMMERCIAL BUS. Includes but is not limited to a school bus, or a
motor vehicle operated solely for the transportation of persons associated with
a charitable or nonprofit organization.
      OUTERBELT. A portion of a freeway that is part of the interstate system
and is located in the outer vicinity of a major municipal corporation or group
of municipal corporations, as designated by the Director.
      RURAL. Means an area outside urbanized areas and outside of a business or
urban district, and areas that extend within urbanized areas where the roadway
characteristics remain mostly unchanged from those outside the urbanized areas.
      URBANIZED AREA. Has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. § 101.
(R.C. § 4511.21(O))
   (J)   Speed limits for private roads and driveways.
      (1)    The owner of a private road located in a private residential area
containing 20 or more dwelling units may establish a speed limit on the road by
complying with all of the following requirements:
         (a)   The speed limit is not less than 25 miles per hour and is
indicated by a sign that is in a proper position, is sufficiently legible to be
seen by an ordinarily observant person, and meets the specifications for the
basic speed limit sign included in the manual adopted by the Department of
Transportation pursuant to R.C. § 4511.09;
         (b)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road
that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road that they
are entering private property, a speed limit has been established for the road,
and the speed limit is enforceable by law enforcement officers under state law.
      (2)   No person shall operate a vehicle upon a private road as provided
in division (J)(1) of this section at a speed exceeding any speed limit
established and posted pursuant to division (J)(1).
      (3)   When a speed limit is established and posted in accordance with
division (J)(1) of this section, a law enforcement officer may apprehend a
person violating the speed limit of the residential area by utilizing any of
the means described in R.C. § 4511.091 or by any other accepted method of
determining the speed of a motor vehicle and may stop and charge the person
with exceeding the speed limit.
      (4)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.211(D), points shall be assessed for
violation of a speed limit established and posted in accordance with division
(J)(1) of this section in accordance with R.C. § 4510.036.
      (5)   As used in this division (J):
         OWNER. Includes but is not limited to a person who holds title to the
real property in fee simple, a condominium owners’ association, a property
owners’ association, a board of directors or trustees of a private community,
and a nonprofit corporation governing a private community.
         PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING UNITS. Does
not include a Chautauqua assembly as defined in R.C. § 4511.90.
(R.C. § 4511.211(A) - (E))
   (K)   Penalties.
      (1)   Divisions (A) through (I).
         (a)   A violation of any provision of divisions (A) through (I) of
this section is one of the following:
            1.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (K)(1)(a)2., (K)(1)
(a)3., (K)(1)(b), and (K)(1)(c) of this section, a minor misdemeanor;
            2.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of any provision of
divisions (A) through (I) of this section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any provision of
any other municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any provision
of that section, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
            3.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of any
provision of divisions (A) through (I) of this section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any
provision of any other municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to
any provision of that section, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
         (b)   If the offender operated a motor vehicle faster than 35 miles an
hour in a business district of the municipality, faster than 50 miles an hour
in other portions of the municipality, or faster than 35 miles an hour in a
school zone during recess or while children are going to or leaving school
during the school’s opening or closing hours, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. This division does not apply if penalties may be imposed under division
(K)(1)(a)2. or (K)(1)(a)3. of this section.
         (c)   Notwithstanding division (K)(1)(a) of this section, if the
offender operated a motor vehicle in a construction zone where a sign was then
posted in accordance with R.C. § 4511.98, the court, in addition to all other
penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a fine of two times
the usual amount imposed for the violation. No court shall impose a fine of two
times the usual amount imposed for the violation upon an offender if the
offender alleges, in an affidavit filed with the court prior to the offender’s
sentencing, that the offender is indigent and is unable to pay the fine imposed
pursuant to this division and if the court determines that the offender is an
indigent person and unable to pay the fine.
         (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.21(P))
      (2)   Division (J).
         (a)   A violation of division (J)(2) of this section is one of the
following:
            1.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (K)(2)(a)2. and (K)
(2)(a)3. of this section, a minor misdemeanor;
            2.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division (J)(2) of
this section, R.C. § 4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to that division, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
            3.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of division
(J)(2) of this section, R.C. § 4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance
that is substantially equivalent to that division, a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
         (b)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.211(F))
(Prior Code, §§ 434.03, 434.035)
Statutory reference:
   Alteration of speed limits with approval of Director, see R.C. § 4511.21(H)
through (M)
   Arrest or citation of driver based on radar, timing device or radio message
from another officer, see R.C. § 4511.091
§ 73.11 SLOW SPEED OR STOPPING.
   (A)   No person shall stop or operate a vehicle at such an unreasonably slow
speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic,
except when stopping or reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or to
comply with law.
   (B)   Whenever the Director of Transportation or local authorities determine
on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on
any part of a controlled-access highway, expressway, or freeway consistently
impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the Director or such
local authority may declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall
operate a motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe operation or in
compliance with the law. No minimum speed limit established hereunder shall be
less than 30 miles per hour, greater than 50 miles per hour, nor effective
until the provisions of R.C. § 4511.21 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, relating to appropriate signs, have been fulfilled and local
authorities have obtained the approval of the Director.
   (C)   In a case involving a violation of this section, the trier of fact, in
determining whether the vehicle was being operated at an unreasonably slow
speed, shall consider the capabilities of the vehicle and its operator.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.22) (Prior Code, § 434.04)
§ 73.12 EMERGENCY VEHICLES EXCEPTED FROM SPEED LIMITATION.
   The prima facie speed limitations set forth in R.C. § 4511.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance do not apply to emergency vehicles
or public safety vehicles when they are responding to emergency calls and are
equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet
to the front of the vehicle, and when the drivers thereof sound audible signals
by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle. This section does not relieve the driver of
an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons using the street or highway.
(R.C. § 4511.24) (Prior Code, § 434.06)
§ 73.13 SPEED REGULATIONS ON BRIDGES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle over any bridge or other
elevated structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is greater
than the maximum speed that can be maintained with safety to such bridge or
structure, when such structure is posted with signs as provided in this
section.
      (2)   The Department of Transportation upon request from any local
authority shall, or upon its own initiative may, conduct an investigation of
any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part of a highway, and if
it finds that such structure cannot with safety withstand traffic traveling at
the speed otherwise permissible under this Traffic Code, the Department shall
determine and declare the maximum speed of traffic which such structure can
withstand, and shall cause or permit suitable signs stating such maximum speed
to be erected and maintained at a distance of a least 100 feet before each end
of the structure.
      (3)   Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this
section, proof of such determination of the maximum speed by the Department and
the existence of such signs shall constitute prima facie evidence of the
maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.23) (Prior Code, § 434.05)
§ 73.14 PRESENTING FALSE NAME OR INFORMATION TO OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly present, display, or orally communicate a
false name, social security number, or date of birth to a law enforcement
officer who is in the process of issuing to the person a traffic ticket or
complaint.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4513.361) (Prior Code, § 404.08)
§ 73.15 PROHIBITION AGAINST RESISTING OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall resist, hinder, obstruct, or abuse any sheriff,
constable, or other official while that official is attempting to arrest
offenders under any provision of this Title VII. No person shall interfere with
any person charged under any provision of this Title VII with the enforcement
of the law relative to public highways.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.36)
   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance,
obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of constitutionally
protected speech only.
(Prior Code, § 404.02)
§ 73.16 OPERATION RESTRICTED FOR MINI-TRUCKS AND LOW-SPEED, UNDER-SPEED, OR
UTILITY VEHICLES.
   (A)   As used in this section, LOW-SPEED VEHICLE, MINI-TRUCK, UNDER-SPEED
VEHICLE, and UTILITY VEHICLE have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a low-speed vehicle upon any street or
highway having an established speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour.
      (2)   No person shall operate an under-speed or utility vehicle or a
mini-truck upon any street or highway except as follows:
         (a)   Upon a street or highway having an established speed limit not
greater than 35 miles per hour and only upon such streets or highways where the
municipality has granted permission for such operation in accordance with
division (F) of this section;
         (b)   A state park or political subdivision employee or volunteer
operating a utility vehicle exclusively within the boundaries of state parks or
political subdivision parks for the operation or maintenance of state or
political subdivision park facilities.
      (3)   No person shall operate a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter upon
any street or highway having an established speed limit greater than 45 miles
per hour.
   (C)   This section does not prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   A person operating a low-speed, under-speed, or utility vehicle or
a mini-truck from proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway
having a speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour;
      (2)   A person operating a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter from
proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway having a speed limit
greater than 45 miles per hour.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the municipality from adopting
more stringent local ordinances, resolutions, or regulations governing the
operation of a low-speed vehicle or a mini-truck, or a motor-driven cycle or
motor scooter.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (B) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.214)
   (F)   By ordinance or resolution, the municipality may authorize the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on a public street
or highway under its jurisdiction. The municipality shall do all of the
following:
      (1)   Limit the operation of those vehicles to streets and highways
having an established speed limit not greater than 35 miles per hour;
      (2)   Require the vehicle owner who wishes to operate an under-speed or
utility vehicle or a mini-truck on the public streets or highways to submit the
vehicle to an inspection conducted by a local law enforcement agency that
complies with inspection requirements established by the Department of Public
Safety under R.C. § 4513.02;
      (3)   Permit the operation on public streets or highways of only those
vehicles that successfully pass the required vehicle inspection, are registered
in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4503, and are titled in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 4505;
      (4)   Notify the Director of Public Safety, in a manner the Director
determines, of the authorization for the operation of under-speed or utility
vehicles or mini-trucks.
   (G)   The municipality may establish additional requirements for the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on its streets and
highways.
(R.C. § 4511.215)
   (H)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) through (G) of this section, a person
may operate a utility vehicle on any public roads or right-of-way, other than a
freeway, when traveling from one farm field to another for agricultural
purposes if the vehicle is displaying a triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem
as described in R.C. § 4513.112.
(R.C. § 4511.216)
   (I)   (1)   Except as provided in this division (I) and divisions (F) and
(G) of this section, no person shall operate a mini-truck within this
municipality.
      (2)   A person may operate a mini-truck on a farm for agricultural
purposes only when the owner of the farm qualifies for the current agricultural
use valuation tax credit. A mini-truck may be operated by or on behalf of such
a farm owner on public roads and rights-of-way only when traveling from one
farm field to another.
      (3)   A person may operate a mini-truck on property owned or leased by a
dealer who sells mini-trucks at retail.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (I) shall be penalized as provided
in division (E) of this section.
(R.C. § 4519.401)
(Prior Code, § 434.09)
§ 73.17 VEHICULAR HOMICIDE; VEHICULAR MANSLAUGHTER; VEHICULAR ASSAULT.
   (A)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, utility vehicle, mini-truck, snowmobile, locomotive,
watercraft, or aircraft, shall cause the death of another or the unlawful
termination of another’s pregnancy in any of the following ways:
      (1)   As the proximate result of committing an OVI offense.
      (2)   In one of the following ways:
         (a)   Recklessly; or
         (b)   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck,
or motorcycle in a construction zone, a reckless operation offense, provided
that this division applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose
pregnancy is unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of
the offender’s commission of the reckless operation offense in the construction
zone and does not apply as described in division (D) of this section.
      (3)   In one of the following ways:
         (a)   Negligently; or
         (b)   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck,
or motorcycle in a construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this
division applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is
unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the offender’s
commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and does not apply
as described in division (D) of this section.
      (4)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of any provision
of any section contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor or of a
municipal ordinance that, regardless of the penalty set by ordinance for the
violation, is substantially equivalent to any provision of any section
contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is
guilty of aggravated vehicular homicide, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(3) of this section is guilty of
vehicular homicide. Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
homicide is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular homicide committed in
violation of division (A)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving
under a suspension or cancellation imposed under Ch. 4510 or any other
provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or
motorcycle, did not have a valid driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the offender’s driver’s license
or commercial driver’s license without examination under R.C. § 4507.10 or if
the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-
related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.
         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class four suspension of
the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is guilty of
vehicular manslaughter. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the second degree. Vehicular
manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the first degree if, at the time of the
offense, the offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation imposed
under R.C. Ch. 4510 or any other provision of the Revised Code or was operating
a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license
or nonresident operating privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the
offender’s driver’s license or commercial driver’s license without examination
under R.C. § 4507.10 or if the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-related homicide,
manslaughter or assault offense.
         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class six suspension of
the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6); or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this
section, any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter or assault offense, or a
traffic-related murder, felonious assault or attempted murder offense, a class
four suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
   (C)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least 15 days on an
offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation of
division (A)(3)(b) above and may impose upon the offender a longer jail term as
authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.
   (D)   Divisions (A)(2)(b) and (A)(3)(b) above do not apply in a particular
construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C. § 2903.081 are
erected in that construction zone in accordance with the guidelines and design
specifications established by the Director of Transportation under R.C. §
5501.27. The failure to erect signs of the type described in R.C. § 2903.081 in
a particular construction zone in accordance with those guidelines and design
specifications does not limit or affect the application of division (A)(1), (A)
(2)(a), (A)(3)(a) or (A)(4) of this section in that construction zone or the
prosecution of any person who violates any of those divisions in that
construction zone.
   (E)   (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         CONSTRUCTION ZONE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5501.27.
         MANDATORY PRISON TERM and MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Have the same meanings
as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         MINI-TRUCK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
         MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
         OVI OFFENSE. Means a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), a violation R.C.
§ 1547.11(A), a violation of R.C. § 4561.15(A)(3), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
         RECKLESS OPERATION OFFENSE. A violation of R.C. § 4511.20 or a
municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.20.
         SPEEDING OFFENSE. A violation of R.C. § 4511.21 or a municipal
ordinance pertaining to speed.
         TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MANSLAUGHTER OR ASSAULT OFFENSE. A violation
of R.C. § 2903.04 in circumstances in which division (D) of that section
applies, a violation of R.C. §§ 2903.06 or 2903.08, or a violation of R.C. §§
2903.06, 2903.07 or 2903.08 as they existed prior to March 23, 2000.
         TRAFFIC-RELATED MURDER, FELONIOUS ASSAULT OR ATTEMPTED MURDER OFFENSE.
A violation of R.C. §§ 2903.01 or 2903.02 in circumstances in which the
offender used a motor vehicle as the means to commit the violation, a violation
of R.C. § 2903.11(A)(2) in circumstances in which the deadly weapon used in the
commission of the violation is a motor vehicle, or an attempt to commit
aggravated murder or murder in violation of R.C. § 2923.02 in circumstances in
which the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to attempt to commit the
aggravated murder or murder.
         UTILITY VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or suspension is
enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a prior
or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the specified
law or the specified offense includes any violation of any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or current or former
law of this or another state or the United States.
(R.C. § 2903.06)
   (F)   Vehicular assault.
      (1)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, utility vehicle, or mini-truck, shall cause serious
physical harm to another person or another’s unborn as the proximate result of
committing, while operating or participating in the operation of a motor
vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck, or motorcycle in a construction zone, a
speeding offense, provided that this division applies only if the person to
whom the serious physical harm is caused or to whose unborn the serious
physical harm is caused is in the construction zone at the time of the
offender’s commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and does
not apply as described in division (F)(4) of this section.
      (2)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
assault committed in violation of division (F)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular assault committed in violation of
division (F)(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving under a
suspension imposed under R.C. Ch.4510 or any other provision of the Ohio
Revised Code or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (F)(1) of this section, R.C. § 2903.08, or
any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.
         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed, the court shall
impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender’s driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least seven days
on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation
of division (F)(1) of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer
jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.
      (4)   Division (F)(1) of this section does not apply in a particular
construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C. § 2903.081 are
erected in that construction zone in accordance with the guidelines and design
specifications established by the Director of Transportation under R.C. §
5501.27.
      (5)   As used in this division (F):
         CONSTRUCTION ZONE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5501.27.
         MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         SPEEDING OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.06.
         TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MANSLAUGHTER, OR ASSAULT OFFENSE. Has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.06.
      (6)   For the purposes of this division (F), when a penalty or suspension
is enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a
prior or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the
specified law or the specified offense includes any violation of any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or
current or former law of another state or the United States.
(R.C. 2903.08(A)(3), (C)(3), (D)(3), (E) - (G))
(Prior Code, § 434.08)
Statutory reference:
   Trial court to suspend driver’s license, see R.C. §§ 4510.05 and 4510.10
   Vehicular assault and aggravated vehicular assault, felony offenses, see
R.C. § 2903.08
STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT
§ 73.30 FAILURE TO STOP AFTER ACCIDENT.
   (A)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision with
persons or property on a public road or highway, the operator of the motor
vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, immediately shall stop
the operator’s motor vehicle at the scene of the accident or collision. The
operator shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until the
operator has given the operator’s name and address and, if the operator is not
the owner, the name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together
with the registered number of that motor vehicle, to all of the following:
         (a)   Any person injured in the accident or collision;
         (b)   The operator, occupant, owner, or attendant of any motor vehicle
damaged in the accident or collision;
         (c)   The police officer at the scene of the accident or collision.
      (2)   In the event an injured person is unable to comprehend and record
the information required to be given under division (A)(1) of this section, the
other operator involved in the accident or collision shall notify the nearest
police authority concerning the location of the accident or collision, and the
operator’s name, address, and the registered number of the motor vehicle the
operator was operating. The operator shall remain at the scene of the accident
or collision until a police officer arrives, unless removed from the scene by
an emergency vehicle operated by a political subdivision or an ambulance.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a
conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident. Except as otherwise provided in division (B)
(2) or (B)(3) of this section, failure to stop after an accident is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months
of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this
division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. §
2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.02) (Prior Code, § 436.11)
§ 73.31 STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT ON OTHER THAN PUBLIC ROADS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision resulting
in injury or damage to persons or property on any public or private property
other than a public road or highway, the operator of the motor vehicle, having
knowledge of the accident or collision, shall stop at the scene of the accident
or collision. Upon request of any person who is injured or damaged, or any
other person, the operator shall give that person the operator’s name and
address, and, if the operator is not the owner, the name and address of the
owner of that motor vehicle, together with the registered number of that motor
vehicle, and, if available, exhibit the operator’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license.
      (2)   If the operator of the motor vehicle involved in the accident or
collision does not provide the information specified in division (A)(1) of this
section, the operator shall give that information, within 24 hours after the
accident or collision, to the police department of the city or village in which
the accident or collision occurred, or if it occurred outside the corporate
limits of a city or village, to the sheriff of the county in which the accident
or collision occurred.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required under division (A)(1) of this section, in
writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor
vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident. Except as otherwise provided
in division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section, failure to stop after a nonpublic
road accident is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months
of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this
division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. §
2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.021) (Prior Code, § 436.12)
§ 73.32 ACCIDENT INVOLVING DAMAGE TO REALTY.
   (A)   (1)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
damage to real property, or personal property attached to real property,
legally upon or adjacent to a public road or highway immediately shall stop and
take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of the
property of that fact, of the driver’s name and address, and of the
registration number of vehicle the driver is driving and, upon request and if
available, shall exhibit the driver’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (2)   If the owner or person in charge of the property cannot be located
after reasonable search, the driver of the vehicle involved in the accident
resulting in damage to the property, within 24 hours after accident, shall
forward to the police department of the municipality the same information
required to be given to the owner or person in control of the property and give
the location of the accident and a description of the damage insofar as it is
known.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident involving the property of others, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.03) (Prior Code, § 436.13)
§ 73.33 FAILURE TO REPORT ACCIDENT.
   (A)   No person shall fail to report a motor vehicle accident as required
under state or local law.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4509.74)
CHAPTER 74: EQUIPMENT AND LOADS
Section
Equipment
   
74.01   Unsafe vehicles, prohibition against operation
   
74.02   Bumpers on motor vehicles
   
74.03   Lighted lights required
   
74.04   Headlights
   
74.05   Tail lights and illumination of rear license plate
   
74.06   Red reflectors required
   
74.07   Safety lighting of commercial vehicles
   
74.08   Stoplight regulations
   
74.09   Obscured lights on vehicles
   
74.10   Red light or flag required
   
74.11   Lights on parked vehicles
   
74.12   Lights, emblems, and reflectors on slow-moving vehicles, farm
machinery, agricultural tractors, and animal-drawn vehicles
   
74.13   Spotlight and auxiliary driving lights
   
74.14   Cowl, fender, and back-up lights
   
74.15   Two lights displayed
   
74.16   Headlights required
   
74.17   Lights of less intensity
   
74.18   Number of lights permitted; red and flashing lights
   
74.19   Standards for lights on snow removal equipment and oversize vehicles
   
74.20   Flashing lights permitted for certain types of vehicles
   
74.21   Lights and sign on transportation for preschool children
   
74.22   Focus and aim of headlights
   
74.23   Brake equipment; specifications
   
74.24   Brake fluid
   
74.25   Minimum standards for brakes and components
   
74.26   Horns, sirens, and warning devices
   
74.27   Mufflers; excessive smoke or gas
   
74.28   Rearview mirrors
   
74.29   Windshields and wipers
   
74.30   Solid tire requirements
   
74.31   Requirements for safety glass in motor vehicles; use of tinted glass or
reflectorized material
   
74.32   Directional signals
   
74.33   Installation and sale of seat safety belts required; definition
   
74.34   Requirements for extra signal equipment
   
74.35   Display of warning devices on disabled vehicles
   
74.36   Requirements for vehicles transporting explosives
   
74.37   Studded tires; seasonal use permitted
   
74.38   Safety inspection decals for buses
   
74.39   Air bags
   
74.40   Air cleaner required
Loads
   
74.50   Permit required to exceed load limits
   
74.51   Limitation of load extension on left side of vehicle
   
74.52   All loads shall be properly secured
   
74.53   Towing requirements; exception to size and weight restrictions
   
74.54   Weighing of vehicle; removal of excess load
   
74.55   Operation of vehicle exceeding weight limits prohibited
   
74.56   Load limits
   
74.57   Maximum width, height, and length
   
74.58   Statement of gross vehicle weight
   
74.59   Wheel protectors required on heavy commercial vehicles
   
74.60   Liability for damages; prosecution; application of monies
   
74.61   Weight exceptions for certain vehicles
   
74.62   Route and load information
   
74.63   Shifting load; loose loads
Statutory reference:
   Exemption of certain vehicles from emission, noise control and fuel
standards, see R.C. § 4513.41
   Exemption of collector’s or historical vehicles from equipment standards,
see R.C. § 4513.38
   Motorcycles, protective eye devices required for operators and passengers;
helmets required for persons under 18 years of age, see O.A.C. § 4501-17-01
   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
   Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles, equipment,
see O.A.C. § 4501-29-01
   Vehicle lighting, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-15
EQUIPMENT
§ 74.01 UNSAFE VEHICLES, PROHIBITION AGAINST OPERATION.
   (A)   No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to be
driven or moved, on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is
in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.02(A), (H)) (Prior Code, § 438.01)
§ 74.02 BUMPERS ON MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING. Means the manufacturer’s gross vehicle
weight rating established for that vehicle.
      MANUFACTURER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      MULTIPURPOSE PASSENGER VEHICLE. Means a motor vehicle with motive power,
except a motorcycle, designed to carry ten persons or less, that is constructed
either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional off-road
operation.
      PASSENGER CAR. Means any motor vehicle with motive power, designed for
carrying ten persons or less, except a multipurpose passenger vehicle or
motorcycle.
      TRUCK. Means every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers,
designed and used to carry property and having a gross vehicle weight rating of
10,000 pounds or less.
   (B)   Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, in accordance with
R.C. Chapter 119, shall govern the maximum bumper height or, in the absence of
bumpers and in cases where bumper height have been lowered or modified, the
maximum height to the bottom of the frame rail of any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck.
   (C)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state that does not
conform to the requirements of this section or any applicable rule adopted
pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021.
   (D)   No person shall modify any motor vehicle registered in this state in
such a manner as to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in contact with
the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage from collision, or cause the wheels
to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and no person shall
disconnect any part of the original suspension system of the vehicle to defeat
the safe operation of that system.
   (E)   Nothing contained in this section or in the rules adopted pursuant to
R.C. § 4513.021 shall be construed to prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   The installation upon a passenger car, multipurpose passenger
vehicle or truck registered in this state of heavy duty equipment, including
shock absorbers and overload springs:
      (2)   The operation on a street or highway of a passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle, or truck registered in this state with normal
wear to the suspension system if the normal wear does not adversely affect the
control of the vehicle.
   (F)   This section and the rules adopted pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021 do not
apply to any specially designed or modified passenger car, multipurpose
passenger vehicle, or truck when operated off a street or highway in races and
similar events.
   (G)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.021) (Prior Code, § 438.26)
Statutory reference:
   Maximum height on bumpers, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-43
§ 74.03 LIGHTED LIGHTS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a street
or highway within this state shall display lighted lights and illuminating
devices as required by R.C. §§ 4513.04 to 4513.37 during all of the following
times:
      (1)   The time from sunset to sunrise;
      (2)   At any other time when, due to insufficient natural light or
unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons, vehicles, and substantial objects
on the highway are not discernible at a distance of 1,000 feet ahead;
      (3)   At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle are in use
because of precipitation on the windshield.
   (B)   Every motorized bicycle shall display at such times lighted lights
meeting the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4511.521. No motor vehicle, during any time specified in this section, shall be
operated upon a street or highway within this state using only parking lights
as illumination.
   (C)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the distance
from which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible, or within
which such lamps or devices shall be visible, such distance shall be measured
upon a straight level unlighted highway under normal atmospheric conditions
unless a different condition is expressly stated.
   (D)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the mounted
height of lights or devices, it shall mean from the center of such light or
device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a vehicle being operated upon a
street or highway within this state to stop the vehicle solely because the
officer observes that a violation of division (A)(3) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of that division, or causing the arrest of or
commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that division.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.03) (Prior Code, § 438.02)
§ 74.04 HEADLIGHTS.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall be equipped
with at least two headlights with at least one near each side of the front of
the motor vehicle.
      (2)   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more
than two headlights.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.04) (Prior Code, § 438.03)
§ 74.05 TAIL LIGHTS AND ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATE.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or
vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles shall be
equipped with at least one tail light mounted on the rear which, when lighted,
shall emit a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear,
provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the tail light on the
rearmost vehicle need be visible from the distance specified.
      (2)   Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so constructed and
placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate, when
such registration plate is required, and render it legible from a distance of
50 feet to the rear. Any tail light, together with any separate light for
illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted
whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving lights are lighted, except where
separate lighting systems are provided for trailers for the purpose of
illuminating such registration plate.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.05) (Prior Code, § 438.04)
§ 74.06 RED REFLECTORS REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   Every new motor vehicle sold after September 6, 1941, and
operated on a highway, other than a commercial tractor to which a trailer or
semitrailer is attached, shall carry at the rear, either as a part of the tail
lamps or separately, two red reflectors meeting the requirements of this
section, except that vehicles of the type mentioned in R.C. § 4513.07 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be equipped with reflectors
as required by the regulations provided for in that section.
      (2)   Every such reflector shall be of such size and characteristics and
so maintained as to be visible at night from all distances within 300 feet to
50 feet from such vehicle.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.06) (Prior Code, § 438.05)
§ 74.07 SAFETY LIGHTING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   When the Director of Public Safety prescribes and promulgates
regulations relating to clearance lights, marker lights, reflectors and stop
lights on buses, trucks, commercial tractors, trailers, semitrailers and pole
trailers, when operated upon any highway, these vehicles shall be equipped as
required by such regulations, and such equipment shall be lighted at all times
mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
except that clearance lights and side marker lights need not be lighted on any
such vehicle when it is operated within the municipality where there is
sufficient light to reveal any person or substantial object on the highway at a
distance of 500 feet.
      (2)   Such equipment shall be in addition to all other lights
specifically required by R.C. §§ 4513.03 through 4513.16, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinances.
      (3)   Vehicles operated under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission are not subject to this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.07) (Prior Code, § 438.06)
§ 74.08 STOPLIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and pole trailer when
operated upon a highway shall be equipped with two or more stop lights, except
that passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January 1, 1967,
motorcycles, and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least one stop
light. Stop lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle, actuated upon
application of the service brake, and may be incorporated with other rear
lights. Such stop lights when actuated shall emit a red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear; provided that in the case of a train of
vehicles only the stop lights on the rearmost vehicle need be visible from the
distance specified.
      (2)    Such stop lights when actuated shall give a steady warning light
to the rear of a vehicle or train of vehicles to indicate the intention of the
operator to diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train of vehicles.
      (3)   When stop lights are used as required by this section, they shall
be constructed or installed so as to provide adequate and reliable illumination
and shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations established under
R.C. § 4513.19.
      (4)   A historical motor vehicle that was not originally manufactured
with stop lights or a replica motor vehicle that replicates a motor vehicle
that was not originally manufactured with stop lights is not subject to this
section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
   (C)   As used in this section, REPLICA MOTOR VEHICLE means a replica motor
vehicle for which a certificate of title is issued under R.C. § 4505.072.
(R.C. § 4513.071) (Prior Code, § 438.25)
§ 74.09 OBSCURED LIGHTS ON VEHICLES.
   Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during the
time that lights are required, any light, except tail lights, which by reason
of its location on a vehicle of the combination would be obscured by another
vehicle of the combination, need not be lighted, but this section does not
affect the requirement that lighted clearance lights be displayed on the front
of the foremost vehicle required to have clearance lights or that all lights
required on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any combination shall be
lighted.
(R.C. § 4513.08) (Prior Code, § 438.07)
§ 74.10 RED LIGHT OR FLAG REQUIRED.
   (A)   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or
more beyond the bed or body of this vehicle, there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a red light or lantern plainly
visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and rear. The red
light or lantern required by this section is in addition to the red rear light
required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less than 16 inches
square.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.09) (Prior Code, § 438.08)
§ 74.11 LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Except in case of an emergency, whenever a vehicle is parked or
stopped upon a roadway open to traffic or a shoulder adjacent thereto, whether
attended or unattended, during the times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, such vehicle shall be equipped
with one or more lights which shall exhibit a white or amber light on the
roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle,
and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. No lights need
be displayed upon any such vehicle when it is stopped or parked within the
municipality where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or
substantial object within a distance of 500 feet upon such highway. Any lighted
headlights upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
(R.C. § 4513.10)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99) (Prior Code, § 438.09)
§ 74.12 LIGHTS, EMBLEMS, AND REFLECTORS ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES, FARM
MACHINERY, AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS, AND ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      BOAT TRAILER. Means any vehicle designed and used exclusively to
transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a
marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more
than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
      SLOW-MOVING VEHICLE and SMV. Mean a boat trailer, unit of farm machinery,
road construction machinery, or other machinery designed by the manufacturer to
operate at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less. The term does not include a
bicycle, motorized bicycle, electric bicycle, or animal-drawn vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.11)
   (B)   Generally.
      (1)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall operate
either of the following vehicles unless it is equipped with and displays the
lamps described in division (B)(2) of this section:
         (a)   A vehicle not specifically required to be equipped with lamps or
other lighting devices by R.C. §§ 4513.03 to 4513.10;
         (b)   A vehicle referred to in R.C. § 4513.02(G).
      (2)   Vehicles described in division (B)(1) of this section shall be
equipped with both of the following:
         (a)   At least one lamp displaying a white light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the vehicle;
         (b)   Two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the vehicle, or as an alternative, one lamp
displaying a red light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to
the rear and two red reflectors visible from all distances of 600 feet to 100
feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlamps.
      (3)   (a)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall
operate a multi-wheel agricultural tractor model year 2001 or earlier on a
street or highway unless it is equipped with and displays reflectors and
illuminated amber lamps so that the extreme left and right projections of the
tractor are indicated by all of the following:
            1.   Flashing lamps displaying amber light, visible to the front
and the rear. The lamps need not flash simultaneously and need not flash in
conjunction with any directional signals of the tractor.
            2.   Amber reflectors, all visible to the front;
            3.   Red reflectors, all visible to the rear.
         (b)   Rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4513.111 governing the lamps and reflectors described in division (B)(3)(a) of
this section and their placement correlate with and, as far as possible,
conform with paragraphs 4.1.4.1, 4.1.7.1, and 4.1.7.2 respectively of the
American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S279.10 OCT 98,
Lighting and Marking of Agricultural Equipment on Highways.
      (4)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall operate a
unit of farm machinery model year 2002 or later on a street or highway unless
it is equipped with and displays markings and illuminated lamps that meet or
exceed the lighting, illumination, and marking standards and specifications
that are applicable to that type of farm machinery for the unit's model year
specified in the American society of agricultural engineers standard ANSI/ASAE
S279.10 OCT 98, lighting and marking of agricultural equipment on highways.
      (5)   Any unit of farm machinery designed by its manufacturer to operate
at a speed of 25 miles per hour or greater or any SMV may be equipped with and
display a red flashing light that is visible from a distance of not less than
1,000 feet to the rear at all times specified in R.C. § 4513.03. When a double-
faced light is used, it shall display amber light to the front and red light to
the rear.
      (6)   Lights and reflectors required under divisions (B)(3) and (B)(4) of
this section and authorized under division (B)(5) of this section are in
addition to other lights required or permitted by this division (B) or R.C. §
4513.17.
      (7)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt rules in accordance
R.C. Chapter 119 Code that establish standards and specifications for lamps and
reflectors required or authorized by this section. Lamps and reflectors
required or authorized by this section shall meet those standards and
specifications.
      (8)   This division (B) does not apply to a bicycle, motorized bicycle,
electric bicycle, or animal-drawn vehicle.
      (9)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.111)
   (C)   Slow-moving vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall
operate an SMV on a street or highway as follows:
         (a)   At a speed exceeding 25 miles per hour;
         (b)   Without displaying the triangular SMV emblem mounted in
accordance with division (C)(2) of this section.
      (2)   The SMV emblem shall be mounted so as to be visible from a distance
of not less than 500 feet to the rear. In accordance with R.C. Chapter 119, the
Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt standards and specifications for the
design and position of mounting the SMV emblem. The standards and
specifications for the SMV emblem correlate with and, so far as possible,
conform with those approved by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers.
      (3)   A person may operate an SMV on a street or highway without
displaying the triangular SMV emblem when any of the following apply:
         (a)   The SMV is being used in actual construction and maintenance
work in an area guarded by a flagperson, or where flares are used.
         (b)   The SMV is operating or traveling within the limits of a
construction area designated by the Ohio Director of Transportation, a city
engineer, or the county engineer of the several counties, when such
construction area is marked in accordance with requirements of the Ohio
Director of Transportation and the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
as set forth in R.C. § 4511.09.
      (4)   No person shall display an SMV emblem on any of the following:
         (a)   Any vehicle not required to use the SMV emblem by this division
(C) or R.C. § 4513.113 or 4513.114;
         (b)   An SMV being transported upon any other vehicle;
         (c)   Any stationary object on the highway.
      (5)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate an SMV, except a unit
designed to be completely mounted on a primary power unit that is manufactured
or assembled on or after April 1, 1966, unless it is equipped with an SMV
emblem mounting device.
      (6)   Whoever violates this division (C) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.112)
   (D)   Farm machinery and agricultural tractors.
      (1)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate on a street or
highway any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the unit displays both
of the following:
         (a)   The SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. § 4513.112(B);
         (b)   A speed identification symbol that does both of the following:
            1.   Meets the specifications contained in the American Society of
Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment:
Speed Identification Symbol (SIS);
            2.   Indicates the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the
unit of farm machinery is designed by its manufacturer to operate.
      (2)   No person operating a tractor on a street or highway that is
designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per
hour and that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery
while operating at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour shall fail to display
both of the following on the unit of farm machinery:
         (a)   The SMV emblem;
         (b)   The speed identification symbol that matches the speed
identification symbol required to be displayed on the agricultural tractor.
      (3)   No person shall operate an agricultural tractor that is designed by
its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless
the person possesses documentation published or provided by the manufacturer
indicating the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the manufacturer
designed the agricultural tractor to operate.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (D) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.113)
   (E)   Animal-drawn vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (E)(4) of this section, no
person shall operate an animal- drawn vehicle on a street or highway unless it
is equipped with and displays, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, both
of the following:
         (a)   At least one lamp displaying a white light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the animal-drawn vehicle;
         (b)   Two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the animal-drawn vehicle, or as an
alternative, one lamp displaying a red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear and two red reflectors visible from all
distances of 600 feet to one hundred feet to the rear when illuminated by the
lawful lower beams of headlamps.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (E)(4) of this section, no
person shall operate an animal- drawn vehicle on a street or highway unless it
is equipped with and displays, at all times, all of the following:
         (a)   One yellow flashing lamp displaying yellow light that is visible
from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet and that is mounted in either of
the following positions:
            1.   On the top most portion of the rear of the animal-drawn
vehicle;
            2.   On the top of the animal-drawn vehicle.
         (b)   At least one of the following:
            1.   An SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. § 4513.112(B);
            2.   Micro-prism reflective tape that is visible from a distance of
not less than 500 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams
of headlamps;
            3.   Both an SMV emblem and micro-prism reflective tape, as
specified in this division.
         (c)   Lamps and micro-prism reflective tape required by this section
shall meet standards and specifications adopted by the Ohio Director of Public
Safety under R.C. § 4513.114.
      (3)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety, in accordance with R.C. Chapter
119, shall adopt rules establishing standards and specifications for the
position and mounting of the lamps and micro-prism reflective tape required by
R.C. § 4513.114. The rules permit the micro-prism reflective tape to be red,
amber, white, or silver in color.
      (4)   (a)   Divisions (E)(1) and (E)(2) of this section do not apply to
the operator of animal-drawn agricultural equipment who is not transporting any
livestock or a person other than the operator.
         (b)   No operator described in division (E)(4)(a) of this section
shall operate animal-drawn agricultural equipment unless it is equipped with
and displays, at all times, the SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. §
4513.112(B).
         (c)   As used in division (E)(4) of this section, “animal-drawn
agricultural equipment” means equipment drawn by the muscular power of an
animal that is used solely for agricultural purposes. “Animal- drawn
agricultural equipment” includes any of the following:
            1.   A plow;
            2.   A manure spreader;
            3.   A thresher.
      (5)   Whoever violates this division (E) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.114)
   (F)   Strict liability offenses. The offenses established under this section
are strict liability offenses, and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The
designation of these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be
construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no specified
degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4513.115)
(Prior Code, § 438.10)
§ 74.13 SPOTLIGHT AND AUXILIARY DRIVING LIGHTS.
   (A)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one
spotlight and every lighted spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon
approaching another vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the
beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side
of the vehicle, nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than three
auxiliary driving lights mounted on the front of the vehicle. Any such lights
which do not conform to the specifications for auxiliary driving lights and the
regulations for their use prescribed by the Director of Public Safety shall not
be used.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.12) (Prior Code, § 438.11)
§ 74.14 COWL, FENDER, AND BACK-UP LIGHTS.
   (A)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or fender
lights which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with lights on each side thereof
which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (3)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights, either
separately or in combination with another light. No back-up lights shall be
continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.13) (Prior Code, § 438.12)
§ 74.15 TWO LIGHTS DISPLAYED.
   (A)   At all times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, at least two lighted lights shall be displayed, one near
each side of the front of every motor vehicle, except when such vehicle is
parked subject to the regulations governing lights on parked vehicles.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.14) (Prior Code, § 438.13)
§ 74.16 HEADLIGHTS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto during the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the driver shall use a
distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of
sufficient intensity to reveal persons, vehicles and substantial objects at a
safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle,
such driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that
the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver.
      (2)   Every new motor vehicle registered in this state which has
multiple-beam road lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam indicator,
which shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of light from the
headlights is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. This indicator shall
be so designed and located that, when lighted, it will be readily visible
without glare to the driver of the vehicle.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.15) (Prior Code, § 438.14)
§ 74.17 LIGHTS OF LESS INTENSITY.
   (A)   Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions specified in
R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance when it is
equipped with two lighted lights upon the front thereof capable of revealing
persons and substantial objects 75 feet ahead, in lieu of lights required in
R.C. § 4513.14 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, provided that
such vehicle shall not be operated at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.16) (Prior Code, § 438.15)
§ 74.18 NUMBER OF LIGHTS PERMITTED; RED AND FLASHING LIGHTS.
   (A)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights is also equipped
with any auxiliary lights or spotlight or any other light on the front thereof
projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower, not more than a
total of five of any such lights on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at
any one time when the vehicle is upon a highway.
   (B)   Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other
than headlights, spotlights, signal lights, or auxiliary driving lights, that
projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower shall be
so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of the roadway on
which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than 75 feet from the vehicle.
   (C)   (1)   Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles, except as a
means for indicating a right or a left turn, or in the presence of a vehicular
traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, or overtaking or passing.
      (2)   The prohibition in division (C)(1) of this section does not apply
to any of the following:
         (a)   Emergency vehicles, road service vehicles servicing or towing a
disabled vehicle, stationary waste collection vehicles actively collecting
garbage, refuse, trash, or recyclable materials on the roadside, rural mail
delivery vehicles, vehicles as provided in R.C. § 4513.182, highway maintenance
vehicles, and similar equipment operated by state or local authorities,
provided such vehicles are equipped with and display, when used on a street or
highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing,
oscillating, or rotating amber light;
         (b)   Vehicles or machinery permitted by R.C. § 4513.111 to have a
flashing red light;
         (c)   Farm machinery and vehicles escorting farm machinery, provided
such machinery and vehicles are equipped with and display, when used on a
street or highway, a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber light. Farm
machinery also may display the lights described in R.C. § 4513.111.
         (d)   A funeral hearse or funeral escort vehicle, provided that the
funeral hearse or funeral escort vehicle is equipped with and displays, when
used on a street or highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights,
a flashing, oscillating, or rotating purple or amber light.
         (e)   A vehicle being used for emergency preparedness, response, and
recovery activities, as those terms are defined in R.C. § 5502.21, that is
equipped with and displays, when used on a street or highway for the special
purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber
or red and white light, provided that the vehicle is being operated by a person
from one of the following and the vehicle is clearly marked with the applicable
agency’s or authority’s insignia:
            1.   The Ohio Emergency Management Agency;
            2.   A countywide emergency management agency established under
R.C. § 5502.26;
            3.   A regional authority for emergency management established
under R.C. § 5502.27;
            4.   A program for emergency management established under R.C. §
5502.271.
      (3)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to animal-drawn
vehicles subject to R.C. § 4513.114.
   (D)   (1)   Except a person operating a public safety vehicle, as defined in
R.C. § 4511.01(E), an emergency management agency vehicle, as described in
division (C)(2)(e) of this section, or a school bus, no person shall operate,
move, or park upon, or permit to stand within the right-of-way of any public
street or highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with and displaying
a flashing red or a flashing combination red and white light, or an oscillating
or rotating red light, or a combination red and white oscillating or rotating
light.
      (2)   Except a public law enforcement officer, or other person sworn to
enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state, operating a public safety
vehicle when on duty, no person shall operate, move, or park upon, or permit to
stand within the right-of-way of any street or highway any vehicle or equipment
that is equipped with, or upon which is mounted, and displaying a flashing blue
or a flashing combination blue and white light, or an oscillating or rotating
blue light, or a combination blue and white oscillating or rotating light.
   (E)   This section does not prohibit the use of warning lights required by
law or the simultaneous flashing of turn signals on disabled vehicles or on
vehicles being operated in unfavorable atmospheric conditions in order to
enhance their visibility. This section also does not prohibit the simultaneous
flashing of turn signals or warning lights whether on farm machinery or
vehicles escorting farm machinery when used on a street or highway.
(R.C. § 4513.17)
   (F)   (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a motor vehicle
operated by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator may be equipped
with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and siren, whistle
or bell capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a
distance of not less than 500 feet. Such a vehicle may display the flashing,
oscillating or rotating red or blue light and may give the audible signal of
the siren, whistle or bell only when responding to a fatality or a fatal motor
vehicle accident on a street or highway and only at those locations where the
stoppage of traffic impedes the ability of the coroner, deputy coroner or
coroner’s investigator to arrive at the site of the fatality.
      (2)   This division (F) does not relieve the coroner, deputy coroner or
coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with
due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4513.171)
   (G)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. §§ 4513.17(F), 4513.171(B))
(Prior Code, §§ 438.16, 438.165)
§ 74.19 STANDARDS FOR LIGHTS ON SNOW REMOVAL EQUIPMENT AND OVERSIZE VEHICLES.
   (A)   It is unlawful to operate snow removal equipment on a highway unless
the lights thereon comply with and are lighted when and as required by the
standards and specifications adopted by the Director of Transportation pursuant
to R.C. § 4513.18.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.18)
§ 74.20 FLASHING LIGHTS PERMITTED FOR CERTAIN TYPES OF VEHICLES.
   Rural mail delivery vehicles, state highway survey vehicles, and funeral
escort vehicles are permitted to use flashing lights.
(R.C. § 4513.181)
§ 74.21 LIGHTS AND SIGN ON TRANSPORTATION FOR PRESCHOOL CHILDREN.
   (A)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle owned, leased, or hired by a
nursery school, kindergarten, or day-care center, while transporting preschool
children to or from such an institution unless the motor vehicle is equipped
with and displaying two amber flashing lights mounted on a bar attached to the
top of the vehicle, and a sign bearing the designation “caution – children”,
which shall be attached to the bar carrying the amber flashing lights in such a
manner as to be legible to persons both in front of and behind the vehicle. The
lights and sign shall meet standards and specifications adopted by the Director
of Public Safety.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle displaying the lights and sign
required by this section for any purpose other than the transportation of
preschool children as provided in this section.
(R.C. § 4513.182)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
(Prior Code, § 438.17)
§ 74.22 FOCUS AND AIM OF HEADLIGHTS.
   (A)   No person shall use any lights mentioned in R.C. §§ 4513.03 through
4513.18, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, upon any motor
vehicle, trailer or semitrailer unless these lights are equipped, mounted and
adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance with regulations which are
prescribed by the Director of Public Safety.
   (B)   The headlights on any motor vehicle shall comply with the headlamp
color requirements contained in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number
108, 49 C.F.R. § 571.108. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in violation
of this division.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.19) (Prior Code, § 438.18)
§ 74.23 BRAKE EQUIPMENT; SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The following requirements govern as to brake equipment on vehicles:
      (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated upon a
highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and
to stop and hold the motor vehicle, including two separate means of applying
the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at
least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are
connected in any way, then on such motor vehicles, manufactured or assembled
after January 1, 1942, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one
part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without
brakes on at least two wheels.
      (2)   Every motorcycle, when operated upon a highway shall be equipped
with at least one adequate brake, which may be operated by hand or by foot.
      (3)   Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes meeting the
rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety under R.C. § 4511.521.
      (4)   When operated upon the highways, the following vehicles shall be
equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to
hold the vehicle, designed to be applied by the driver of the towing motor
vehicle from its cab, and also designed and connected so that, in case of a
breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically applied:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every trailer or
semitrailer, except a pole trailer, with an empty weight of 2,000 pounds or
more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1942;
         (b)   Every manufactured home or travel trailer with an empty weight
of 2,000 pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2001.
      (5)   Every watercraft trailer with a gross weight or manufacturer’s
gross vehicle weight rating of 3,000 pounds or more that is manufactured or
assembled on or after January 1, 2008, shall have separate brakes equipped with
hydraulic surge or electrically operated brakes on two wheels.
      (6)   In any combination of motor-drawn trailers or semitrailers equipped
with brakes, means shall be provided for applying the rearmost brakes in
approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle, and developing
the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest rate; or
means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the rearmost
brakes; or both of the above means, capable of being used alternatively, may be
employed.
      (7)   Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles and
motorized bicycles, and except trailers and semitrailers of a gross weight of
less than 2,000 pounds, and pole trailers, shall be equipped with parking
brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under
all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice, or loose material.
The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in conformance with the
foregoing requirements by the driver’s muscular effort or by spring action or
by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the service brakes or
other source of power provided that failure of the service brake actuation
system or other power assisting mechanism will not prevent the parking brakes
from being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements. The parking
brakes shall be so designed that when once applied they shall remain applied
with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of any source of energy or
leakage of any kind.
      (8)   The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies, brake shoe
anchors, and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally associated with
the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service brakes and the
parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes and the service
brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of
any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative brakes.
      (9)   Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall,
at all times and under all conditions of loading, be capable of being stopped
on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon application of the
service or foot brake, within the following specified distances, or shall be
capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate corresponding to these
distances:
         (a)   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles having brakes on all wheels
shall come to a stop in 30 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per hour.
         (b)   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles not having brakes on all
wheels shall come to a stop in 40 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per
hour.
      (10)   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be
so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels
on opposite sides of the vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.20)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
(Prior Code, § 438.19)
§ 74.24 BRAKE FLUID.
   (A)   No hydraulic brake fluid for use in motor vehicles shall be sold in
this municipality if the brake fluid is below the minimum standard of
specifications for heavy duty type brake fluid established by the society of
automotive engineers and the standard of specifications established by 49
C.F.R. § 571.116, as amended.
   (B)   All manufacturers, packers, or distributors of brake fluid selling
such fluid in this municipality shall state on the containers that the brake
fluid meets or exceeds the applicable minimum SAE standard of specifications,
and the standard of specifications established in 49 C.F.R. § 571.116, as
amended.
(R.C. § 4513.201)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.25 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BRAKES AND COMPONENTS.
   (A)   No brake lining, brake lining material, or brake lining assemblies for
use as repair and replacement parts in motor vehicles shall be sold in this
municipality if these items do not meet or exceed the minimum standard of
specifications established by the Society of Automotive Engineers and the
standard of specifications established in 49 C.F.R. § 571.105, as amended, and
49 C.F.R. § 571.135, as amended.
   (B)   All manufacturers or distributors of brake lining, brake lining
material, or brake lining assemblies selling these items for use as repair and
replacement parts in motor vehicles shall state that the items meet or exceed
the applicable minimum standard of specifications.
   (C)   As used in this section, MINIMUM STANDARD OF SPECIFICATIONS means a
minimum standard for brake system or brake component performance that meets the
need for motor vehicle safety and complies with the applicable SAE standards
and recommended practices, and the federal motor vehicle safety standards that
cover the same aspect of performance for any brake lining, brake lining
material, or brake lining assemblies.
(R.C. § 4513.202)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.26 HORNS, SIRENS, AND WARNING DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway shall be
equipped with a horn which is in good working order and capable of emitting
sound audible, under normal conditions, from a distance of not less than 200
feet.
      (2)   No motor vehicle shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use
upon a vehicle, any siren, whistle, or bell. Any vehicle may be equipped with a
theft alarm signal device which shall be so arranged that it cannot be used as
an ordinary warning signal. Every emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a
siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal
conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a type approved by
the Director of Public Safety. Such equipment shall not be used except when
such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or is in the
immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which case
the driver of the emergency vehicle shall sound such equipment when it is
necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.21) (Prior Code, § 438.20)
§ 74.27 MUFFLERS; EXCESSIVE SMOKE OR GAS.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle with an internal combustion
engine shall at all times be equipped with a muffler which is in good working
order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, and no
person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor
vehicle on a highway. Every motorcycle muffler shall be equipped with baffle
plates.
      (2)   No person shall own, operate or have in the person’s possession any
motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with a device for producing excessive
smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit oil or any other chemical to flow
into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of such vehicle, or equipped in any
way to produce or emit smoke or dangerous or annoying gases from any portion of
such vehicle, other than the ordinary gases emitted by the exhaust of an
internal combustion engine under normal operation.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.22) (Prior Code, § 438.21)
§ 74.28 REARVIEW MIRRORS.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall be equipped with a mirror so
located as to reflect to the operator a view of the highway to the rear of such
vehicle or motorcycle. Operators of vehicles and motorcycles shall have a clear
and unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of their vehicles and
motorcycles and shall have a clear view to the rear of their vehicles and
motorcycles by mirror.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.23) (Prior Code, § 438.22)
§ 74.29 WINDSHIELDS AND WIPERS.
   (A)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle on a street or highway in this
municipality, other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, that is not
equipped with a windshield.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a bus, with
any sign, poster, or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield,
sidewings, side, or rear windows of such vehicle other than a certificate or
other paper required to be displayed by law, except that there may be in the
lower left-hand or right-hand corner of the windshield a sign, poster, or decal
not to exceed four inches in height by six inches in width. No sign, poster, or
decal shall be displayed in the front windshield in such a manner as to conceal
the vehicle identification number for the motor vehicle when, in accordance
with federal law, that number is located inside the vehicle passenger
compartment and so placed as to be readable through the vehicle glazing without
moving any part of the vehicle.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a passenger car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if either of
the following apply to the device:
         (a)   It is a “vehicle safety technology” as defined in 49 C.F.R. §
393.5 and complies with 49 C.F.R. § 393.60(e)(1)(ii).
         (b)   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals, and it does not conceal the vehicle
identification number.
      (3)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a commercial car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if either of
the following apply to the device:
         (a)   It is a “vehicle safety technology” as defined in 49 C.F.R. §
393.5 and complies with 49 C.F.R. § 393.60(e)(1)(ii).
         (b)   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals, and it is mounted not more than 8.5 inches
below the upper edge of the windshield.
   (C)   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device
for cleaning rain, snow, or other moisture from the windshield. The device
shall be maintained in good working order and so constructed as to be
controlled or operated by the operator of the vehicle.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.24) (Prior Code, § 438.23)
§ 74.30 SOLID TIRE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every solid tire, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, on a vehicle shall
have rubber or other resilient material on its entire traction surface at least
one inch thick above the edge of the flange of the entire periphery.
(R.C. § 4513.25)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.31 REQUIREMENTS FOR SAFETY GLASS IN MOTOR VEHICLES; USE OF TINTED GLASS OR
REFLECTORIZED MATERIAL.
   (A)   Safety glass.
      (1)   No person shall sell any new motor vehicle nor shall any new motor
vehicle be registered, and no person shall operate any motor vehicle, which is
registered in this state and which has been manufactured or assembled on or
after January 1, 1936, unless the motor vehicle is equipped with safety glass,
wherever glass is used in the windshields, doors, partitions, rear windows, and
windows on each side immediately adjacent to the rear window.
      (2)   As used in this section, SAFETY GLASS means any product composed of
glass so manufactured, fabricated, or treated as substantially to prevent
shattering and flying of the glass when it is struck or broken, or such other
or similar product as may be approved by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
      (3)   Glass other than safety glass shall not be offered for sale, or
sold for use in, or installed in any door, window, partition, or windshield
that is required by this section to be equipped with safety glass.
(R.C. § 4513.26)
   (B)   Tinted or reflectorized material.
      (1)   No person shall operate, on any highway or other public or private
property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking, lease, or rent any
motor vehicle that is registered in this state unless the motor vehicle
conforms to the requirements concerning tinted glass and reflectorized material
of R.C. § 4513.241 and of any applicable rule adopted under that section.
      (2)   No person shall install in or on any motor vehicle, any glass or
other material that fails to conform to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or
of any rule adopted under that section.
      (3)   (a)   No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor vehicle dealer, as
defined in R.C. § 4517.01, shall sell any motor vehicle that fails to conform
to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that
section.
         (b)   No manufacturer, remanufacturer, or distributor, as defined in
R.C. § 4517.01, shall provide to a motor vehicle dealer licensed under R.C.
Chapter 4517 or to any other person, a motor vehicle that fails to conform to
the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that section.
      (4)   No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in any front
windshield, side windows, sidewings, or rear window.
      (5)   This division (B) does not apply to the manufacturer’s tinting or
glazing of motor vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise in compliance
with or permitted by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard #205.
      (6)   With regard to any side window behind a driver’s seat or any rear
window other than any window on an emergency door, this division (B) does not
apply to any school bus used to transport a child with disabilities pursuant to
R.C. Chapter 3323, whom it is impossible or impractical to transport by regular
school bus in the course of regular route transportation provided by a school
district. As used in this division, CHILD WITH DISABILITIES has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 3323.01.
      (7)   This division (B) does not apply to any school bus that is to be
sold and operated outside the municipality.
      (8)   (a)    This division (B) does not apply to a motor vehicle used by
a law enforcement agency when the motor vehicle is used by the law enforcement
agency for a purpose within the scope of the law enforcement agency’s duties.
         (b)   As used in this division, LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY means a police
department, the office of a sheriff, the State Highway Patrol, a county
prosecuting attorney, or a federal, state, or local governmental body that
enforces criminal laws and that has employees who have a statutory power of
arrest.
(R.C. § 4513.241(C) - (J))
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(1),(B)(3)(b) or (B)(4) of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (B)(3)(a) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor if the dealer or the dealer’s agent knew of the nonconformity
at the time of sale.
      (4)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, except that an organization may not be
convicted unless the act of installation was authorized by the board of
directors, trustees, partners, or by a high managerial officer acting on behalf
of the organization, and installation was performed by an employee of the
organization acting within the scope of the person’s employment.
         (b)   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section,
whoever violates division (B)(2) of this section is liable in a civil action to
the owner of a motor vehicle on which was installed the nonconforming glass or
material for any damages incurred by that person as a result of the
installation of the nonconforming glass or material, costs of maintaining the
civil action, and attorney fees.
         (c)   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section, if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of division (B)(2) of this section and the offender is a motor vehicle repair
operator registered under R.C. Chapter 4775 or a motor vehicle dealer licensed
under R.C. Chapter 4517, whoever violates division (B)(2) of this section is
subject to a registration or license suspension, as applicable, for a period of
not more than 180 days.
(R.C. § 4513.241(K))
(Prior Code, § 438.235)
Statutory reference:
   Recording and reporting violations, certain court requirements, see R.C. §
4513.241(L)
   Regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-41
§ 74.32 DIRECTIONAL SIGNALS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle manufactured or
assembled on or after January 1, 1954, unless the vehicle is equipped with
electrical or mechanical directional signals.
      (2)   No person shall operate any motorcycle or motor-driven cycle
manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1968, unless the vehicle is
equipped with electrical or mechanical directional signals.
   (B)   As used in this section, DIRECTIONAL SIGNALS means an electrical or
mechanical signal device capable of clearly indicating an intention to turn
either to the right or to the left and which shall be visible from both the
front and rear.
   (C)   All mechanical signal devices shall be self-illuminating devices when
in use at the times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.261)
§ 74.33 INSTALLATION AND SALE OF SEAT SAFETY BELTS REQUIRED; DEFINITION.
   (A)   As used in this section and in R.C. § 4513.263 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the component parts of a seat safety belt
include a belt, anchor attachment assembly, and a buckle or closing device.
   (B)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate any passenger car, as
defined in R.C. § 4501.01(E), that is registered or to be registered in this
state and that is manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1962, unless
the passenger car is equipped with sufficient anchorage units at the attachment
points for attaching at least two sets of seat safety belts to its front seat.
Such anchorage units at the attachment points shall be of such construction,
design, and strength to support a loop load pull of not less than 4,000 pounds
for each belt.
   (C)   No person shall sell, lease, or rent any passenger car, as defined in
R.C. § 4501.01(E), that is registered or to be registered in this state and
that is manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1966, unless the
passenger car has installed in its front seat at least two seat safety belt
assemblies.
   (D)   After January 1, 1966, neither any seat safety belt for use in a motor
vehicle nor any component part of any such seat safety belt shall be sold in
this municipality unless the seat safety belt or the component part satisfies
the minimum standard of specifications established by the society of automotive
engineers for automotive seat belts and unless the seat safety belt or
component part is labeled so as to indicate that it meets those minimum
standard specifications.
   (E)   Each sale, lease, or rental in violation of this section constitutes a
separate offense.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.262)
§ 74.34 REQUIREMENTS FOR EXTRA SIGNAL EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   No person shall operate any motor truck, bus, or commercial tractor
upon any highway at any time from sunset to sunrise unless there is carried in
such vehicle, except as provided in division (B) of this section, the following
equipment which shall be of the types approved by the Director of
Transportation.
      (1)   At least three flares or three red reflectors or three red electric
lanterns, each of which is capable of being seen and distinguished at a
distance of 500 feet under normal atmospheric conditions at nighttime;
      (2)   At least three red-burning fusees, unless red reflectors or red
electric lanterns are carried;
      (3)   At least two red cloth flags, not less than two inches square, with
standards to support them;
      (4)   The type of red reflectors shall comply with such standards and
specifications in effect on September 16, 1963, or later established by the
Interstate Commerce Commission and must be certified as meeting such standards
by Underwriters Laboratories.
   (B)   No person shall operate at the time and under the conditions stated in
this section any motor vehicle used in transporting flammable liquids in bulk,
or in transporting compressed flammable gases, unless there is carried in such
vehicle three red electric lanterns or three red reflectors meeting the
requirements stated in division (A) of this section. There shall not be carried
in any such vehicle any flare, fusee, or signal produced by a flame.
   (C)   This section does not apply to any person who operates any motor
vehicle in a work area designated by protection equipment devices that are
displayed and used in accordance with the manual adopted by the Department of
Transportation under R.C. § 4511.09.
(R.C. § 4513.27)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.35 DISPLAY OF WARNING DEVICES ON DISABLED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Whenever any motor truck, bus, commercial tractor, trailer,
semitrailer, or pole trailer is disabled upon any freeway, expressway, thruway
and connecting, entering, or exiting ramps within the municipality, at any time
when lighted lamps are required on vehicles, the operator of such vehicle shall
display the following warning devices upon the highway during the time the
vehicle is so disabled on the highway except as provided in division (B) of
this section:
      (1)   A lighted fusee shall be immediately placed on the roadway at the
traffic side of such vehicle, unless red electric lanterns or red reflectors
are displayed.
      (2)   Within the burning period of the fusee and as promptly as possible,
three lighted flares or pot torches, or three red reflectors or three red
electric lanterns shall be placed on the roadway as follows:
         (a)   One at a distance of 40 paces or approximately 100 feet in
advance of the vehicle;
         (b)   One at a distance of 40 paces or approximately 100 feet to the
rear of the vehicle, except as provided in this section, each in the center of
the lane of traffic occupied by the disabled vehicle;
         (c)   One at the traffic side of the vehicle.
   (B)   Whenever any vehicle used in transporting flammable liquids in bulk,
or in transporting compressed flammable gases, is disabled upon a highway at
any time or place mentioned in division (A) of this section, the driver of such
vehicle shall display upon the roadway the following warning devices:
      (1)   One red electric lantern or one red reflector shall be immediately
placed on the roadway at the traffic side of the vehicle;
      (2)   Two other red electric lanterns or two other red reflectors shall
be placed to the front and rear of the vehicle in the same manner prescribed
for flares in division (A) of this section.
   (C)   When a vehicle of a type specified in division (B) of this section is
disabled, the use of flares, fusees, or any signal produced by flame as warning
signals is prohibited.
   (D)   Whenever any vehicle of a type referred to in this section is disabled
upon any freeway, expressway, thruway, and connecting, entering, or exiting
ramps within the municipality, at any time when the display of fusees, flares,
red reflectors, or electric lanterns is not required, the operator of such
vehicle shall display two red flags upon the roadway in the lane of traffic
occupied by the disabled vehicle, one at a distance of 40 paces or
approximately 100 feet in advance of the vehicle, and one at a distance of 40
paces or approximately 100 feet to the rear of the vehicle, except as provided
in this section.
   (E)   The flares, fusees, lanterns, red reflectors, and flags to be
displayed as required in this section shall conform with the applicable
requirements of R.C. § 4513.27 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (F)   In the event the vehicle is disabled near a curve, crest of a hill, or
other obstruction of view, the flare, flag, reflector, or lantern in that
direction shall be placed as to afford ample warning to other users of the
highway, but in no case shall it be placed less than 40 paces or approximately
100 feet nor more than 120 paces or approximately 300 feet from the disabled
vehicle.
   (G)   This section does not apply to the operator of any vehicle in a work
area designated by protection equipment devices that are displayed and used in
accordance with the manual adopted by the Department of Transportation under
R.C. § 4511.09.
   (H)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.28)
§ 74.36 REQUIREMENTS FOR VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES.
   (A)   Any person operating any vehicle transporting explosives upon a
highway shall at all times comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   The vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and on the
rear with the word “EXPLOSIVES” in letters not less than eight inches high, or
there shall be displayed on the rear of such vehicle a red flag not less than
24 inches square marked with the word “DANGER” in white letters six inches
high, or shall be marked or placarded in accordance with Section 177.823 of the
United States Department of Transportation regulations.
      (2)   The vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two fire
extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use, and placed at convenient
points on such vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.29)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
(Prior Code, § 440.04)
§ 74.37 STUDDED TIRES; SEASONAL USE PERMITTED.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, STUDDED TIRE means any tire designed
for use on a vehicle and equipped with metal studs or studs of wear-resisting
material that project beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, no person
shall operate any motor vehicle other than a public safety vehicle or school
bus that is equipped with studded tires on any street or highway in this
municipality, except during the period extending from the first day of November
of each year through the fifteenth day of April of the succeeding year.
      (2)   A person may operate a motor vehicle that is equipped with
retractable studded tires with the studs retracted at any time of the year, but
shall operate the motor vehicle with the studs extended only as provided in
division (B)(1) of this section.
   (C)   This section does not apply to the use of tire chains when there is
snow or ice on the streets or highways where such chains are being used, or the
immediate vicinity thereof.
(R.C. § 5589.081)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
(Prior Code, § 440.07)
§ 74.38 SAFETY INSPECTION DECALS FOR BUSES.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      BUS.
         (a)   Means any vehicle used for the transportation of passengers that
meets at least one of the following:
            1.   Was originally designed by the manufacturer to transport more
than 15 passengers, including the driver;
            2.   Either the gross vehicle weight rating or the gross vehicle
weight exceeds 10,000 pounds.
         (b)   The term does not include a church bus as defined in R.C. §
4503.07 or a school bus unless the church bus or school bus is used in the
transportation of passengers by a motor carrier.
         (c)   The term also does not include any of the following:
            1.   Any vehicle operated exclusively on a rail or rails;
            2.   A trolley bus operated by electric power derived from a fixed
overhead wire furnishing local passenger transportation similar to street-
railway service;
            3.   Vehicles owned or leased by government agencies or political
subdivisions.
      MOTOR CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4923.01
(R.C. § 4513.50)
   (B)   Safety inspection decals.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, on and after
July 1, 2001, no person shall operate a bus, nor shall any person being the
owner of a bus or having supervisory responsibility for a bus, permit the
operation of any bus unless the bus displays a valid, current safety inspection
decal issued by the State Highway Patrol under R.C. § 4513.52.
      (2)   For the purpose of complying with the requirements of this section
and R.C. § 4513.52, the owner or other operator of a bus may drive the bus
directly to an inspection site conducted by the State Highway Patrol and
directly back to the person’s place of business without a valid registration
and without displaying a safety inspection decal, provided that no passengers
may occupy the bus during such operation.
(R.C. § 4513.51(A), (B))
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4513.51(D))
(Prior Code, § 440.04)
§ 74.39 AIR BAGS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      AIR BAG. Has the same meaning as in 49 C.F.R. § 579.4, as amended.
      COUNTERFEIT AIR BAG. An air bag displaying a mark identical or similar to
the genuine mark of a motor vehicle manufacturer, without the authorization of
the motor vehicle manufacturer.
      NONFUNCTIONAL AIR BAG. Any of the following:
         (a)   A replacement air bag that has been previously deployed or
damaged;
         (b)   A replacement air bag that has an electrical fault that is
detected by the air bag diagnostic system of a vehicle after the air bag is
installed;
         (c)   A counterfeit air bag, air bag cover, or some other object that
is installed in a vehicle to deceive an owner or operator of the vehicle into
believing that a functional air bag has been installed.
   (B)   No person shall install or reinstall in any motor vehicle a
counterfeit or nonfunctional air bag or any object intended to fulfill the
function of an air bag other than an air bag that was designed in conformance
with or that is regulated by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208
for the make, model, and model year of the vehicle, knowing that the object is
not in accordance with that standard.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly manufacture, import, sell, or offer for sale
any of the following:
      (1)   A counterfeit air bag;
      (2)   A nonfunctional air bag;
      (3)   Any other object that is intended to be installed in a motor
vehicle to fulfill the function of an air bag and that is not in conformance
with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208 for the make, model, and
model year of the vehicle in which the object is intended to be installed.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly sell, install, or reinstall a device in a
motor vehicle that causes the diagnostic system of a vehicle to inaccurately
indicate that the vehicle is equipped with a functional air bag.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) or (D) of this section is guilty
of improper replacement of a motor vehicle air bag, a misdemeanor of the first
degree on a first offense. On each subsequent offense, or if the violation
results in serious physical harm to an individual, the person is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Each manufacture, importation, installation, reinstallation, sale,
or offer for sale in violation of this section shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation.
(R.C. § 4549.20) (Prior Code, § 438.31)
§ 74.40 AIR CLEANER REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate upon any street, alley or other public place any
motor vehicle which is not equipped with a functioning air cleaner, except for
motor vehicles equipped with electronic fuel-injection engines.
(Prior Code, § 438.27)
LOADS
§ 74.50 PERMIT REQUIRED TO EXCEED LOAD LIMITS.
   (A)   (1)   The municipality, with respect to highways under their
jurisdiction, upon application in writing, shall issue a special regional heavy
hauling permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or
combination of vehicles as follows:
         (a)   At a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum
specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with
R.C. §§ 4513.01 to 4513.37.
         (b)   Upon any highway under the jurisdiction of municipality except
those highways with a condition insufficient to bear the weight of the vehicle
or combination of vehicles as stated in the application.
         (c)   Issuance of a special regional heavy hauling permit is subject
to the payment of a fee established by the municipality in accordance with this
section.
      (2)   In circumstances where a person is not eligible to receive a permit
under division (A)(1) of this section, the municipality, with respect to
highways under its jurisdiction, upon application in writing and for good cause
shown, may issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to
operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of
vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with R.C. §§ 4513.01 through 4513.37,
upon any highway under its jurisdiction.
   (B)   (1)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 715.22 and 723.01, the holder of a
permit issued by the Ohio Director of Transportation under R.C. § 4513.34 may
move the vehicle or combination of vehicles described in the permit on any
highway that is a part of the state highway system when the movement is partly
within and partly without the corporate limits of the municipality. No local
authority shall require any other permit or license or charge any license fee
or other charge against the holder of a permit for the movement of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles on any highway which is a part of the state highway
system. The Ohio Director of Transportation shall not require the holder of a
permit issued by the municipality to obtain a special permit for the movement
of vehicles or combination of vehicles on highways within the jurisdiction of
the municipality.
      (2)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4513.34(B)(3), permits may be issued
for any period of time not to exceed one year, as the local authority in its
discretion determines advisable or for the duration of any public construction
project.
   (C)   (1)   The application for a permit issued under this section shall be
in the form that the municipality prescribes. The municipality may prescribe a
permit fee to be imposed and collected when any permit described in this
section is issued. The permit fee may be in an amount sufficient to reimburse
the municipality for the administrative costs incurred in issuing the permit,
and also to cover the cost of normal and expected damage caused to the roadway
or a street or highway structure as the result of the operation of the
nonconforming vehicle or combination of vehicles.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the
Director under R.C. § 4513.34, milk transported in bulk by vehicle is deemed a
nondivisible load.
      (3)   For purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the Director
under R.C. § 4513.34, three or fewer aluminum coils, transported by a vehicle,
are deemed a nondivisible load. The Director shall adopt rules establishing
requirements for an aluminum coil permit that are substantially similar to the
requirements for a steel coil permit under O.A.C. Chapter 5501:2-1.
   (D)   The municipality shall issue a special regional heavy hauling permit
under division (A)(1) of this section upon application and payment of the
applicable fee. However, the municipality may issue or withhold a special
permit specified in division (A)(2) of this section. If a permit is to be
issued, the municipality may limit or prescribe conditions of operation for the
vehicle and may require the posting of a bond or other security conditioned
upon the sufficiency of the permit fee to compensate for damage caused to the
roadway or a street or highway structure. In addition, the municipality, as a
condition of issuance of an overweight permit, may require the applicant to
develop and enter into a mutual agreement with the municipality to compensate
for or to repair excess damage caused to the roadway by travel under the
permit.
   (E)   Every permit issued under this section shall be carried in the vehicle
or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection
by any police officer or authorized agent of any authority granting the permit.
No person shall violate any of the terms of a permit.
   (F)   The Director of Transportation may debar an applicant from applying
for a special permit under this section upon a finding based on a reasonable
belief that the applicant has done any of the actions specified in R.C. §
4513.34(F).
   (G)   Notice and procedures for debarment shall be as provided in R.C. §
4513.34(G).
   (H)   (1)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to gross load limits.
      (2)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to axle load by more than 2,000 pounds per axle or group of
axles.
      (3)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to an approved route except upon order of a law enforcement
officer or authorized agent of the issuing authority.
   (I)   A permit issued by the municipality under this section for the
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles is valid for the purposes of
the vehicle operation in accordance with the conditions and limitations
specified on the permit. Such a permit is voidable by law enforcement only for
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles in violation of the weight,
dimension, or route provisions of the permit. However, a permit is not voidable
for operation in violation of a route provision of a permit if the operation is
upon the order of a law enforcement officer.
(R.C. § 4513.34)
   (J)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
Statutory reference:
   Overweight or oversized vehicles, state permit regulations, see O.A.C.
Chapter 5501:2-1
§ 74.51 LIMITATION OF LOAD EXTENSION ON LEFT SIDE OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a highway with any load
carried on the vehicle which extends more than six inches beyond the line of
the fenders on the vehicle’s left side.
(R.C. § 4513.30)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
(Prior Code, § 438.24)
§ 74.52 ALL LOADS SHALL BE PROPERLY SECURED.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the vehicle
is so constructed, loaded, or covered as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand
or other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or
water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or
maintaining the roadway.
   (B)   Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the process of
acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans, bottles, waste
paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper, cartons, boxes,
glass, solid waste, or any other material of an unsanitary nature that is
susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a moving vehicle shall be driven or
moved on any highway unless the load is covered with a sufficient cover to
prevent the load or any part of the load from spilling onto the highway.
(R.C. § 4513.31)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
(Prior Code, § 440.06)
§ 74.53 TOWING REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTION TO SIZE AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   When one vehicle is towing another vehicle, the drawbar or other
connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed
thereby, and the drawbar or other connection shall not exceed 15 feet from one
vehicle to the other, except the connection between any two vehicles
transporting poles, pipe, machinery, or other objects of structural nature
which cannot readily be dismembered.
      (2)   When one vehicle is towing another and the connection consists only
of a chain, rope, or cable, there shall be displayed upon such connection a
white flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square.   
      (3)   In addition to such drawbar or other connection, each trailer and
each semitrailer which is not connected to a commercial tractor by means of a
fifth wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the vehicle by which
it is being drawn. These chains or cables shall be of sufficient size and
strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle in
case the drawbar or other connection should break or become disengaged. In case
of a loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to the drawing vehicle shall be
coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains or cables of sufficient size
and strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle.
      (4)   Every trailer or semitrailer, except pole and cable trailers and
pole and cable dollies operated by a public utility as defined in R.C. §
5727.01, shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be so designed
and constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the path of the
vehicle drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to side. Vehicles
used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials
between a local place of storage and supply and the farm, when drawn or towed
on a street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less, and vehicles
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less, shall have a drawbar or other connection, including the hitch
mounted on the towing vehicle, which shall be of sufficient strength to pull
all the weight towed thereby. Only one such vehicle used to transport
agricultural produce or agricultural production materials as provided in this
section may be towed or drawn at one time except as follows:
         (a)   An agricultural tractor may tow or draw more than one such
vehicle;
         (b)   A pickup truck or straight truck designed by the manufacturer to
carry a load of not less than one-half ton and not more than two tons may tow
or draw not more than two such vehicles that are being used to transport
agricultural produce from the farm to a local place of storage. No vehicle
being so towed by such a pickup truck or straight truck shall be considered to
be a motor vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.32)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
   (C)   Exception to size and weight restrictions.
      (1)   The size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter
5577 do not apply to a any of the following:
         (a)   A person who is engaged in the initial towing or removal of a
wrecked or disabled motor vehicle from the site of an emergency on a public
highway where the vehicle became wrecked or disabled to the nearest site where
the vehicle can be brought into conformance with the requirements of this
chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577, to the nearest storage facility, or to the
nearest qualified repair facility;
         (b)   A person who is en route to the site of an emergency on a public
highway to remove a wrecked or disabled motor vehicle;
         (c)   A person who is returning from delivering a wrecked or disabled
motor vehicle to a site, storage facility, or repair facility as specified in
division (C)(1)(a) of this section.
      (2)   Any subsequent towing of a wrecked or disabled vehicle shall comply
with the size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577.
      (3)   No court shall impose any penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99 or
the civil liability established in R.C. § 5577.12 upon a person who is
operating a vehicle in the manner described in division (C)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 5577.15)
(Prior Code, § 440.05)
§ 74.54 WEIGHING OF VEHICLE; REMOVAL OF EXCESS LOAD.
   (A)   Any police officer having reason to believe that the weight of a
vehicle and its load is unlawful may require the driver of the vehicle to stop
and submit to a weighing of it by means of a compact, self-contained, portable,
sealed scale specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of vehicles on
highways; a sealed scale permanently installed in a fixed location, having a
load-receiving element specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of
highway vehicles; a sealed scale, permanently installed in a fixed location,
having a load-receiving element specially adapted to determining the combined
load of all wheels on a single axle or on successive axles of a highway
vehicle; or a sealed scale adapted to weighing highway vehicles, loaded or
unloaded.
   (B)   The driver of the vehicle shall, if necessary, be directed to proceed
to the nearest available sealed scales to accomplish the weighing, provided the
scales are within three miles of the point where the vehicle is stopped.
   (C)   Any vehicle stopped in accordance with this section may be held by the
police officer for a reasonable time only to accomplish the weighing as
prescribed by this section.
   (D)   All scales used in determining the lawful weight of a vehicle and its
load shall be annually compared by a municipal, county or state sealer with the
state standards or standards approved by the state, and the scales shall not be
sealed if they do not conform to the state standards or standards approved by
the state.
   (E)   At each end of a permanently installed scale, there shall be a
straight approach in the same plane as the platform, of sufficient length and
width to insure the level positioning of vehicles during weight determinations.
During determination of weight by compact, self-contained, portable, sealed
scales, specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of vehicles on
highways, they shall always be used on a level terrain of sufficient length and
width to accommodate the entire vehicle being weighed. Such terrain shall be
level, or if not level, it shall be of such elevation that the difference in
elevation between the wheels on any one axle does not exceed two inches and the
difference in elevation between axles being weighed does not exceed one-quarter
inch per foot of the distance between such axles.
   (F)   In all determinations of all weights, except gross weight, by compact,
self-contained, portable, sealed scales, specially adapted to determining the
wheel loads of vehicles on highways, all successive axles, 12 feet or less
apart, shall be weighed simultaneously by placing one such scale under the
outside wheel of each such axle. In determinations of gross weight by the use
of compact, self-contained, portable, sealed scales, specially adapted to
determining the wheel loads of vehicles on highways, all axles shall be weighed
simultaneously by placing one such scale under the outside wheel of each axle.
   (G)   Whenever an officer, upon weighing a vehicle and load, determines that
the weight is unlawful, he or she may require the driver to stop the vehicle in
a suitable place and remain standing until such portion of the load is removed
as is necessary to reduce the weight of the vehicle to the limit permitted
under R.C. §§ 5577.01 through 5577.14 and this chapter.
(R.C. § 4513.33)
Statutory reference:
   Alteration of weight limits, approval of Director required, see R.C. §
4513.33
§ 74.55 OPERATION OF VEHICLE EXCEEDING WEIGHT LIMITS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall operate or move a traction engine, steam roller, or
other vehicle, load, object or structure, whether propelled by muscular or
motor power, over or upon the improved public streets, highways, bridges, or
culverts in this municipality, that weighs in excess of the weights prescribed
in this subchapter or R.C. §§ 5577.01 et seq., unless the person has been
issued a permit under R.C. § 4513.34, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance. The prohibition in this section applies regardless of whether the
weight is moved upon wheels, rollers, or otherwise. Any weight determination
shall include the weight of the vehicle, object, structure, contrivance, and
load.
(R.C. § 5577.02)
   (B)   Whoever violates the weight provisions of this section shall be fined
$80 for the first 2,000 pounds, or fraction thereof, of overload; for overloads
in excess of 2,000 pounds, but not in excess of 5,000 pounds, such person shall
be fined $100, and in addition thereto $1 per 100 pounds of overload; for
overloads in excess of 5,000 pounds but not in excess of 10,000 pounds, such
person shall be fined $130, and in addition thereto $2 per 100 pounds of
overload, or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. For all overloads in
excess of 10,000 pounds, such person shall be fined $160, and in addition
thereto $3 per 100 pounds of overload, or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or
both. Whoever violates the weight provisions of vehicle and load relating to
gross load limits shall be fined not less than $100. No penalty prescribed in
this division (B)(2) shall be imposed on any vehicle combination if the
overload on any one axle does not exceed 1,000 pounds, and if the immediately
preceding or following axle, excepting the front axle of the vehicle
combination, is underloaded by the same or greater amount. For purposes of this
division (B)(2), two axles on one vehicle less than eight feet apart shall be
considered as one axle.
(R.C. § 5577.99(A))
§ 74.56 LOAD LIMITS.
   (A)   Weight of load; width of tire. No person, firm or corporation shall
transport over the improved public streets, alleys, intercounty highways, state
highways, bridges or culverts in this municipality, in any vehicle propelled by
muscular, motor or other power, any burden, including weight of vehicle and
load, greater than the following:
      (1)   (a)   In vehicles having metal tires three inches or less in width,
a load of 500 pounds for each inch of the total width of the tire on all
wheels;
         (b)   When the tires on such vehicles exceed three inches in width, an
additional load of 800 pounds shall be permitted for each inch by which the
total width of the tires on all wheels exceeds 12 inches.
      (2)   In vehicles having tires of rubber or other similar substance, for
each inch of the total width of tires on all wheels, as follows:
 
Tire Width  Load Limit
(in inches) (in pounds)
3.5         450
6 and over  650
 
      (3)   The total width of tires on all wheels shall be, in the case of
solid tires of rubber or other similar substance, the actual width in inches of
all such tires between the flanges at the base of the tires, but in no event
shall that portion of tire coming in contact with the road surface be less than
two-thirds the width so measured between the flanges.
      (4)   In the case of pneumatic tires, of rubber or other similar
substance, the total width of tires on all wheels shall be the actual width of
all such tires, measured at the widest portion thereof when inflated and not
bearing a load.
      (5)   In no event shall the load, including the proportionate weight of
vehicle that can be concentrated on any wheel, exceed 650 pounds to each inch
in width of the tread as defined in this division (A) for solid tires, or each
inch in the actual diameter of pneumatic tires measured when inflated and not
bearing a load.
(R.C. § 5577.03)
   (B)   Vehicles with pneumatic tires, load limits.
      (1)   The maximum wheel load of any one wheel of any vehicle, load,
object or structure operated or moved upon improved public highways, streets,
bridges or culverts shall not exceed 650 pounds per inch width of pneumatic
tire, measured as prescribed by division (A) of this section.
      (2)   The weight of the vehicle and load imposed upon a road surface that
is part of the interstate system by vehicles with pneumatic tires shall not
exceed any of the following weight limitations:
         (a)   On any one axle, 20,000 pounds;
         (b)   On any tandem axle, 34,000 pounds;
         (c)   On any two or more consecutive axles, the maximum weight as
determined by application of the formula provided in division (B)(3) of this
section.
      (3)   (a)   For purposes of division (B)(2)(c) of this section, the
maximum gross weight on any two or more consecutive axles shall be determined
by application of the following formula: W = 500[(LN/–1) + 12N + 36]
         (b)   In this formula, W equals the overall gross weight on any group
of two or more consecutive axles to the nearest 500 pounds, L equals the
distance in rounded whole feet between the extreme of any group of two or more
consecutive axles, and N equals the number of axles in the group under
consideration. However, two consecutive sets of tandem axles may carry a gross
load of 34,000 pounds each, provided the overall distance between the first and
last axles of such consecutive sets of tandem axles is 36 feet or more.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (B)(9) of this section, the weight
of vehicle and load imposed upon a road surface that is not part of the
interstate system by vehicles with pneumatic tires shall not exceed any of the
following weight limitations:
         (a)   On any one axle, 20,000 pounds.
         (b)   On any two successive axles:
            1.   Spaced four feet or less apart, and weighed simultaneously,
24,000 pounds;
            2.   Spaced more than four feet apart, and weighed simultaneously,
34,000 pounds, plus 1,000 pounds per foot or fraction thereof, over four feet,
not to exceed 40,000 pounds.
         (c)   On any three successive load-bearing axles designed to equalize
the load between such axles and spaced so that each such axle of the three-axle
group is more than four feet from the next axle in the three- axle group and so
that the spacing between the first axle and the third axle in the three-axle
group is no more than nine feet, and with such load-bearing three-axle group
weighed simultaneously as a unit:
            1.   A weight of 48,000 pounds, with the total weight of the
vehicle and load not exceeding 38,000 pounds plus an additional 900 pounds for
each foot of spacing between the front axle and the rearmost axle of the
vehicle;
            2.   As an alternative to division (B)(4)(c)1. of this section,
42,500 pounds, if part of a six- axle vehicle combination with at least 20 feet
of spacing between the front axle and rearmost axle, with the total weight of
the vehicle and load not exceeding 54,000 pounds plus an additional 600 pounds
per each foot of spacing between the front axle and the rearmost axle of the
vehicle.
         (d)   The total weight of the vehicle and load utilizing any
combination of axles, other than as provided for three-axle groups in division
(B)(4) of this section, shall not exceed 38,000 pounds plus an additional 900
pounds for each foot of spacing between the front axle and the rearmost axle of
the vehicle.
      (5)   Notwithstanding divisions (B)(2) and (B)(4) of this section, the
maximum overall gross weight of a vehicle and load imposed upon the road
surface shall not exceed 80,000 pounds.
      (6)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when a vehicle is
towing another vehicle, such drawbar or other connection shall be of a length
such as will limit the spacing between nearest axles of the respective vehicles
to a distance not in excess of 12.5 feet.
      (7)   As used in division (B)(2) of this section, TANDEM AXLE means two
or more consecutive axles whose centers may be included between parallel
transverse vertical planes spaced more than 40 inches but not more than 96
inches apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle.
      (8)   This division (B) does not apply to passenger bus type vehicles
operated by a regional transit authority pursuant to R.C. §§ 306.30 through
306.54.
      (9)   Either division (B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section applies to the
weight of a vehicle and its load imposed upon any road surface that is not a
part of the interstate system by vehicles with pneumatic tires. As between
divisions (B)(2) and (B)(4) of this section, only the division that yields the
highest total gross vehicle weight limit shall be applied to any such vehicle.
Once that division has been determined, only the limits contained in the
subdivisions of that division shall apply to that vehicle.
(R.C. § 5577.04)
   (C)   Axle and wheel load, gross weights and towing connection length for
solid rubber tires.
      (1)   No vehicle, load, object or structure having a maximum axle load
greater than 16,000 pounds when such vehicle is equipped with solid rubber
tires shall be operated or moved upon the improved public highways, streets,
bridges or culverts. The maximum wheel load of any one wheel of such vehicle
shall not exceed 650 pounds per inch width of tire, measured as prescribed by
division (A) of this section, nor shall any solid tire or rubber or other
resilient material, on any wheel of any such vehicle, be less than one inch
thick when measure from the top of the flanges of the tire channel.
      (2)   The weight of vehicle and load imposed upon the road surface by any
two successive axles, spaces four feet or less apart, shall not exceed 19,000
pounds for solid tires; or by any two successive axles spaced more than four
feet but less than eight feet apart, shall not exceed 24,000 pounds for solid
tires; or by any two successive axles, spaced eight feet or more apart, shall
not exceed 28,000 pounds for solid tires; nor shall the total weight of vehicle
and load exceed, for solid rubber tires, 28,000 pounds plus an additional 600
pounds for each foot or fraction thereof of spacing between the front axle and
the rear-most axle of the vehicle; nor shall the weight of the vehicle and load
imposed upon the road surface by any vehicle equipped with solid rubber tires
exceed 80% of the permissible weight of vehicle and load as provided for
pneumatic tires.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when a vehicle is
towing another vehicle, such drawbar or other connection shall be of a length
such as will limit the spacing between the nearest axles of the respective
vehicles to a distance not in excess of 12.5 feet. If the provisions of this
division (C) are held to exceed the weight limitations or other provisions set
forth in the “Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1958", 72 Stat. 902, 23 U.S.C. § 127,
this division (C) shall become null and void to the extent of such
inconsistency.
(R.C. § 5577.041)
   (D)   Penalties.
      (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second or subsequent offense, such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 5577.99(C))
      (2)   Whoever violates the weight provisions of this section shall be
punished as set forth in §
74.55(B).
   (E)   Modification of load limits. The load limits established in this
section may be modified or waived upon special permission granted as provided
in R.C. § 4513.34 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 440.01)
§ 74.57 MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT, AND LENGTH.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be operated upon the public highways, streets,
bridges, and culverts within this municipality whose dimensions exceed those
specified in this section.
   (B)   No such vehicle shall have a width:
      (1)   In excess of 104 inches for passenger bus type vehicles operated
exclusively within the municipality.
      (2)   In excess of 102 inches, excluding such safety devices as are
required by law, for passenger bus type vehicles operated over freeways, and
such other state roads with minimum pavement widths of 22 feet, except those
roads or portions of roads over which operation of 102-inch buses is prohibited
by order of the Director of Transportation.
      (3)   In excess of 132 inches for traction engines.
      (4)   In excess of 102 inches for recreational vehicles, excluding safety
devices and retracted awnings and other appurtenances of six inches or less in
width and except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch
recreational vehicles on designated state highways or portions of highways.
      (5)   In excess of 102 inches, including load, for all other vehicles,
except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch vehicles on
such state highways or portions of state highways as the Director designates.
   (C)   No such vehicle shall have a length:
      (1)   In excess of 66 feet for passenger bus type vehicles and
articulated passenger bus type vehicles operated by a regional transit
authority pursuant to R.C. §§ 306.30 through 306.54.
      (2)   In excess of 45 feet for all other passenger bus type vehicles.
      (3)   In excess of 53 feet for any semitrailer when operated in a
commercial tractor-semitrailer combination, with or without load, except that
the Director may prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor-
semitrailer combination on such state highways or portions of state highways as
the Director designates.
      (4)   In excess of 28.5 feet for any semitrailer or trailer when operated
in a commercial tractor- semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-semitrailer-
semitrailer combination, except that the Director may prohibit the operation of
any such commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-
semitrailer-semitrailer combination on such state highways or portions of state
highways as the Director designates.
      (5)   (a)   In excess of 97 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations when operated on any interstate, United States route,
or state route, including reasonable access travel on all other roadways for a
distance not to exceed one road mile from any interstate, United States route,
or state route, not to exceed three saddlemounted vehicles, but which may
include one fullmount;
         (b)   In excess of 75 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations when operated on any roadway not designated as an
interstate, United States route, or state route, not to exceed three
saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one fullmount.
      (6)   In excess of 65 feet for any other combination of vehicles coupled
together, with or without load, except as provided in division (C)(3) and (C)
(4), and in division (E) below.
      (7)   In excess of 45 feet for recreational vehicles.
      (8)   In excess of 50 feet for all other vehicles, except trailers and
semitrailers, with or without load.
   (D)   No such vehicle shall have a height in excess of 13.5 feet, with or
without load.
   (E)   An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed a
length of 65 feet, and a stinger-steered automobile transporter or stinger-
steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of 75 feet, except that the
load thereon may extend no more than four feet beyond the rear of such vehicles
and may extend no more than three feet beyond the front of such vehicles, and
except further that the Director may prohibit the operation of a stinger-
steered automobile transporter, stinger-steered boat transporter, or a B-train
assembly on any state highway or portion of any state highway that the Director
designates.
   (F)   (1)   The widths prescribed in division (B) of this section shall not
include side mirrors, turn signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds for cab entry
and egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, splash and spray suppressant
devices, and load-induced tire bulge.
      (2)   The widths prescribed in division (B)(5) of this section shall not
include automatic covering devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and tiedown
assemblies, provided these safety devices do not extend more than three inches
from either side of the vehicle.
      (3)   The lengths prescribed in divisions (C)(2) through (C)(7) shall not
include safety devices, bumpers attached to the front or rear of such bus or
combination, non-property carrying devices or components that do not extend
more than 24 inches beyond the rear of the vehicle and are needed for loading
or unloading, B-train assembly used between the first and second semitrailer of
a commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, energy conservation
devices as provided in any regulations adopted by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Transportation, or any noncargo-carrying refrigerator
equipment attached to the front of trailers and semitrailers. In special cases,
vehicles that dimensions exceed those prescribed by this section may operate in
accordance with rules adopted by the Director.
   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to fire engines, fire trucks, or
other vehicles or apparatus belonging to the municipality or to the volunteer
fire department thereof or used by such department in the discharge of its
functions. This section does not apply to vehicles and pole trailers used in
the transportation of wooden and metal poles, nor to the transportation of
pipes or well-drilling equipment, nor to farm machinery and equipment.
      (2)   The owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery, or equipment not
specifically enumerated in this section but the dimensions of which exceed the
dimensions provided by this section, when operating the same on the highways
and streets of the municipality, shall comply with the rules of the Director
governing such movement. Any person adversely affected shall have the same
right of appeal as provided in R.C. Chapter 119.
      (3)   This section does not require the municipality or any railroad or
other private corporation to provide sufficient vertical clearance to permit
the operation of such vehicle, or to make any changes in or about existing
structures now crossing streets, roads, and other public thoroughfares.
   (H)   As used in this section, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 4501.01.
(R.C. § 5577.05)
   (I)   No person shall violate any rule or regulation promulgated by the
Director of Transportation in accordance with R.C. § 5577.05.
(R.C. § 5577.06)
   (J)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second or subsequent offense, such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 5577.99(C))
(Prior Code, § 440.02)
§ 74.58 STATEMENT OF GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT.
   (A)   No person shall issue or aid in issuing any bill of lading or other
document of like nature in lieu thereof, which bill or document is to accompany
a shipment of goods or property by truck, trailer, semitrailer, commercial
tractor, or any other commercial vehicle used for the transportation of
property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons, with intent
to defraud by misrepresentation thereon the weight of such goods of property to
be so transported.
   (B)   Any driver or operator of a commercial car, trailer or semitrailer may
obtain from any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association,
including the owner, lessee, or operator of such commercial car, trailer or
semitrailer, owning and operating sealed scales in this state, a written
“statement of gross vehicle weight” showing the gross weight of the vehicle
including the cargo on the vehicle, the name and address of the person issuing
the statement, and the date and place where the vehicle and its cargo were
weighed. The driver or operator of the commercial car, trailer or semitrailer
shall retain such statement of gross vehicle weight on his or her person, and
any law enforcement officer may request that such driver or operator exhibit it
to him or her. If, upon examining the statement of gross vehicle weight, the
law enforcement officer has reason to believe that the information contained
therein is correct in every respect, he or she shall indorse it with his or her
name and the date and place where it was exhibited to him or her. The law
enforcement officer may then permit such driver or operator to proceed without
weighing by a law enforcement officer. No person shall willfully issue a
written statement of gross vehicle weight and knowingly give any false
information in such statement.
(R.C. § 5577.10)
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be fined not more
than $5,000 or imprisoned for not less than 30 days nor more than six months,
or both.
(R.C. § 5577.99(D))
§ 74.59 WHEEL PROTECTORS REQUIRED ON HEAVY COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated,
any commercial car, trailer, or semitrailer, used for the transportation of
goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons,
upon the public highways, streets, bridges, and culverts within the
municipality, unless such vehicle is equipped with suitable metal protectors or
substantial flexible flaps on the rearmost wheels of such vehicle or
combination of vehicles to prevent, as far as practicable, the wheels from
throwing dirt, water, or other materials on the windshields of following
vehicles. Such protectors or flaps shall have a ground clearance of not more
than one-third of the distance from the center of the rearmost axle to the
center of the flaps under any conditions of loading of the vehicle, and they
shall be at least as wide as the tires they are protecting. If the vehicle is
so designed and constructed that such requirements are accomplished by means of
fenders, body construction, or other means of enclosure, then no such
protectors or flaps are required. Rear wheels not covered at the top by
fenders, bodies, or other parts of the vehicle shall be covered at the top by
protective means extending at least to the center line of the rearmost axle.
(R.C. § 5577.11)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $25.
(R.C. § 5577.99(E))
(Prior Code, § 440.03)
§ 74.60 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES; PROSECUTION; APPLICATION OF MONIES.
   Any person violating any law relating to or regulating the use of the
improved public roads shall be liable for all damage resulting to any such
street, highway, bridge or culvert by reason of such violation. In case of any
injury to such street, highway, bridge or culvert, such damages shall be
collected by civil action for recovery of such damages brought by the proper
authorities of the municipality. All damages collected under this section shall
be paid into the treasury of the municipality and credited to any fund for the
repairs of streets, highways, roads, bridges or culverts.
(R.C. § 5577.12)
§ 74.61 WEIGHT EXCEPTIONS FOR CERTAIN VEHICLES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      COAL TRUCK. Means a truck transporting coal from the site where it is
mined when the truck is operated in accordance with this section.
      FARM COMMODITIES. Includes livestock, bulk milk, corn, soybeans, tobacco
and wheat.
      FARM MACHINERY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      FARM TRUCK. Means a truck used in the transportation from a farm of farm
commodities when the truck is operated in accordance with this section.
      LOG TRUCK. Means a truck used in the transportation of timber from the
site of its cutting when the truck is operated in accordance with this section.
      SOLID WASTE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3743.01.
      SOLID WASTE HAUL VEHICLE. Means a vehicle hauling solid waste for which a
bill of lading has not been issued.
   (B)   (1)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the following vehicles under the
described conditions may exceed by no more than 7.5% the weight provisions of
R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, and no penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be imposed:
         (a)   A coal truck transporting coal, from the place of production to
the first point of delivery where title to the coal is transferred;
         (b)   A farm truck or farm machinery transporting farm commodities,
from the place of production to the first point of delivery where the
commodities are weighed and title to the commodities is transferred;
         (c)   A log truck transporting timber, from the site of its cutting to
the first point of delivery where the timber is transferred;
         (d)   A solid waste haul vehicle hauling solid waste, from the place
of production to the first point of delivery where the solid waste is disposed
of or title to the solid waste is transferred.
      (2)   In addition, if any of the vehicles listed in division (B)(1) of
this section and operated under the conditions described in that division does
not exceed by more than 7.5% the gross vehicle weight provisions of R.C. §§
5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and
does not exceed the wheel or axle-load limits of those sections by more than
7.5%, no penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, for a wheel or axle overload shall be imposed.
   (C)   If any of the vehicles listed in division (B)(1) of this section and
operated under the conditions described in that division exceeds the weight
provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, by more than the percentage allowance of either divisions
(B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section, both of the following apply without regard to
the allowance provided by this division (B) of this section:
      (1)   The applicable penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   The civil liability imposed by R.C. § 5577.12, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   (1)   Division (B) of this section does not apply to the operation of
a farm truck, log truck, or farm machinery transporting farm commodities during
the months of February and March.
      (2)   Regardless of when the operation occurs, division (B) of this
section does not apply to the operation of a vehicle on either of the
following:
         (a)   A highway that is part of the interstate system;
         (b)   A highway, road, or bridge that is subject to reduced maximum
weights under R.C. § 4513.33, 5577.07, 5577.071, 5577.08, 5577.09, or 5591.42,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 5577.042)
   (E)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the following vehicles under the described
conditions may exceed by no more than 7.5% the weight provisions of R.C. §§
5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and no
penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, shall be imposed:
      (1)   A surface mining truck transporting minerals from the place where
the minerals are loaded to any of the following:
         (a)   The construction site where the minerals are discharged;
         (b)   The place where title to the minerals is transferred;
         (c)   The place of processing.
      (2)   A vehicle transporting hot mix asphalt material from the place
where the material is first mixed to the paving site where the material is
discharged;
      (3)   A vehicle transporting concrete from the place where the material
is first mixed to the site where the material is discharged;
      (4)   A vehicle transporting manure, turf, sod, or silage from the site
where the material is first produced to the first place of delivery;
      (5)   A vehicle transporting chips, sawdust, mulch, bark, pulpwood,
biomass, or firewood from the site where the product is first produced or
harvested to first point where the product is transferred.
   (F)   In addition, if any of the vehicles listed in division (E) of this
section and operated under the conditions described in that division do not
exceed by more than 7.5% the gross vehicle weight provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01
to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and do not
exceed the wheel or axle- load limits of those sections by more than 7.5%, no
penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, for a wheel or axle overload shall be imposed.
   (G)   If any of the vehicles listed in division (E) of this section and
operated under the conditions described in that division exceed the weight
provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, by more than the percentage allowance of either divisions
(E) or (F) of this section, both of the following apply without regard to the
allowance provided by division (E) or (F) of this section:
      (1)   The applicable penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   The civil liability imposed by R.C. § 5577.12, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (H)   Divisions (E) and (F) of this section do not apply to the operation of
a vehicle listed in division (E) of this section on either of the following:
      (1)   A highway that is part of the interstate system;
      (2)   A highway, road, or bridge that is subject to reduced maximum
weights under R.C. § 4513.33, 5577.07, 5577.071, 5577.08, 5577.09, or 5591.42,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 5577.043)
   (I)    Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, a vehicle fueled solely by compressed natural
gas or liquid natural gas or powered primarily by means of an electric battery
may exceed by not more than 2,000 pounds the gross vehicle weight provisions of
R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or the axle load limits of those sections.
   (J)   If a vehicle described in division (I) of this section exceeds the
weight provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, by more than the allowance provided for in
division (I) of this section, both of the following apply:
      (1)   The applicable penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   The civil liability imposed by R.C. § 5577.12, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (K)   Division (I) of this section does not apply to the operation of a
vehicle on a highway, road, or bridge that is subject to reduced maximum
weights under R.C. § 4513.33, 5577.07, 5577.071, 5577.08, 5577.09, or 5591.42,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 5577.044)
   (L)   Fire engine weight exemptions. 
      (1)   As used in this division (L), FIRE ENGINE means a fire engine, fire
truck, or other vehicle or apparatus belonging to or used by any municipal,
township, or volunteer fire department, while in the discharge of its
functions.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, a person may do both of the following without a
written permit issued under R.C. § 4513.34, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance:
         (a)   Operate a two-axle fire engine, with a front axle maximum weight
of 24,000 pounds and a rear axle maximum weight of 33,500 pounds and a minimum
wheelbase of 15 feet, on all roadways in the state;
         (b)   Operate a fire engine with a maximum gross vehicle weight of
86,000 pounds on the interstate highway system and within one road mile of an
interstate highway system entrance or exit ramp.
      (3)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 4513.34, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, for any fire engine that requires a permit, the Ohio
Director of Transportation or local authority shall do both of the following:
         (a)   Issue the permit at no cost to the municipal, township, or
volunteer fire department;
         (b)   Issue a permit that expires five years after the date of
issuance.
(R.C. § 5577.045)
§ 74.62 ROUTE AND LOAD INFORMATION.
   Drivers of vehicles described in this chapter are required, upon request by
a police officer, to give full and true information as to the route they are
following and the name of the consignor and consignee and place of delivery or
removal and the location of any consignment being hauled or goods being
removed, and upon a designation by such police officer of a route to be
followed, shall immediately adopt and pursue the route.
(Prior Code, § 440.09)
§ 74.63 SHIFTING LOAD; LOOSE LOADS.
   (A)   In addition to any other lawful requirements of load distribution, no
person shall operate any vehicle upon a street or highway unless the vehicle is
so laden as to prevent its contents from shifting or otherwise unbalancing the
vehicle to such an extent as to interfere with the safe operation of the same.
   (B)   No motor vehicle or trailer shall be driven unless the tailboard or
tailgate, tarpaulins, chains (except ground or contact chains), ropes, stakes,
poles and the like, or any part of the load, are securely fastened to prevent
dangling, flapping, swinging or falling from the side, end or top of the load
or body. All projecting cargo shall be properly guarded by a red flag or cloth
or a red light or lantern as required by R.C. § 4513.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 440.10)
CHAPTER 75: BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, AND
OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
Section
General Provisions
   
75.01   Bicycles; application of Title VII
   
75.02   Operation of motorized bicycle
   
75.03   Electric bicycles
   
75.04   Rules for bicycles, motorcycles, and snowmobiles
   
75.05   Prohibition against attaching bicycles and sleds to vehicles
   
75.06   Riding bicycles; motorcycles abreast
   
75.07   Equipment of bicycles
   
75.08   Riding bicycles upon sidewalks
   
75.09   Safe riding regulations for bicycles
   
75.10   Parking; locks
   
75.11   Parent’s responsibility
   
75.12   Suspension of riding privileges; impounding of bicycles
Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles, and All-Purpose Vehicles
   
75.25   Definitions
   
75.26   Equipment
   
75.27   Code application; prohibited operation
   
75.28   Permitted operation
   
75.29   Licensing requirements of operator
   
75.30   Maintenance of vehicles for hire
   
75.31   Accident reports
   
75.32   Impounding of vehicle
   
75.33   Local control within police power
   
75.34   Registration of vehicles
   
75.35   Certificate of title; prohibitions
Cross-reference:
   Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low-speed, under-speed, or utility
vehicles, see §
73.16
Statutory reference:
   Bicycle regulations to be consistent with state law, see R.C. § 4511.07(A)
(8)
   Protective eye devices required for motorcycle operators and passengers;
helmets required for persons under 18 years of age, see O.A.C. § 4501-17-01
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 75.01 BICYCLES; APPLICATION OF TITLE VII.
   (A)   The provisions of this title that are applicable to bicycles and
electric bicycles apply whenever a bicycle or electric bicycle is operated upon
any highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section, a bicycle operator
or electric bicycle operator who violates any provisions of this title
described in division (A) of this section that is applicable to bicycles or
electric bicycles may be issued a ticket, citation, or summons by a law
enforcement officer for the violation in the same manner as the operator of a
motor vehicle would be cited for the same violation. A person who commits any
such violation while operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall not have any
points assessed against the person’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary license under R.C. §
4510.036.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section, in the case of a
violation of any provision of this title described in division (A) of this
section by a bicycle operator, electric bicycle operator, or motor vehicle
operator when the trier of fact finds that the violation by the motor vehicle
operator endangered the lives of bicycle riders or electric bicycle riders at
the time of the violation, the court, notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio
Revised Code to the contrary, may require the bicycle operator, electric
bicycle operator, or motor vehicle operator to take and successfully complete a
bicycling skills course approved by the court in addition to or in lieu of any
penalty otherwise prescribed by this Traffic Code or the Ohio Revised Code for
that violation.
   (D)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to violations of
R.C. § 4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 4511.52) (Prior Code, § 474.01)
§ 75.02 OPERATION OF MOTORIZED BICYCLE.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, unless all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The person is 14 or 15 years of age and holds a valid probationary
motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test provided
for in this section, or the person is 16 years of age or older and holds either
a valid commercial driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 or a
driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid motorized bicycle
license issued after the person has passed the test provided for in this
section, except that if a person is 16 years of age, has a valid probationary
motorized bicycle license and desires a motorized bicycle license, the person
is not required to comply with the testing requirements provided for in this
section.
      (2)   The motorized bicycle is equipped in accordance with the rules
adopted under division (B) of this section and is in proper working order.
      (3)   The person, if under 18 years of age, is wearing a protective
helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened and the
motorized bicycle is equipped with a rearview mirror.
      (4)   The person operates the motorized bicycle when practicable within
three feet of the right edge of the roadway obeying all traffic rules
applicable to vehicles.
   (B)   The Director of Public Safety, subject to R.C. Chapter 119, shall
adopt and promulgate rules concerning protective helmets, the equipment of
motorized bicycles, and the testing and qualifications of persons who do not
hold a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license. The test shall be as near
as practicable to the examination required for a motorcycle operator’s
endorsement under R.C. § 4507.11. The test shall also require the operator to
give an actual demonstration of the operator’s ability to operate and control a
motorized bicycle by driving one under the supervision of an examining officer.
   (C)   Every motorized bicycle license expires on the birthday of the
applicant in the fourth or eighth year after the date it is issued, based on
the period of renewal requested by the applicant. No motorized bicycle license
shall be issued for a period longer than eight years. A person who is 65 years
of age or older may only apply for a motorized bicycle license that expires on
the birthday of the applicant in the fourth year after the date it is issued.
   (D)   No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry another person
upon the motorized bicycle.
   (E)   The protective helmet and rearview mirror required by division (A)(3)
of this section shall, on and after January 1, 1985, conform with rules adopted
by the Director under division (B) of this section.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (A), (D), or (E) of this section is guilty
of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.521) (Prior Code, § 474.11)
Statutory reference:
   Suspension of probationary motorized bicycle license by the state, see R.C.
§ 4510.34
§ 75.03 ELECTRIC BICYCLES.
   (A)   (1)   On and after January 1, 2020, manufacturers and distributors of
electric bicycles shall permanently affix a label, in a prominent location, to
each electric bicycle. The label shall specify whether the electric bicycle is
a class 1, class 2, or class 3 electric bicycle, the top assisted speed that
the electric bicycle is capable of reaching, and the motor wattage of the
electric bicycle.
      (2)   No person shall modify an electric bicycle in a manner that changes
the top assisted speed that the electric bicycle is capable of reaching unless
the person also modifies the label required under division (A)(1) of this
section to reflect the modification.
   (B)   (1)   The manufacturer of an electric bicycle shall ensure that the
electric bicycle complies with the equipment and manufacturing requirements for
bicycles established by the consumer product safety commission under 16 C.F.R.
§§ 1512 et seq.
      (2)   The manufacturer shall manufacture all class 1 electric bicycles
and class 3 electric bicycles so that when the rider ceases pedaling the
electric motor ceases to provide assistance. The manufacturer shall manufacture
all class 2 electric bicycles so that when the rider applies the brakes or
releases or activates a switch or similar mechanism the electric motor ceases
to provide assistance.
      (3)   All class 3 electric bicycles shall be equipped with a speedometer
that displays the speed of the electric bicycle in miles per hour.
   (C)   (1)   The operation of a class 1 electric bicycle and a class 2
electric bicycle is permitted on a path set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles or on a shared-use path, unless the county, township, municipal
corporation, other local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60
with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule prohibits the use
of a class 1 electric bicycle or class 2 electric bicycle on such a path.
      (2)   No person shall operate a class 3 electric bicycle on a path set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or a shared-use path unless that path
is within or adjacent to a highway or the county, township, municipal
corporation, or local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60 with
control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule authorizes the use of a
class 3 electric bicycle on such a path.
      (3)   No person shall operate a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2
electric bicycle, or a class 3 electric bicycle on a path that is intended to
be used primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or other similar
uses, or any other single track or natural surface trail that has historically
been reserved for non-motorized use, unless the county, township, municipal
corporation, other local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60
with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule authorizes the use
of a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2 electric bicycle, or a class 3
electric bicycle on such a path.
      (4)   Divisions (C)(2) and (C)(3) of this section do not apply to a law
enforcement officer, or other person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic
laws of the state, using an electric bicycle while in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
   (D)   (1)   No person under 16 years of age shall operate a class 3 electric
bicycle; however, a person under 16 years of age may ride as a passenger on a
class 3 electric bicycle that is designed to accommodate passengers.
      (2)   No person shall operate or be a passenger on a class 3 electric
bicycle unless the person is wearing a protective helmet that meets the
standards established by the Consumer Product Safety Commission or the American
Society for Testing and Materials.
   (E)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever operates
an electric bicycle in a manner that is prohibited under division (C) of this
section and whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   The offenses established under division (E)(1) of this section are
strict liability offenses and strict liability is a culpable mental state for
purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of these offenses as strict
liability offenses shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
(R.C. § 4511.522) (Prior Code, § 474.12)
§ 75.04 RULES FOR BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, AND SNOWMOBILES.
   (A)   As used in this section, SNOWMOBILE has the same meaning as given that
term in R.C. § 4519.01.
   (B)   (1)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall ride
other than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto or
carry any other person upon such bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon a
firmly attached and regular seat thereon, and no person shall ride upon a
bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon such a firmly attached and regular
seat.
      (2)   No person operating a motorcycle shall ride other than upon or
astride the permanent and regular seat or saddle attached thereto, or carry any
other person upon such motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular
seat or saddle thereon, and no person shall ride upon a motorcycle other than
upon such a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle.
      (3)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a
saddle other than while sitting astride the saddle, facing forward, with one
leg on each side of the motorcycle.
      (4)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a seat
other than while sitting upon the seat.
      (5)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall carry any
package, bundle, or article that prevents the driver from keeping at least one
hand upon the handlebars.
      (6)   No bicycle, electric bicycle, or motorcycle shall be used to carry
more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
No motorcycle shall be operated on a highway when the handlebars rise higher
than the shoulders of the operator when the operator is seated in the
operator’s seat or saddle.
   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this section, no person
shall operate or be a passenger on a snowmobile or motorcycle without using
safety glasses or other protective eye device. Except as provided in division
(C)(3) of this section, no person who is under the age of 18 years, or who
holds a motorcycle operator’s endorsement or license bearing a “novice”
designation that is currently in effect as provided in R.C. § 4507.13, shall
operate a motorcycle on a highway, or be a passenger on a motorcycle, unless
wearing a protective helmet on the person’s head, and no other person shall be
a passenger on a motorcycle operated by such a person unless similarly wearing
a protective helmet. The helmet, safety glasses, or other protective eye device
shall conform with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. The
provisions of this paragraph or a violation thereof shall not be used in the
trial of any civil action.
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this section, no
person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary instruction permit and
temporary instruction permit identification card issued by the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 unless the person, at the time of
such operation, is wearing on the person’s head a protective helmet that
conforms with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety.
         (b)   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary
instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 in any of the
following circumstances:
            1.   At any time when lighted lights are required by R.C. § 4513.03
(A)(1);
            2.   While carrying a passenger;
            3.   On any limited access highway or heavily congested roadway.
      (3)   Divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2)(a) of this section do not apply to a
person who operates or is a passenger in an autocycle or cab-enclosed
motorcycle when the occupant compartment top is in place enclosing the
occupants.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the carrying
of a child in a seat or trailer that is designed for carrying children and is
firmly attached to the bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (B) or (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates division (B) or (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (B) or (C)(1) or
(C)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.53) (Prior Code, § 474.02)
§ 75.05 PROHIBITION AGAINST ATTACHING BICYCLES AND SLEDS TO VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   No person riding upon any bicycle, electric bicycle, coaster,
roller skates, sled, skateboard, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or self
to any vehicle upon a roadway.
      (2)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding upon any
bicycle, electric bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, skateboard, or toy
vehicle to attach the same or self to any vehicle while it is moving upon a
roadway.
      (3)   This section does not apply to towing a disabled vehicle.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.54) (Prior Code, § 474.03)
§ 75.06 RIDING BICYCLES; MOTORCYCLES ABREAST.
   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle upon a roadway
shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable obeying all
traffic rules applicable to vehicles and exercising due care when passing a
standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (B)   Persons riding bicycles, electric bicycles, or motorcycles upon a
roadway shall ride not more than two abreast in a single lane, except on paths
or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, electric
bicycles, or motorcycles.
   (C)   This section does not require a person operating a bicycle or electric
bicycle to ride at the edge of the roadway when it is unreasonable or unsafe to
do so. Conditions that may require riding away from the edge of the roadway
include when necessary to avoid fixed or moving objects, parked or moving
vehicles, surface hazards, or if it otherwise is unsafe or impracticable to do
so, including if the lane is too narrow for the bicycle or electric bicycle and
an overtaking vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.55) (Prior Code, § 474.04)
§ 75.07 EQUIPMENT OF BICYCLES.
   (A)   Every bicycle or electric bicycle when in use at the times specified
in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be
equipped with the following:
      (1)   A lamp mounted on the front of either the bicycle or electric
bicycle or the operator that shall emit a white light visible from a distance
of at least 500 feet to the front and 300 feet to the sides. A generator-
powered lamp that emits light only when the bicycle or electric bicycle is
moving may be used to meet this requirement.
      (2)   A red reflector on the rear that shall be visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle;
      (3)   A lamp emitting either flashing or steady red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear shall be used in addition to the red
reflector. If the red lamp performs as a reflector in that it is visible as
specified in division (A)(2) of this section, the red lamp may serve as the
reflector and a separate reflector is not required.
   (B)   Additional lamps and reflectors may be used in addition to those
required under division (A) of this section, except that red lamps and red
reflectors shall not be used on the front of the bicycle or electric bicycle
and white lamps and white reflectors shall not be used on the rear of the
bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (C)   A bicycle or electric bicycle may be equipped with a device capable of
giving an audible signal, except that a bicycle or electric bicycle shall not
be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle or electric bicycle
any siren or whistle.
   (D)   Every bicycle and electric bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate
brake when used on a street or highway.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.56) (Prior Code, § 474.05)
§ 75.08 RIDING BICYCLES UPON SIDEWALKS.
   A person operating a bicycle shall ride upon the sidewalk rather than the
roadway when sidewalks are available, except that no person shall ride a
bicycle upon a sidewalk upon or along which signs have been erected by
authority of Council or other duly designated local authority prohibiting such
bicycle riding, or within a business district. At no time shall a person under
the age of 11 years operate a bicycle on a street.
(Prior Code, § 474.06)
§ 75.09 SAFE RIDING REGULATIONS FOR BICYCLES.
   (A)   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk or street, the
person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible
signal before attempting to overtake and pass a pedestrian or another bicycle.
This audible signal must be given only by bell or other warning device capable
of giving an audible signal and shall be given at such a distance and in such a
manner as not to startle the person being overtaken and passed.
   (B)   No person shall ride a bicycle across or through any intersection
involving a through street. These intersections are to be crossed by walking
the bicycle across or through the intersection.
   (C)   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the person,
before overtaking and passing a blind person carrying a white or metallic cane,
shall dismount and overtake or pass on foot.
   (D)   When a bicycle is operated on the street, the operator shall give hand
signals before turning, changing lanes or stopping. The signals shall conform
with R.C. § 4511.40, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (E)   Every rider of a bicycle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding
with any pedestrian or any vehicle upon any roadway, sidewalk or bicycle path,
or endangering the life, limb or property of any person while in the lawful use
of the streets, sidewalks or any other private or public property.
   (F)   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is
reasonable and proper under the conditions then existing.
   (G)   The operator of a bicycle emerging from or turning into an alley,
driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area
extending across any alley, driveway or building, yield the right-of-way to all
pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk area. Upon entering the street, the
operator shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the
street.
   (H)   No person shall engage in trick riding or operate a bicycle without
both hands upon the handle grips except when necessary to give the hand signals
required herein.
(Prior Code, § 474.07)
§ 75.10 PARKING; LOCKS.
   (A)   No person shall park a bicycle upon a sidewalk in such a manner as to
interfere with pedestrian traffic or damage the property of another.
   (B)   No person shall park a bicycle upon a roadway in such a manner as to
interfere with vehicular traffic.
   (C)   No bicycle shall remain unlocked when parked upon any public way or
place.
(Prior Code, § 474.08)
§ 75.11 PARENT’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   No parent of any child or guardian of any ward shall authorize or knowingly
permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 474.09)
§ 75.12 SUSPENSION OF RIDING PRIVILEGES; IMPOUNDING OF BICYCLES.
   In addition to the penalties provided in §
70.99, a court may prohibit any person who violates or fails to comply with any
of the provisions of this chapter relating to bicycles from riding a bicycle
for a period not to exceed three months. In addition, any person violating or
failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter relating to
bicycles may be punished by having his or her bicycle impounded for a period
not exceeding 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 474.10)
SNOWMOBILES, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES, AND ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLES
§ 75.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for
cross-country travel on land and water, or on more than one type of terrain,
and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or any combination thereof,
including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air, vehicles commonly known as
all-terrain vehicles, all season vehicles, mini-bikes and trail bikes. The term
does not include a utility vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or any vehicle
principally used in playing golf, any motor vehicle or aircraft required to be
registered under R.C. Chapter 4503 or R.C. Chapter 4561, and any vehicle
excepted from definition as a motor vehicle by R.C. § 4501.01(B).
   DEALER. Any person or firm engaged in the business of manufacturing or
selling snowmobiles, off- highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles at
wholesale or retail, or who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes snowmobiles,
off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles for hire.
   ELECTRONIC. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   ELECTRONIC DEALER. A dealer whom the Registrar of Motor Vehicles designates
under R.C. § 4519.511.
   ELECTRONIC RECORD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   HIGHWAY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   INTERSTATE HIGHWAY. Any part of the interstate system of highways as defined
in subsection (e), 90 Stat. 431 (1976), 23 U.S.C. § 103, as amended.
   LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY OR FREEWAY. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
5511.02.
   MINI-TRUCK. A vehicle that has four wheels, is propelled by an electric
motor with a rated power of 7,500 watts or less or an internal combustion
engine with a piston displacement capacity of 660 cubic centimeters or less,
has a total dry weight of 900 to 2,200 pounds, contains an enclosed cabin and a
seat for the vehicle operator, resembles a pickup truck or van with a cargo
area or bed located at the rear of the vehicle, and was not originally
manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety standards.
   OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE. Every motorcycle, as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that
is designed to be operated primarily on lands other than a street or highway.
   OPERATOR. Any person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle.
   OWNER. Any person or firm, other than a lienholder or dealer, having title
to a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, or other right
to the possession thereof.
   PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4509.01.
   SNOWMOBILE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for use on snow or
ice, and steered by skis, runners or caterpillar treads.
   STATE HIGHWAY and STATE ROUTE. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   STREET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 4519.01) (Prior Code, § 476.01)
§ 75.26 EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   In addition to any rules or regulations promulgated by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety pursuant to R.C. § 4519.20 and R.C. Chapter 119,
equipment of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles
shall include but not necessarily be limited to requirements for the following
items of equipment:
      (1)   At least one headlight having a minimum candlepower of sufficient
intensity to reveal persons and objects at a distance of at least 100 feet
ahead under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (2)   At least one red tail light having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to be plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the
rear under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (3)   Every snowmobile, while traveling on packed snow, shall be capable
of carrying a driver who weighs 175 pounds or more, and, while carrying such
driver, be capable of stopping in no more than 40 feet from an initial steady
speed of 20 miles per hour, or locking its traction belt; and
      (4)   A muffler system capable of precluding the emission of excessive
smoke or exhaust fumes, and of limiting the engine noise of vehicles. On
snowmobiles manufactured after January 1, 1973, such requirement shall include
sound dampening equipment such that noise does not exceed 82 decibels on the
“A” scale at 50 feet as measured according to SAE J192 (September 1970).
   (B)   No person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle in violation of this section, except that equipment
specified in division (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section shall not be required
on snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles operated
during the daylight hours.
(R.C. § 4519.20(A), (B))
   (C)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, lease, rent or otherwise furnish
for hire in this municipality any new snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle that fails to comply with any rule adopted by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety under R.C. § 4519.20 after the effective date of the
rule.
(R.C. § 4519.22(A))
   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (B) of this section shall be fined not more than $50. If the offender
within the preceding year previously has committed a violation of division (B)
of this section or of R.C. § 4519.20(B), whoever violates division (B) of this
section shall be fined not less than $15 nor more than $100, imprisoned not
more than three days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.20(C))
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (C) of this section shall be fined not more than $50. If the offender
within the preceding year previously has committed a violation of division (C)
of this section or of R.C. § 4519.22(A), whoever violates this section shall be
fined not less than $15 nor more than $100, imprisoned not more than three
days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.22(B))
(Prior Code, § 476.02)
§ 75.27 CODE APPLICATION; PROHIBITED OPERATION.
   (A)   The applicable provisions of this traffic code apply to the operation
of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles, except that
no person shall operate a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On any state highway, including a limited access highway or freeway
or the right-of-way thereof, except for emergency travel during such time and
in such manner as the Ohio Director of Public Safety designates or except as
authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F);
      (2)   On any private property, or in any nursery or planting area,
without the permission of the owner or other person having the right to
possession of the property;
      (3)   On any land or waters controlled by the state, except at those
locations where a sign has been posted permitting such operation;
      (4)   On the tracks or right-of-way of any operating railroad;
      (5)   While transporting any firearm, bow or other implement for hunting
that is not unloaded and securely encased;
      (6)   For the purpose of chasing, pursuing, capturing or killing any
animal or wild fowl; or
      (7)   During the time from sunset to sunrise, unless displaying lighted
lights as required by R.C. § 4519.20 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500, imprisoned not less than 3 nor more than 30 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.40) (Prior Code, § 476.03)
Cross-reference:
   Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low-speed, under-speed, or utility
vehicles, see §
73.16
§ 75.28 PERMITTED OPERATION.
   Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles may be
operated as follows:
   (A)   To make a crossing of a highway, other than a highway as designated in
R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
whenever the crossing can be made in safety and will not interfere with the
movement of vehicular traffic approaching from any direction on the highway,
and provided that the operator yields the right-of-way to any approaching
traffic that presents an immediate hazard;
   (B)   On highways in the county or township road systems whenever the local
authority having jurisdiction over such highways so permits;
   (C)   Off and alongside street or highway for limited distances from the
point of unloading from a conveyance to the point at which the snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle is intended and authorized to be
operated;
   (D)   On the berm or shoulder of a highway, other than a highway as
designated in R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, when the terrain permits such operation to be undertaken safely and
without the necessity of entering any traffic lane;
   (E)   On the berm or shoulder or a county or township road, while traveling
from one area of operation of the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-
purpose vehicle to another such area.
   (F)   For snowmobiles without metal studded tracks and all-purpose vehicles,
on state highways located on an island in Lake Erie, including limited access
highways and freeways, between the first day of November and the thirtieth day
of April, provided that all of the following conditions apply:
      (1)   The operator has a valid driver’s license as required under R.C. §
4519.44.
      (2)   The snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle is in compliance with rules
governing safety equipment adopted under R.C. § 4519.20.
      (3)   The owner of the snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle maintains proof
of financial responsibility for both on-road and off-road use of the snowmobile
or all-purpose vehicle.
      (4)   The operator obeys all traffic rules and regulations.
(R.C. § 4519.41) (Prior Code, § 476.04)
§ 75.29 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS OF OPERATOR.
   (A)   No person who does not hold a valid, current motor vehicle driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, motorcycle operator’s endorsement or probationary
license, issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 or R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid,
current driver’s license issued by another jurisdiction, shall operate a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle on any street or
highway in this municipality, on any portion of the right-of- way thereof, or
on any public land or waters.
   (B)   No person who is less than 16 years of age shall operate a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all- purpose vehicle on any land or waters other
than private property or waters owned by or leased to the person’s parent or
guardian, unless accompanied by another person who is 18 years of age or older,
and who holds a license as provided in division (A) of this section, except
that the Ohio Department of Natural Resources may permit such operation on
state controlled land under its jurisdiction when such person is less than 16
years of age and is accompanied by a parent or guardian who is a licensed
driver 18 years of age or older.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500, imprisoned not less than 3 nor more than 30 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.44) (Prior Code, § 476.05)
§ 75.30 MAINTENANCE OF VEHICLES FOR HIRE.
   (A)   Any dealer who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes a snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle, or all- purpose vehicle for hire shall maintain the vehicle
in safe operating condition. No dealer, or agent or employee of a dealer, shall
rent, lease or otherwise furnish a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-
purpose vehicle for hire to any person who does not hold a license as required
by R.C. § 4519.44(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or to
any person whom the dealer or an agent or employee of the dealer has reasonable
cause to believe is incompetent to operate the vehicle in a safe and lawful
manner.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $100 nor
more than $500.
(R.C. § 4519.45)
§ 75.31 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (A)   The operator of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle involved in any accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any
person or damage to the property of any person in excess of $100 shall report
the accident within 48 hours to the Chief of Police, and within 30 days shall
forward a written report of the accident to the Ohio Registrar of Motor
Vehicles on a form prescribed by the Registrar. If the operator is physically
incapable of making the reports and there is another participant in the
accident not so incapacitated, the participant shall make the reports. In the
event there is no other participant, and the operator is other than the owner,
the owner, within the prescribed periods of time, shall make the reports.
   (B)   Any law enforcement officer or other person authorized by R.C. §§
4519.42 and 4519.43 who investigates or receives information of an accident
involving a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall
forward to the Registrar a written report of the accident within 48 hours.
(R.C. § 4519.46) (Prior Code, § 476.06)
§ 75.32 IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLE.
   (A)   Whenever a person is found guilty of operating a snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle in violation of any rule authorized
to be adopted under R.C. § 4519.21 or 4519.42, the trial judge of any court of
record, in addition to or independent of any other penalties provided by law,
may impound for not less than 60 days the certificate of registration and
license plate, if applicable, of that snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle. The court shall send the impounded certificate of
registration and license plate, if applicable, to the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles, who shall retain the certificate of registration and license plate,
if applicable, until the expiration of the period of impoundment.
   (B)   If a court impounds the certificate of registration and license plate
of an all-purpose vehicle pursuant to R.C. § 2911.21, the court shall send the
impounded certificate of registration and license plate to the Registrar, who
shall retain them until the expiration of the period of impoundment.
(R.C. § 4519.47)
§ 75.33 LOCAL CONTROL WITHIN POLICE POWER.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall prevent the municipality from
regulating the operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycle, and all-
purpose vehicles on streets and highways and other public property under
municipal jurisdiction, and within the reasonable exercise of the police power,
except that no registration or licensing of any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle required to be registered or titled under
R.C. Chapter 4519 shall be required.
(R.C. § 4519.48) (Prior Code, § 476.07)
§ 75.34 REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B), (C) and (D) of this section,
no person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle within this municipality unless the snowmobile, off- highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle is registered and numbered in accordance
with R.C. §§ 4519.03 and 4519.04.
      (2)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.215 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, no registration is required for a mini-truck that is
operated within this state. A mini-truck may be operated only in accordance
with R.C. § 4511.215 and R.C. § 4519.401, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (B)   (1)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle that is operated exclusively upon lands owned by the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle, or on lands to which the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle has a contractual right.
      (2)   No registration is required for an all-purpose vehicle that is used
primarily for agricultural purposes when the owner qualifies for the current
agricultural use valuation tax credit, unless it is to be used on any public
land, trail, or right-of-way.
      (3)   Any all-purpose vehicle exempted from registration under division
(B)(2) of this section and operated for agricultural purposes may use public
roads and rights-of-way when traveling from one farm field to another, when
such use does not violate R.C. § 4519.41.
      (4)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle
that is operated on a state highway as authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F).
   (C)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle,
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident of another
state whenever that state has in effect a registration law similar to R.C.
Chapter 4519 and the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle
is properly registered under that state’s law. Any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident
of a state not having a registration law similar to R.C. Chapter 4519 shall
comply with R.C. § 4519.09.
   (D)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle,
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this municipality by the United
States, another state or a political subdivision thereof, but the snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall display the name of the
owner thereon.
   (E)   The owner or operator of any all-purpose vehicle operated or used upon
the waters in this municipality shall comply with R.C. Chapter 1547 and R.C.
Chapter 1548 relative to the operation of watercraft.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be fined not less
than $50 nor more than $100.
(R.C. § 4519.02) (Prior Code, § 476.08)
Statutory reference:
   Destruction or transfer of vehicle; lost or destroyed registration, see R.C.
§ 4519.05
   Registration of emergency vehicles, see R.C. § 4519.08
   Registration procedure, see R.C. § 4519.03
   Temporary license placards and fees, see R.C. § 4519.10
   Temporary operating permit for certain nonresidents, see R.C. § 4519.09
§ 75.35 CERTIFICATE OF TITLE; PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle without having a certificate of title for the off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle if such a certificate is required by R.C. Chapter 4519 to
be issued for the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, or, if a
physical certificate of title has not been issued for it, operate an off-
highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle knowing that the ownership
information related to the motorcycle or vehicle has not been entered into the
automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common Pleas.
      (2)   Operate in this municipality an off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle is a certificate of title to the off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle has been issued and then has been canceled.
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon cancellation of it
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed
in R.C. Chapter 4519.
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 4519, in case of the destruction or
dismantling of, or change in, the off-highway motorcycle or all- purpose
vehicle described in the certificate of title.
      (5)   Violate any provision of R.C. §§ 4519.51 through 4519.70 for which
no penalty is otherwise provided or any lawful rules adopted pursuant to those
sections.
      (6)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle knowing that the certificate of title to or ownership of the motorcycle
or vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has
been canceled.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $200,
imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.66) (Prior Code, § 476.09)
Statutory reference:
   Certificate of title: rules and procedures, see R.C. §§ 4519.51 et seq.
   Stolen vehicles and restrictions on sale or transfer, felony provisions, see
R.C. § 4519.67
CHAPTER 76: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
76.01   Prohibition against parking on highways
   
76.02   Condition when motor vehicle left unattended
   
76.03   Police may remove illegally parked vehicle
   
76.04   Parking prohibitions
   
76.05   Parking near curb; privileges for persons with disabilities
   
76.06   Parking on private property in violation of posted prohibition
   
76.07   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway
   
76.08   Truck loading zones
   
76.09   Bus stops and taxicab stands
   
76.10   Parking in alleys and narrow streets; exceptions
   
76.11   Registered owner prima facie liable for unlawful parking
   
76.12   Waiver
   
76.13   Prohibited standing or parking places
   
76.14   Willfully leaving vehicles on private or public property
   
76.15   Parking prohibitions on private property; private tow-away zones
   
76.16   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway
   
76.17   Truck loading zones
   
76.18   Bus stops and taxicab stands
   
76.19   Parking in alleys and narrow streets; exceptions
   
76.20   Snow emergencies
   
76.21   Parking of commercial motor vehicles and commercial tractors in
residence districts
   
76.22   Registered owner prima facie liable for unlawful parking
   
76.23   Compression release brakes prohibited
   
76.24   Parking violation not considered criminal offense
   
76.25   Schedule of fines
   
76.26   Payment of fines
   
76.27   Right of appeal
 
   
76.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Unlawful furnishing of prescription to enable persons to be issued
handicapped parking placards or license plates, see §
138.17
Statutory reference:
   Noncriminal parking infractions, local option to create, see R.C. Chapter
4521
§ 76.01 PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING ON HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   (1)   Upon any highway, no person shall stop, park, or leave standing
any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled
part of the highway if it is practicable to stop, park, or so leave such
vehicle off the paved or main traveled part of the highway. In every event a
clear and unobstructed portion of the highway opposite such standing vehicle
shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of such
stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each
direction upon such highway.
      (2)   This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled while on the paved or improved or main traveled portion of a highway
in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in such position.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.66) (Prior Code, § 452.01)
§ 76.02 CONDITION WHEN MOTOR VEHICLE LEFT UNATTENDED.
   (A)   (1)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit
it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition,
removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the parking brake, and,
when the motor vehicle is standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to
the curb or side of the highway.
      (2)   The requirements of this section relating to the stopping of the
engine, locking of the ignition, and removing the key from the ignition of a
motor vehicle do not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   A motor vehicle that is parked on residential property;
         (b)   A motor vehicle that is locked, regardless of where it is
parked;
         (c)   An emergency vehicle ;
         (d)   A public safety vehicle.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.661) (Prior Code, § 452.06)
§ 76.03 POLICE MAY REMOVE ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE.
   (A)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in
violation of R.C. § 4511.66 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
such officer may move such vehicle, or require the driver or other person in
charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or improved
or main traveled part of such highway.
   (B)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any
highway, bridge, or causeway, or in any tunnel, where such vehicles constitutes
an obstruction to traffic, such officer may provide for the removal of such
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
(R.C. § 4511.67) (Prior Code, § 452.02)
§ 76.04 PARKING PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the provisions of this
title, or while obeying the directions of a police officer or a traffic-control
device, in any of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk, except as provided in division (B) of this section;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (7)    Within 30 feet of, and upon the approach to, any yield sign, stop
sign, or highway traffic signal;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by a traffic-control device;
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and, on
the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75
feet of the entrance when it is properly posted with signs;
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (12)   Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street;
      (13)   Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a highway, or within a
highway tunnel;
      (14)   At any place where signs prohibit stopping;
      (15)   Within one foot of another parked vehicle;
      (16)    On the roadway portion of a freeway, expressway, or thruway;
      (17)   On a bicycle lane.
   (B)   A person is permitted, without charge or restriction, to stand or park
on a sidewalk a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter that has an engine not
larger than 150 cubic centimeters, a low-speed micromobility device, or a
bicycle or electric bicycle, provided that the motor-driven cycle, motor
scooter, low-speed micromobility device, bicycle, or electric bicycle does not
impede the normal flow of pedestrian traffic. This division does not authorize
any person to operate a vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.711, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.68)
§ 76.05 PARKING NEAR CURB; PRIVILEGES FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
   (A)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an
adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle parallel with and not more than 12 inches from the right-hand curb,
unless it is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in such case the stop
shall be made as close to the curb as possible and only for the time necessary
to discharge and receive passengers or to load or unload merchandise. Local
authorities by ordinance may permit angle parking on any roadway under their
jurisdiction, except that angle parking shall not be permitted on a state route
within the municipality unless an unoccupied roadway width of not less than 25
feet is available for free-moving traffic.
   (B)   Local authorities by ordinance may permit parking of vehicles with the
left-hand wheels adjacent to and within 12 inches of the left-hand curb of a
one-way roadway.
   (C)   (1)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(1)(b) of this section,
no vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a road or highway with the vehicle
facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on that side of the
road or highway.
         (b)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into an
angled parking space so that when the motorcycle is parked it is facing in a
direction other than the direction of travel on the side of the road or
highway.
      (2)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into a parking
space that is located on the side of, and parallel to, a road or highway. The
motorcycle may face any direction when so parked. Not more than two motorcycles
at a time shall be parked in a parking space as described in division (C)(2) of
this section irrespective of whether or not the space is metered.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any statute or any rule, regulation, resolution, or
ordinance, air compressors, tractors, trucks, and other equipment, while being
used in the construction, reconstruction, installation, repair, or removal of
facilities near, on, over, or under a street or highway, may stop, stand, or
park where necessary in order to perform such work, provided a flagperson is on
duty or warning signs or lights are displayed as may be prescribed by the
Director of Transportation.
   (E)   Accessible parking locations and privileges for persons with
disabilities that limit or impair the ability to walk shall be provided and
designated by all political subdivisions and by the state and all agencies and
instrumentalities thereof at all offices and facilities where parking is
provided, whether owned, rented, or leased, and at all publicly owned parking
garages. The locations shall be designated through the posting of an elevated
sign, whether permanently affixed or movable, imprinted with the international
symbol of access and shall be reasonably close to exits, entrances, elevators,
and ramps. All elevated signs posted in accordance with this division and R.C.
§ 3781.111(C) shall be mounted on a fixed or movable post, and the distance
from the ground to the bottom edge of the sign shall measure not less than five
feet. If a new sign or a replacement sign designating an accessible parking
location is posted on or after October 14, 1999, there also shall be affixed
upon the surface of that sign or affixed next to the designating sign a notice
that states the fine applicable for the offense of parking a motor vehicle in
the designated accessible parking location if the motor vehicle is not legally
entitled to be parked in that location.
   (F)   (1)   (a)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle at
accessible parking locations provided under division (E) of this section, or at
accessible clearly marked parking locations provided in or on privately owned
parking lots, parking garages, or other parking areas and designated in
accordance with that division, unless one of the following applies:
            1.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a valid removable windshield placard or accessible license plates;
or
            2.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a person with a disability and is displaying a parking card or accessible
license plates.
         (b)   Any motor vehicle that is parked in an accessible marked parking
location in violation of division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section
may be towed or otherwise removed from the parking location by the law
enforcement agency of the municipality. A motor vehicle that is so towed or
removed shall not be released to its owner until the owner presents proof of
ownership of the motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees normally
imposed by the municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles. If the motor
vehicle is a leased vehicle, it shall not be released to the lessee until the
lessee presents proof that that person is the lessee of the motor vehicle and
pays all towing and storage fees normally imposed by the municipality for
towing and storing motor vehicles.
         (c)   If a person is charged with a violation of division (F)(1)(a)1.
or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section, it is an affirmative defense to the charge that
the person suffered an injury not more than 72 hours prior to the time the
person was issued the ticket or citation and that, because of the injury, the
person meets at least one of the criteria contained in R.C. § 4503.44(A)(1).
      (2)    No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle in an area
that is commonly known as an access aisle, which area is marked by diagonal
stripes and is located immediately adjacent to an accessible parking location
provided under division (E) of this section or at an accessible clearly marked
parking location provided in or on a privately owned parking lot, parking
garage, or other parking area and designated in accordance with that division.
   (G)   When a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a
person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a removable windshield placard or accessible license plates, or when
a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a person with a
disability and is displaying a parking card or accessible license plates, the
motor vehicle is permitted to park for a period of two hours in excess of the
legal parking period permitted by local authorities, except where local
ordinances or police rules provide otherwise or where the vehicle is parked in
such a manner as to be clearly a traffic hazard.
   (H)   No owner of an office, facility, or parking garage where accessible
parking locations are required to be designated in accordance with division (E)
of this section shall fail to properly mark the accessible parking locations in
accordance with that division or fail to maintain the markings of the
accessible locations, including the erection and maintenance of the fixed or
movable signs.
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a person or
organization to apply for a removable windshield placard or accessible license
plates if the parking card or accessible license plates issued to the person or
organization under prior law have not expired or been surrendered or revoked.
   (J)   As used in this section:
      ACCESSIBLE LICENSE PLATES and REMOVABLE WINDSHIELD PLACARD. Mean any
license plates, standard removable windshield placard, permanent removable
windshield placard, or temporary removable windshield placard issued under R.C.
§ 4503.41 or 4503.44, and also mean any substantially similar license plates or
removable windshield placard issued by a state, district, country, or
sovereignty.
      PERSON WITH A DISABILITY. Means any person who has lost the use of one or
both legs or one or both arms, who is blind, deaf, or unable to move without
the aid of crutches or a wheelchair, or whose mobility is restricted by a
permanent cardiovascular, pulmonary, or other disabling condition.
      PERSON WITH A DISABILITY THAT LIMITS OR IMPAIRS THE ABILITY TO WALK. Has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 4503.44.
   (K)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (A) or (C) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in
division (K)(2)(a) and (K)(2)(b) of this section. Except as otherwise provided
in division (K)(2)(a) of this section, an offender who violates division (F)(1)
(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section shall be fined not less than $250 nor more
than $500. An offender who violates division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this
section shall be fined not more than $100 if the offender, prior to sentencing,
proves either of the following to the satisfaction of the court:
            1.   At the time of the violation of division (F)(1)(a)1. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a removable windshield placard that then was
valid or accessible license plates that then were valid but the offender or the
person neglected to display the placard or license plates as described in
division (F)(1)(a)1. of this section.
            2.   At the time of the violation of division (F)(1)(a)2. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a parking card that then was valid or accessible
license plates that then were valid but the offender or the person neglected to
display the card or license plates as described in division (F)(1)(a)2. of this
section.
         (b)   In no case shall an offender who violates division (F)(1)(a)1.
or (F)(1)(a)2. be sentenced to any term of imprisonment.
         (c)   An arrest or conviction for a violation of division (F)(1)(a)1.
or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section does not constitute a criminal record and need
not be reported by the person so arrested or convicted in response to any
inquiries contained in any application for employment, license, or other right
or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s appearance as a witness.
         (d)   The clerk of the court shall pay every fine collected under
divisions (K)(2) and (K)(3) of this section to the municipality. Except as
provided in division (K)(2) of this section, the municipality shall use the
fine moneys it receives under divisions (K)(2) and (K)(3) of this section to
pay the expenses it incurs in complying with the signage and notice
requirements contained in division (E) of this section. The municipality may
use up to 50% of each fine it receives under divisions (K)(2) and (K)(3) of
this section to pay the costs of educational, advocacy, support, and assistive
technology programs for persons with disabilities, and for public improvements
within the municipality that benefit or assist persons with disabilities, if
governmental agencies or nonprofit organizations offer the programs.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (F)(2) of this section shall be fined not
less than $250 nor more than $500. In no case shall an offender who violates
division (F)(2) of this section be sentenced to any term of imprisonment. An
arrest or conviction for a violation of division (F)(2) of this section does
not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries contained in any application
for employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection
with the person’s appearance as a witness.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (H) of this section shall be punished as
follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (K)(4) of this section,
the offender shall be issued a warning.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (H) of this section or of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, the offender shall
not be issued a warning but shall be fined not more than $25 for each parking
location that is not properly marked or whose markings are not properly
maintained.
(R.C. § 4511.69) (Prior Code, § 452.04)
Cross-reference:
   Unlawful furnishing of prescription to enable persons to be issued
handicapped parking placards or license plates, see §
138.17
Statutory reference:
   Buildings, access for disabled persons, see R.C. § 3781.111
§ 76.06 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY IN VIOLATION OF POSTED PROHIBITION.
   (A)   If an owner of private property posts on the property in a conspicuous
manner a prohibition against parking on the property or conditions and
regulations under which parking is permitted, no person shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   Park a vehicle on the property without the owner’s consent;
      (2)   Park a vehicle on the property in violation of any condition or
regulation posted by the owner.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.681)
§ 76.07 SELLING, WASHING OR REPAIRING VEHICLE UPON ROADWAY.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the
principal purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.08 TRUCK LOADING ZONES.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and
loading of materials, in any place marked as a truck loading zone during hours
when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall
the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.09 BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a
bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or
stand has been officially designated and appropriately posted, except that the
driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of,
and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter such zone, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes, if
such stopping is not prohibited therein by posted signs.
   (B)   No operator of a bus shall stop, stand or park such vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop so designated and posted
as such, except in case of an emergency.
   (C)   No operator of a bus shall fail to enter a bus stop on a street or
other public way in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload
passengers or baggage is in a position with the right front wheel of such
vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately
parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular
traffic.
   (D)   No operator of a taxicab shall stand or park such vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place other than in a taxicab stand so
designated and posted as such. This provision shall not prevent the operator of
a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking provisions at any place for the purpose of, and while actually engaged
in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.10 PARKING IN ALLEYS AND NARROW STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other
than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available
less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular
traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or
unloading of passengers or when directed to by a police officer or traffic
control signal.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle within an alley except while actually loading and unloading, and
then only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.11 REGISTERED OWNER PRIMA FACIE LIABLE FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle, testimony
that a vehicle bearing a certain license plate was found unlawfully parked as
prohibited by the provisions of this Traffic Code, and further testimony that
the record of the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles shows that the license plate
was issued to the defendant, shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle
which was unlawfully parked, was so parked by the defendant. A certified
registration copy, showing such fact, from the Registrar shall be proof of such
ownership.
§ 76.12 WAIVER.
   Any person charged with a violation of any provision of this chapter for
which payment of a prescribed fine may be made, may pay such sum in the manner
prescribed on the issued traffic ticket. Such payment shall be deemed a plea of
guilty, waiver of court appearance and acknowledgment of conviction of the
alleged offense and may be accepted in full satisfaction of the prescribed
penalty for such alleged violation. Payment of the prescribed fine need not be
accepted when laws prescribe that a certain number of such offenses shall
require court appearance.
(Prior Code, § 452.13)
§ 76.13 PROHIBITED STANDING OR PARKING PLACES.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or to comply with the provisions of this title, or
while obeying the directions of a police officer or a traffic-control device,
in any of the following places:
   (A)   On a sidewalk, except a bicycle;
   (B)   In front of a public or private driveway;
   (C)   Within an intersection;
   (D)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
   (E)   On a crosswalk;
   (F)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
   (G)   Within 30 feet of, and upon the approach to, any flashing beacon, stop
sign or traffic-control device;
   (H)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by a traffic-control device;
   (I)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
   (J)   Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and, on the
side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75 feet of
the entrance when it is properly posted with signs;
   (K)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such
standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
   (L)   Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street;
   (M)   Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a highway, or within a
highway tunnel;
   (N)   At any place where signs prohibit stopping, including, but not limited
to, loading and unloading zones at the Akron-Canton Regional Airport where
posted signs prohibit parking;
   (O)   Within one foot of another parked vehicle;
   (P)   On the roadway portion of a freeway, expressway or thruway.
(Prior Code, § 452.03) (Ord. 03-06, passed 3-11-2003)
Statutory reference:
   See parking prohibitions, see R.C. § 4511.68
§ 76.14 WILLFULLY LEAVING VEHICLES ON PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   The County Sheriff, upon notification to the County Sheriff of such
action and of the location of the place of storage, may order into storage any
motor vehicle, including an abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in R.C. §
4513.63, that:
      (1)   Has come into the possession of the Police chief as a result of the
performance of the County Sheriff’s duties; or
      (2)   Has been left on a public street or other property open to the
public for purposes of vehicular travel, or upon or within the right-of-way of
any road or highway, for 48 hours or longer without notification to the County
Sheriff of the reasons for leaving the motor vehicle in such place. However,
when such a motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic it may be
ordered into storage immediately unless either of the following applies:
         (a)   The vehicle was involved in an accident and is subject to R.C. §
4513.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         (b)   The vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle. If the vehicle is a
commercial motor vehicle, the County Sheriff shall allow the owner or operator
of the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle
within a period of time specified by the County Sheriff. If the County Sheriff
determines that the vehicle cannot be removed within the specified period of
time, the County Sheriff shall order the removal of the vehicle.
      (3)   Subject to division (C) of this section, the County Sheriff shall
designate the place of storage of any motor vehicle so ordered removed.
   (B)   If the County Sheriff issues an order under division (A) of this
section and arranges for the removal of a motor vehicle by a towing service,
the towing service shall deliver the motor vehicle to the location designated
by the County Sheriff not more than two hours after the time it is removed.
   (C)   (1)   The County Sheriff shall cause a search to be made of the
records of an applicable entity listed in R.C. § 4513.601(F)(1) to ascertain
the identity of the owner and any lienholder of a motor vehicle ordered into
storage by the County Sheriff within five business days of the removal of the
vehicle. Upon obtaining such identity, the County Sheriff shall send or cause
to be sent to the owner and any lienholder at the owner’s and any lienholder’s
last known address by certified or express mail with return receipt requested,
by certified mail with electronic tracking, or by a commercial carrier service
utilizing any form of delivery requiring a signed receipt. The notice shall
inform the owner and any lienholder that the motor vehicle will be declared a
nuisance and disposed of if not claimed within ten days of the date of the
sending of the notice.
      (2)   (a)   The owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle is responsible
for payment of any expenses or charges incurred in its removal and storage and
may reclaim the motor vehicle upon payment of those expenses or charges, and
presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of
title or memorandum certificate of title to the motor vehicle, a certificate of
registration for the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement. Upon presentation of
proof of ownership evidenced as provided above, the owner of the motor vehicle
also may retrieve any personal items from the vehicle without retrieving the
vehicle and without paying any fee. However, a towing service or storage
facility may charge an after-hours retrieval fee established by the Public
Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25 if the owner
retrieves the personal items after hours, unless the towing service or storage
facility fails to provide the notice required under R.C. § 4513.69(B)(3), if
applicable. However, the owner shall not do either of the following:
            1.   Retrieve any personal item that has been determined by the
County Sheriff to be necessary to a criminal investigation;
            2.   Retrieve any personal item from a vehicle if it would endanger
the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees to sign a waiver of liability.
         (b)   For purposes of division (C)(2) of this section, “personal
items” do not include any items that are attached to the vehicle.
      (3)   If the owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle reclaims it after a
search of the applicable records has been conducted and after notice has been
sent to the owner and any lienholder as described in this section, and the
search was conducted by the place of storage, and the notice was sent to the
motor vehicle owner by the place of storage, the owner or lienholder shall pay
to the place of storage a processing fee of $25, in addition to any expenses or
charges incurred in the removal and storage of the vehicle.
   (D)   If the owner or lienholder makes no claim to the motor vehicle within
ten days of the date of sending the notice, and if the vehicle is to be
disposed of at public auction as provided in R.C. § 4513.62 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the County Sheriff, without
charge to any party, shall file with the clerk of courts of the county in which
the place of storage is located an affidavit showing compliance with the
requirements of this section. Upon presentation of the affidavit, the clerk,
without charge, shall issue a salvage certificate of title, free and clear of
all liens and encumbrances, to the County Sheriff. If the vehicle is to be
disposed of to a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility as provided in
R.C. § 4513.62 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the County
Sheriff shall execute in triplicate an affidavit, as prescribed by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles, describing the motor vehicle and the manner in
which it was disposed of, and that all requirements of this section have been
complied with. The County Sheriff shall retain the original of the affidavit
for the County Sheriff’s records, and shall furnish two copies to the motor
vehicle salvage dealer or other facility. Upon presentation of a copy of the
affidavit by the motor vehicle salvage dealer, the clerk of courts, within 30
days of the presentation, shall issue a salvage certificate of title, free and
clear of all liens and encumbrances.
   (E)   Whenever a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility receives an
affidavit for the disposal of a motor vehicle as provided in this section, the
dealer or facility shall not be required to obtain an Ohio certificate of title
to the motor vehicle in the dealer’s or facility’s own name if the vehicle is
dismantled or destroyed and both copies of the affidavit are delivered to the
Clerk of Courts.
   (F)   No towing service or storage facility shall fail to comply with this
section.
(R.C. § 4513.61)
   (G)   Abandonment of junk motor vehicle prohibited.
      (1)   (a)   No person shall willfully leave an abandoned junk motor
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4513.63 on private property for more than 72 hours
without the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the
property, or on a public street or other property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of
any road or highway for 48 hours or longer without notification to the County
Sheriff of the reason for leaving the motor vehicle in such place.
         (b)   For purposes of this division (G)(1), the fact that a motor
vehicle has been so left without permission or notification is prima facie
evidence of abandonment.
         (c)   Nothing contained in this section and R.C. §§ 4513.60, 4513.61
and 4513.63 shall invalidate or prevent the enactment of further provisions of
municipal ordinances regulating or prohibiting the abandonment of motor
vehicles on streets, highways, public property or private property within the
municipality.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (G) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
and shall also be assessed any costs incurred by the municipality in disposing
of the abandoned junk motor vehicle, less any money accruing to the
municipality from the disposal.
(R.C. § 4513.64)
(Prior Code, § 452.05)
§ 76.15 PARKING PROHIBITIONS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; PRIVATE TOW-AWAY ZONES.
   (A)   (1)   The Sheriff or Chief of Police, upon complaint of any person
adversely affected, may order into storage any motor vehicle, other than an
abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4513.63, that has been left
on private residential or private agricultural property for at least four hours
without the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the
property. The Sheriff or Chief of Police, upon complaint of a repair garage or
place of storage, may order into storage any motor vehicle, other than an
abandoned junk motor vehicle, that has been left at the garage or place of
storage for a longer period than that agreed upon. When ordering a motor
vehicle into storage pursuant to this division, the Sheriff or Chief of Police
may arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle by a towing service and shall
designate a storage facility.
      (2)   A towing service towing a motor vehicle under division (A)(1) of
this section shall remove the motor vehicle in accordance with that division.
The towing service shall deliver the motor vehicle to the location designated
by the Sheriff or Chief of Police not more than two hours after the time it is
removed from the private property, unless the towing service is unable to
deliver the motor vehicle within two hours due to an uncontrollable force,
natural disaster, or other event that is not within the power of the towing
service.
      (3)   Subject to division (B) of this section, the owner of a motor
vehicle that has been removed pursuant to this division may recover the vehicle
only in accordance with division (D) of this section.
      (4)   As used in this section, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY means private
property on which is located one or more structures that are used as a home,
residence, or sleeping place by one or more persons, if no more than three
separate households are maintained in the structure or structures. The phrase
does not include any private property on which is located one or more
structures that are used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by two or more
persons, if more than three separate households are maintained in the structure
or structures.
   (B)   (1)   If the owner or operator of a motor vehicle that has been
ordered into storage pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section arrives after
the motor vehicle has been prepared for removal, but prior to its actual
removal from the property, the towing service shall give the owner or operator
oral or written notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle owner
or operator may pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee for the removal
of the motor vehicle established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules
adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, in order to obtain release of the motor vehicle.
However, if the vehicle is within a municipal corporation and the municipal
corporation has established a vehicle removal fee, the towing service shall
give the owner or operator oral or written notification that the owner or
operator may pay not more than one-half of that fee to obtain release of the
motor vehicle. That fee may be paid by use of a major credit card unless the
towing service uses a mobile credit card processor and mobile service is not
available at the time of the transaction.
      (2)   Upon payment of the applicable fee, the towing service shall give
the vehicle owner or operator a receipt showing both the full amount normally
assessed and the actual amount received and shall release the motor vehicle to
the owner or operator. Upon its release, the owner or operator immediately
shall move it so that it is not on the private residential or private
agricultural property without the permission of the person having the right to
possession of the property, or is not at the garage or place of storage without
the permission of the owner, whichever is applicable.
   (C)   (1)   The Sheriff and Chief of Police shall maintain a record of motor
vehicles that the Sheriff or Chief of Police orders into storage pursuant to
division (A)(1) of this section. The record shall include an entry for each
such motor vehicle that identifies the motor vehicle’s license number, make,
model, and color, the location from which it was removed, the date and time of
its removal, the telephone number of the person from whom it may be recovered,
and the address of the place to which it has been taken and from which it may
be recovered. The Sheriff or Chief of Police shall provide any information in
the record that pertains to a particular motor vehicle to any person who,
either in person or pursuant to a telephone call, identifies self as the owner
or operator of the motor vehicle and requests information pertaining to its
location.
      (2)   Any person who registers a complaint that is the basis of the
Sheriff’s or Police Chief’s order for the removal and storage of a motor
vehicle under division (A)(1) of this section shall provide the identity of the
law enforcement agency with which the complaint was registered to any person
who identifies self as the owner or operator of the motor vehicle and requests
information pertaining to its location.
   (D)   (1)   The owner or lienholder of a motor vehicle that is ordered into
storage pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section may reclaim it upon both of
the following:
         (a)   Payment of all applicable fees established by the Public
Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25 or, if the vehicle
was towed within a municipal corporation that has established fees for vehicle
removal and storage, payment of all applicable fees established by the
municipal corporation; and
         (b)   Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a
certificate of title to the motor vehicle, a certificate of registration for
the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement.
      (2)   When the owner of a vehicle towed under this section retrieves the
vehicle, the towing service or storage facility in possession of the vehicle
shall give the owner written notice that if the owner disputes that the motor
vehicle was lawfully towed, the owner may be able to file a civil action under
R.C. § 4513.611.
      (3)   Upon presentation of proof of ownership as required under division
(D)(1)(b) of this section, the owner of a motor vehicle that is ordered into
storage under division (A)(1) of this section may retrieve any personal items
from the motor vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and without paying any
fee. However, a towing service or storage facility may charge an after-hours
retrieval fee established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted
under R.C. § 4921.25 if the owner retrieves the personal items after hours,
unless the towing service or storage facility fails to provide the notice
required under R.C. § 4513.69(B)(3), if applicable. The owner of a motor
vehicle shall not do either of the following:
         (a)   Retrieve any personal item that has been determined by the
Sheriff or Chief of Police,
as applicable, to be necessary to a criminal investigation; or
         (b)   Retrieve any personal item from a vehicle if it would endanger
the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees to sign a waiver of liability.
      (4)   For purposes of division (D)(3) of this section, “personal items”
do not include any items that are attached to the motor vehicle.
      (5)   If a motor vehicle that is ordered into storage pursuant to
division (A)(1) of this section remains unclaimed by the owner for 30 days, the
procedures established by R.C. §§ 4513.61 and 4513.62 apply.
   (E)   (1)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any motor
vehicle from any private residential or private agricultural property other
than in accordance with division (A)(1) of this section or R.C. §§ 4513.61 to
4513.65.
      (2)   No towing service or storage facility shall fail to comply with the
requirements of this section.
   (F)   This section does not apply to any private residential or private
agricultural property that is established as a private tow-away zone in
accordance with division (H) of this section or R.C. § 4513.601.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.60)
   (H)   Private tow-away zones.
      (1)   The owner of a private property may establish a private tow-away
zone, but may do so only if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
         (a)   The owner of the private property posts on the property a sign,
that is at least 18 inches by 24 inches in size, that is visible from all
entrances to the property, and that includes all of the following information:
            1.   A statement that the property is a tow-away zone;
            2.   A description of persons authorized to park on the property.
If the property is a residential property, the owner of the private property
may include on the sign a statement that only tenants and guests may park in
the private tow-away zone, subject to the terms of the property owner. If the
property is a commercial property, the owner of the private property may
include on the sign a statement that only customers may park in the private
tow-away zone. In all cases, if it is not apparent which persons may park in
the private tow-away zone, the owner of the private property shall include on
the sign the address of the property on which the private tow-away zone is
located or the name of the business that is located on the property designated
as a private tow- away zone;
            3.   If the private tow-away zone is not enforceable at all times,
the times during which the parking restrictions are enforced;
            4.   The telephone number and the address of the place from which a
towed vehicle may be recovered at any time during the day or night;
            5.   A statement that the failure to recover a towed vehicle may
result in the loss of title to the vehicle as provided in R.C. § 4505.101(B);
and
            6.   In order to comply with the requirements of division (h)(1)A.
of this section, the owner of a private property may modify an existing sign by
affixing to the existing sign stickers or an addendum in lieu of replacing the
sign.
         (b)   A towing service ensures that a vehicle towed under this
division (H) is taken to a location from which it may be recovered that
complies with all of the following:
            1.   It is located within 25 linear miles of the location of the
private tow-away zone, unless it is not practicable to take the vehicle to a
place of storage within 25 linear miles;
            2.   It is well-lighted; and
            3.   It is on or within a reasonable distance of a regularly
scheduled route of one or more modes of public transportation, if any public
transportation is available in the municipal corporation or township in which
the private tow-away zone is located.
      (2)   (a)   If a vehicle is parked on private property that is
established as a private tow-away zone in accordance with division (H)(1) of
this section, without the consent of the owner of the private property or in
violation of any posted parking condition or regulation, the owner of the
private property may cause the removal of the vehicle by a towing service. The
towing service shall remove the vehicle in accordance with this division (H).
The vehicle owner and the operator of the vehicle are considered to have
consented to the removal and storage of the vehicle, to the payment of the
applicable fees established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted
under R.C. § 4921.25, and to the right of a towing service to obtain title to
the vehicle if it remains unclaimed as provided in R.C. § 4505.101. The owner
or lienholder of a vehicle that has been removed under this division (H),
subject to division (H)(3) of this section, may recover the vehicle in
accordance with division (H)(7) of this section.
         (b)   If a municipal corporation requires tow trucks and tow truck
operators to be licensed, no owner of a private property located within the
municipal corporation shall cause the removal and storage of any vehicle
pursuant to division (H)(2) of this section by an unlicensed tow truck or
unlicensed tow truck operator.
         (c)   No towing service shall remove a vehicle from a private tow-away
zone except pursuant to a written contract for the removal of vehicles entered
into with the owner of the private property on which the private tow-away zone
is located.
      (3)   If the owner or operator of a vehicle that is being removed under
authority of division (H)(2) of this section arrives after the vehicle has been
prepared for removal, but prior to its actual removal from the property, the
towing service shall give the vehicle owner or operator oral or written
notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle owner or operator may
pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee for the removal of the vehicle
established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. §
4921.25 in order to obtain release of the vehicle. That fee may be paid by use
of a major credit card unless the towing service uses a mobile credit card
processor and mobile service is not available at the time of the transaction.
Upon payment of that fee, the towing service shall give the vehicle owner or
operator a receipt showing both the full amount normally assessed and the
actual amount received and shall release the vehicle to the owner or operator.
Upon its release, the owner or operator immediately shall move the vehicle so
that the vehicle is not parked on the private property established as a private
tow-away zone without the consent of the owner of the private property or in
violation of any posted parking condition or regulation.
      (4)   (a)   Prior to towing a vehicle under division (h)(2) of this
section, a towing service shall make all reasonable efforts to take as many
photographs as necessary to evidence that the vehicle is clearly parked on
private property in violation of a private tow-away zone established under
division (H)(1) of this section. The towing service shall record the time and
date of the photographs taken under this division (H). The towing service shall
retain the photographs and the record of the time and date, in electronic or
printed form, for at least 30 days after the date on which the vehicle is
recovered by the owner or lienholder or at least two years after the date on
which the vehicle was towed, whichever is earlier.
         (b)   A towing service shall deliver a vehicle towed under division
(H)(2) of this section to the location from which it may be recovered not more
than two hours after the time it was removed from the private tow-away zone,
unless the towing service is unable to deliver the motor vehicle within two
hours due to an uncontrollable force, natural disaster, or other event that is
not within the power of the towing service.
      (5)   (a)   If an owner of a private property that is established as a
private tow-away zone in accordance with division (H)(1) of this section causes
the removal of a vehicle from that property by a towing service under division
(H)(2) of this section, the towing service, within two hours of removing the
vehicle, shall provide notice to the Sheriff or the Police Department
concerning all of the following:
            1.   The vehicle’s license number, make, model, and color;
            2.   The location from which the vehicle was removed;
            3.   The date and time the vehicle was removed;
            4.   The telephone number of the person from whom the vehicle may
be recovered; and
            5.   The address of the place from which the vehicle may be
recovered.
         (b)   The Sheriff and Chief of Police shall maintain a record of any
vehicle removed from private property in the Sheriff’s or Police Chief’s
jurisdiction that is established as a private tow-away zone of which the
Sheriff or Police Chief has received notice under this division (H). The record
shall include all information submitted by the towing service. The Sheriff or
Police Chief shall provide any information in the record that pertains to a
particular vehicle to a person who, either in person or pursuant to a telephone
call, identifies self as the owner, operator, or lienholder of the vehicle and
requests information pertaining to the vehicle.
      (6)   (a)   When a vehicle is removed from private property in accordance
with this section, within three business days of the removal, the towing
service or storage facility from which the vehicle may be recovered shall cause
a search to be made of either of the following to ascertain the identity of the
owner and any lienholder of the vehicle:
            1.   The records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles; or
            2.   The records of any vendor or vendors, approved by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles, that are capable of providing real-time access to
owner and lienholder information.
         (b)   The towing service or storage facility may search the National
Motor Vehicle Title Information System in order to determine the state in which
the vehicle is titled. The entity that provides the record of the owner and any
lienholder under this division shall ensure that such information is provided
in a timely manner.
         (c)   Subject to division (H)(6)(f) of this section, the towing
service or storage facility shall send notice to the vehicle owner and any
known lienholder as follows:
            1.   Within five business days after the applicable entity provides
the identity of the owner and any lienholder of the motor vehicle, if the
vehicle remains unclaimed, to the owner’s and lienholder’s last known address
by certified or express mail with return receipt requested, by certified mail
with electronic tracking, or by a commercial carrier service utilizing any form
of delivery requiring a signed receipt; and
            2.   If the vehicle remains unclaimed 30 days after the first
notice is sent, in the manner required under division (H)(6)(c)1. of this
section.
         (d)   Sixty days after any notice sent pursuant to division (H)(6)(c)
of this section is received, as evidenced by a receipt signed by any person, or
the towing service or storage facility has been notified that delivery was not
possible, the towing service or storage facility, if authorized under R.C. §
4505.101(B), may initiate the process for obtaining a certificate of title to
the motor vehicle as provided in that section.
         (e)   A towing service or storage facility that does not receive a
signed receipt of notice, or a notification that delivery was not possible,
shall not obtain, and shall not attempt to obtain, a certificate of title to
the motor vehicle under R.C. § 4505.101(B).
         (f)   With respect to a vehicle concerning which a towing service or
storage facility is not eligible to obtain title under R.C. § 4505.101, the
towing service or storage facility need only comply with the initial notice
required under division (H)(6)(c)1. of this section.
      (7)   (a)   The owner or lienholder of a vehicle that is removed under
division (H)(2) of this section may reclaim it upon both of the following:
            1.   Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by
a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of registration for the
motor vehicle, or a lease agreement; and
            2.   Payment of the following fees:
               a.   All applicable fees established by the Public Utilities
Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, except that the lienholder of
a vehicle may retrieve the vehicle without paying any storage fee for the
period of time that the vehicle was in the possession of the towing service or
storage facility prior to the date the lienholder received the notice sent
under division (H)(6)(a)1. of this section; and
               b.   If notice has been sent to the owner and lienholder as
described in division (H)(6) of this section, a processing fee of $25.
         (b)   A towing service or storage facility in possession of a vehicle
that is removed under authority of division (H)(2) of this section shall show
the vehicle owner, operator, or lienholder who contests the removal of the
vehicle all photographs taken under division (H)(4) of this section. Upon
request, the towing service or storage facility shall provide a copy of all
photographs in the medium in which the photographs are stored, whether paper,
electronic, or otherwise.
         (c)   When the owner of a vehicle towed under this section retrieves
the vehicle, the towing service or storage facility in possession of the
vehicle shall give the owner written notice that if the owner disputes that the
motor vehicle was lawfully towed, the owner may be able to file a civil action
under R.C. § 4513.611.
         (d)   Upon presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced
by a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of registration for the
motor vehicle, or a lease agreement, the owner of a vehicle that is removed
under authority of division (H)(2) of this section may retrieve any personal
items from the vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and without paying any
fee. The owner of the vehicle shall not retrieve any personal items from a
vehicle if it would endanger the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees
to sign a waiver of liability. For purposes of division (H)(7)(d) of this
section, “personal items” do not include any items that are attached to the
vehicle.
      (8)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any vehicle from
private property that is established as a private tow-away zone under this
division (h) or store such a vehicle other than in accordance with this
division (H), or otherwise fail to comply with any applicable requirement of
this division (H).
      (9)   This section does not affect or limit the operation of divisions
(A) through (G) of this section, R.C. § 4513.60 or R.C. §§ 4513.61 to 4613.65
as they relate to property other than private property that is established as a
private tow-away zone under division (H)(1) of this section.
      (10)   Whoever violates division (H)(8) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (11)   As used in this section, “owner of a private property” or “owner
of the private property” includes, with respect to a private property, any of
the following:
         (a)   Any person who holds title to the property;
         (b)   Any person who is a lessee or sublessee with respect to a lease
or sublease agreement for the property;
         (c)   A person who is authorized to manage the property; or
         (d)   A duly authorized agent of any person listed in divisions (H)
(11)(a) to (H)(11)(c) of this section.
(R.C. § 4513.601)
   (I)   If an owner of private property posts on the property in a conspicuous
manner a prohibition against parking on the property or conditions and
regulations under which parking is permitted, no person shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   Park a vehicle on the property without the owner’s consent; or
      (2)   Park a vehicle on the property in violation of any condition or
regulation posted by the owner.
   (J)   Whoever violates division (I) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.681)
(Prior Code, § 452.055)
§ 76.16 SELLING, WASHING OR REPAIRING VEHICLE UPON ROADWAY.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the
principal purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying the vehicle for sale; or
   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle except repairs necessitated
by an emergency.
(Prior Code, § 452.08)
§ 76.17 TRUCK LOADING ZONES.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and
loading of materials, in any place marked as a truck loading zone during hours
when the provisions applicable to those zones are in effect. In no case shall
the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
(Prior Code, § 452.09)
§ 76.18 BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a
bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or
stand has been officially designated and appropriately posted, except that the
driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of,
and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when the
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter the zone, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes, if
the stopping is not prohibited therein by posted signs.
   (B)   No operator of a bus shall stop, stand or park the vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop so designated and posted
as such, except in case of an emergency.
   (C)   No operator of a bus shall fail to enter a bus stop on a street or
other public way in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload
passengers or baggage is in a position with the right front wheel of the
vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately
parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular
traffic.
   (D)   No operator of a taxicab shall stand or park the vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place other than in a taxicab stand so
designated and posted as such. This provision shall not prevent the operator of
a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking provisions at any place for the purpose of, and while actually engaged
in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
(Prior Code, § 452.10)
§ 76.19 PARKING IN ALLEYS AND NARROW STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other
than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available
less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular
traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or
unloading of passengers or when directed to by a police officer or traffic-
control signal.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle within an alley except while actually loading and unloading, and
then only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes.
(Prior Code, § 452.11)
§ 76.20 SNOW EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   In order to facilitate the cleaning of public streets and expedite the
free flow of traffic, motor vehicles shall not be parked on public streets in
the city at such times as the United States Weather Bureau records indicate
that two inches of snow has fallen and that there is a prospect of further
snowfall. Law enforcement officers are authorized to provide for the removal of
any motor vehicle parked in violation of this section.
   (B)   It is the responsibility of the owner or operators of motor vehicles
to ascertain whether or not conditions require the removal of their motor
vehicles from the streets designated, and to remove all cars parked in
violation of this section. The city shall use all available means to
disseminate information as to the existence of weather conditions requiring
removal of parked motor vehicles from the areas designated, including radio,
television, newspapers and other available media to the extent feasible. The
dissemination of this information does not relieve owners or operators of motor
vehicles from the responsibility of ascertaining the existence of weather
conditions requiring the removal of parked motor vehicles from the areas
designated.
   (C)   Any motor vehicle that is removed pursuant to this section shall be
towed in accordance with any city towing ordinance in effect at the time.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. In
addition, where a motor vehicle is towed to a motor vehicle pound, the motor
vehicle may be recovered only upon the payment of the towing charges to the
impound lot.
(Prior Code, § 452.115) (Ord. 94-2, passed 2-8-1994)
§ 76.21 PARKING OF COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES AND COMMERCIAL TRACTORS IN
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE shall have the same meaning given in §
71.45.
      COMMERCIAL TRACTOR shall have the same meaning given in R.C. § 4501.01
(D).
   (B)   No person shall stop, park or leave standing any commercial vehicle or
commercial tractor, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main
traveled part of a street or highway in a residence district.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 452.117) (Ord. 95-22, passed 1-23-1996)
§ 76.22 REGISTERED OWNER PRIMA FACIE LIABLE FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle, testimony
that a vehicle bearing a certain license plate was found unlawfully parked as
prohibited by the provisions of this Traffic Code, and further testimony that
the record of the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles shows that the license plate
was issued to the defendant, shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle
which was unlawfully parked, was so parked by the defendant. A certified
registration copy, showing that fact, from the Registrar shall be proof of
ownership.
(Prior Code, § 452.12)
§ 76.23 COMPRESSION RELEASE BRAKES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, COMPRESSION RELEASE-TYPE
BRAKING SYSTEM shall mean any device equipped on certain commercial vehicles,
including, but not limited to, tractors, semitrucks, motor carriers and buses
that utilize engine compression release or engine retarders as a means of
slowing or braking the speed of the vehicle in lieu of applying the clutch or
brakes. A COMPRESSION RELEASE-TYPE BRAKING SYSTEM is also referred to as “jake
brakes,” “jacob’s brake,” “engine brake” or “dynamic braking device.”
   (B)   Use prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any
motor vehicle with a compression release-type braking system to cause their
vehicle to brake or slow by any method which increases the noise emission
levels of the engine, such as, but not limited to, engine compression release
brakes or engine retarder in lieu of applying the clutch or brakes upon any
public street, road or highway within the limits of the city. This section
shall not apply to fire protection equipment or other emergency vehicles, or if
used by an operator of a vehicle in an emergency situation to avert imminent
danger.
   (C)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be a minor misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of not more than $100 for each offense.
(Prior Code, § 452.14) (Ord. 2008-16, passed 6-24-2008)
§ 76.24 PARKING VIOLATION NOT CONSIDERED CRIMINAL OFFENSE.
   City Council authorizes the Director of Public Safety to make and issue
rules and regulations prohibiting parking on streets, alleys, highways or
public property in the city. City Council further decrees that a violation of
any parking regulation established by the Director of Public Safety shall not
be considered a criminal offense for any purpose, and that no person who
violates a parking violation, shall not be arrested as a result of that
violation under any circumstances.
(Prior Code, § 452.15) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 4-13-2010)
§ 76.25 SCHEDULE OF FINES.
   City Council further adopts a schedule of fines for violation of the new
parking regulations established by the Director of Public Safety as follows:
   (A)   Parking violation (not handicap zone or airport): $5;
   (B)   Late fee (if fine not paid within 15 days): $10;
   (C)   Additional late fee (if fine not paid within 30 days): $40; and
   (D)   City Council further authorizes the impoundment or immobilization of
vehicles, civil court action and/or a block on the renewal registration of the
owner’s vehicle for all fines not paid after 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 452.16) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 4-13-2010)
§ 76.26 PAYMENT OF FINES.
   All fines shall be due and payable to the Finance Department at the Central
Administration Building.
(Prior Code, § 452.17) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 4-13-2010)
§ 76.27 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   Any person who receives a citation for violation of parking regulations
established by the Director of Public Safety shall have the right and
opportunity to appeal the citation as long as that person submits a written
objection to the citation to the Director of Public Safety, or his or her
designee, within ten days of the date of the violation. The Director of Public
Safety, or his or her designee, shall review the objection to determine whether
the citation shall be revoked or sustained. The Director of Public Safety’s
ruling on such issues shall be a final and conclusive determination.
(Prior Code, § 452.18) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 4-13-2010)
§ 76.99 PENALTY.
   Violators of §§
76.13(A) through (M), (O) and (P) shall be fined $15 for a first violation. Any
second or subsequent violation within a one-year period shall incur a fine of
$30. Violators of §
76.13(N) involving parking in areas where signage prohibits parking at the
Akron-Canton Regional Airport shall be fined $15 for the first violation. Any
second or subsequent violations of §
76.13(N) within a one-year period shall incur a fine of $50.
(Prior Code, § 452.99) (Ord. 03-06, passed 3-11-2003; Ord. 05-05, passed 5-24-
2005)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   CEMETERIES
      
92.   ALARM SYSTEMS
      
93.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
94.   ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING CENTERS
      
95.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
96.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
97.   NUISANCES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Animal bites; reports and quarantine
   
90.03   Control of dogs
   
90.04   Animals running at large
   
90.05   Female dogs and cats at large
   
90.06   Nuisance conditions prohibited
   
90.07   Abandoning animals
   
90.08   Killing or injuring animals
   
90.09   Poisoning animals
   
90.10   Cruelty to animals; cruelty to companion animals
   
90.11   Protection of wildlife in parks
   
90.12   Animals prohibited in stores
   
90.13   Removal of excrement
   
90.14   Restraint of dangerous or vicious dogs
   
90.15   Serious harm by dangerous or vicious dogs
   
90.16   Menacing by dangerous or vicious dogs
   
90.17   Insurance for vicious dogs
   
90.18   Pretrial impoundment and destruction of dangerous and vicious dogs
   
90.19   Exotic animals prohibited
   
90.20   Unsecured exotic animals
   
90.21   Exotic animals at large
   
90.22   Serious physical harm to persons by exotic animals
   
90.23   Physical harm to persons and animals by exotic animals
   
90.24   Insurance for exotic animals
   
90.25   Pretrial impoundment and destruction of exotic animals
   
90.26   Sale of exotic animals; display of notice
   
90.27   Report of escape of exotic or dangerous animal
   
90.28   Coloring rabbits and baby poultry; sale or display of poultry
   
90.29   Impounding procedures
   
90.30   Annual registration of dogs; tags required
   
90.31   Unlawful tags
   
90.32   Owner’s liability for damages; treble damages
   
90.33   Enforcement; right of entry
   
90.34   Obstructing enforcement
   
90.35   Sexual conduct with an animal
Statutory reference:
   Power to restrain and impound animals, see R.C. § 715.23
   Possession of dangerous wild animals and restricted snakes, requirements and
licensing, see R.C. Ch. 935
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Dogs, cats, cattle, sheep, horses, geese, ducks, turkeys, chickens
or other fowl or animal, domestic or wild, maintained or kept as a pet, for
work or for a product.
   ANIMAL WARDEN. Any dog warden or deputy dog warden appointed by the county
or the municipality.
   AT LARGE. Off the premises of the owner.
   DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that, without provocation, has chased or approached in
either a menacing fashion or an apparent attitude of attack, or has attempted
to bite or otherwise endanger any person, or bites or causes physical harm to
another dog, cat or other animal. DANGEROUS DOG does not include a police dog
that has chased or approached in either a menacing fashion or an apparent
attitude of attack, or that has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger any
person while the police dog is being used to assist a law enforcement officer
in the performance of his or her official duties.
   DOMESTIC FARM ANIMAL. Horses, mules, donkeys, cattle, goats, sheep, geese,
ducks, swine, guinea hens, chickens and turkeys.
   EXOTIC ANIMAL. Lions, leopards, cheetahs, jaguars, panthers, cougars, lynx,
bobcats, hyenas, wolverines, bears, bison, elk, moose, wildebeest, wolves,
coyotes, foxes, gorillas, baboons, orangutans, gibbons, chimpanzees, monkeys of
a species whose average adult weight exceeds 20 pounds, elephants,
rhinoceroses, hippopotami, caimans, gavials, alligators, crocodiles exceeding
36 inches in length, constricting snakes exceeding 48 inches in length, and all
forms of poisonous or venomous reptiles.
   GUARD DOG. Any dog that has been trained or is being trained to protect
persons or property through aggressive or intimidating behavior, whether or not
under the direct control of the owner, as defined herein.
   IMPOUND. To seize summarily, confine and retain custody of according to law.
   MENACING FASHION. A dog would cause any person being chased or approached to
reasonably believe that the dog will cause physical injury to that person.
   OWNER. A keeper, handler, harborer or person maintaining or responsible for
any animal or having the care, custody or control of any animal.
   PERMIT TO RUN AT LARGE. Running at will, roaming away from the premises of
the owner, acting on its own initiative, and not on a leash or under the
immediate control of the owner.
   POLICE DOG. A dog that has been trained or is being trained and may be used
to assist a law enforcement officer in the performance of his or her official
duties.
   REGISTERED DOG. A dog registered in compliance with R.C. Ch. 955.
   REGISTRATION TAG. The metal tag issued annually by the County Auditor
evidencing a registered dog.
   SECURITY DOG. Any dog that has been trained or is being trained to protect
persons or property through aggressive or intimidating behavior, whether or not
under the direct control of the owner, as defined herein.    
   UNSECURED. Not securely confined indoors, or not securely restrained by
means of a collar and chain, pen, fence or similar physical device, and in such
a manner which effectively prevents the animal from going beyond the premises
of the owner.
   VICIOUS DOG. A dog that, without provocation, has either killed or caused
injury to any person, or killed another dog. VICIOUS DOG does not include
either a police dog that has killed or caused injury to any person while the
police dog is being used to assist a law enforcement officer in the performance
of his or her official duties, or a dog that has caused death or serious injury
to any person while a person was committing or attempting to commit a criminal
trespass or other crime of violence on the property of the owner of the dog.
   WHOEVER. An owner, keeper, handler or harborer.
   WITHOUT PROVOCATION. A dog was not teased, tormented or abused by a person,
or that a dog was not coming to the aid or the defense of a person who was not
engaged in illegal or criminal activity and who was not using the dog as a
means of carrying out such activity.
(Prior Code, § 618.01) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.02 ANIMAL BITES; REPORTS AND QUARANTINE.
   (A)   Whenever any person is bitten by a dog or other animal, report of such
bite shall be made to the animal warden or the municipal law enforcement agency
within 24 hours. Whenever it is reported to the animal warden that any dog or
cat has bitten a person, that dog or cat shall be quarantined by its owner or
by a harborer, or shall be quarantined in a pound or kennel. In all cases, such
quarantine shall be under the supervision of the animal warden and shall be at
the expense of the owner or harborer. Quarantine shall continue until the
animal warden determines that the dog or cat is not afflicted with rabies. The
quarantine period hereby required shall not be less than ten days from the date
on which the person was bitten. If at any time during the quarantine, the
animal warden requires the dog or cat to be examined for symptoms of rabies,
then the examination shall be by a licensed doctor of veterinary medicine. The
veterinarian shall report to the animal warden the conclusions reached as a
result of the examinations. The examination by a veterinarian shall be at the
expense of the owner or harborer. No dog or cat shall be released from the
required quarantine unless and until it has been properly vaccinated against
rabies.
   (B)   No person shall fail to comply with the requirements of this section
or with any order of the animal warden made pursuant thereto, nor fail to
immediately report to the animal warden any symptoms or behavior suggestive of
rabies.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(Prior Code, § 618.02) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.03 CONTROL OF DOGS.
   (A)   No owner, keeper or harborer of any dog shall fail at any time to keep
such dog either physically confined or restrained upon the premises of the
owner by a leash, tether, adequate fence or secure enclosure to prevent escape,
or properly in leash and under the immediate control of some person, except
when the dog is lawfully engaged in hunting or training for the purpose of
hunting, and accompanied by the owner.
   (B)   No dog shall be at large within the city unless securely attached upon
a leash held in the hand of a person in a manner which continuously controls
the dog, except when the dog is lawfully engaged in hunting, or training for
the purpose of hunting, and accompanied by the owner.
   (C)   No person shall take, lead, or have in his or her possession any
animal in any city park, except;
      (1)   Service animals in accordance with Ohio Administrative Code 3344-
79-02; and
      (2)   Dogs in accordance with the following:
         (a)   A dog upon a strapped or corded (not a virtual) leash that is no
longer than six feet in length and held in the hand of a person in a manner
that continuously controls the dog, except that a dog in Ariss park may be
unleashed within the designated fenced area;
         (b)   A dog wearing a valid registration tag pursuant to R.C. Chapter
955 and § 90.30;
         (c)   A dog within the following parks, including inside the spectator
area of a sport field or sport court, but not on the sport field or sport
court:
            1.   Ariss Park;
            2.   Boettler Park;
            3.   Central Park (except that dogs are not permitted in the
amphitheater seating area, the playground area, or the splash pad);
            4.   East Liberty Park;
            5.   Greensburg Park;
            6.   Kleckner Park;
            7.   Kreighbaum Park;
            8.   Southgate Park; and
            9.   Spring Hill Sports Complex.
         (d)   Dogs are not permitted at the following parks or city owned
properties:
            1.   Raintree Golf and Event Center, including on the course;
            2.   Veteran's Park;
            3.   Torok Community/Senior Center walking trails;
            4.   Central Park Amphitheater seating area;
            5.   Any indoor facility owned or operated by the city;
            6.   Any park playground areas, play structures;
            7.   Splash pad; and
            8.   Within the playing limits of competitive/play sports fields or
sports courts.
         (e)   Dogs are prohibited at special events hosted by the city at any
city park.
   (D)   No person shall fail to clean up after and properly dispose of the
waste of his or her service animal or dog in any city park.
   (E)   No person, being the owner of a dog, shall encourage or permit such
dog to:
      (1)   Snap at, menace, attempt to bite or attempt to cause physical harm
to any person or animal, while the dog is off the premises of the owner, or
while on premises which are not exclusively controlled by the owner;
      (2)   Cause physical harm to the property of another while the dog is off
the premises of the owner, or while on premises which are not exclusively
controlled by the owner; or
      (3)   Bite or otherwise cause physical harm to any person or animal while
the dog is off the premises of the owner, or while on premises which are not
exclusively controlled by the owner.
   (F)   It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of divisions (A) and
(B) of this section that the dog was:
      (1)   Securely confined in an automobile or cage which is adequately
ventilated; or
      (2)   Being exhibited at a public dog show, zoo, museum or public
institution.
   (G)   No public law enforcement agency or member thereof, or a licensed
private law enforcement agency or member thereof, shall be convicted of any
violation of this section where the dog is owned by the agency and at that time
engaged in law enforcement activities.
   (H)   Lack of intent, knowledge or fault on the part of the owner is not a
defense to a violation of this section.
   (I)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a
first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for each subsequent
offense.
(Prior Code, § 618.03) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992; Ord. 2018-08, passed 5-22-
2018; Ord. 2024-05, passed 4-9-2024)
§ 90.04 OTHER ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   No person, being the owner or having charge of any animal other than a
dog, shall permit such animal to run at large upon any public place, upon any
enclosed lands or upon the premises of another. The owner or person having
charge of any such animal shall at all times keep it either confined upon the
premises of the owner or keeper or under reasonable control of some person.
   (B)   The running at large of any such animal in or upon any of the places
mentioned in this section is prima facie evidence that it is running at large
in violation of this section.
   (C)   Lack of intent, knowledge or fault on the part of the owner is not a
defense to a violation of this section.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a
first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for each subsequent
offense.
(Prior Code, § 618.04) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.05 FEMALE DOGS AND CATS AT LARGE.
   (A)   No owner of any female dog or cat shall, during the period that such
animal is in heat, fail to keep such dog or cat securely confined within a
building or upon enclosed lands of the owner, unless such dog or cat is
properly in leash and accompanied by the owner.
   (B)   Lack of intent, knowledge or fault on the part of the owner is not a
defense to a violation of this section.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a
first offense and misdemeanor of the fourth degree for each subsequent offense.
(Prior Code, § 618.05) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.06 NUISANCE CONDITIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall keep or harbor any animal within the city:
      (1)   So as to create offensive odors or unsanitary conditions which are
a nuisance or menace to the health, comfort or safety of the public;
      (2)   Which molests, menaces or interferes with persons in the public
right-of-way;
      (3)   Which scatters refuse that is bagged or otherwise contained in
trash receptacles; or
      (4)   Which damages any public or private property not the property of
the owner of such animal.
   (B)   No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any dog out of doors within
the city which, by loud, frequent or habitual barking, yelping or howling,
disturbs the peaceful living of any person or makes such a noise as is likely
to cause inconvenience or annoyance to persons of ordinary sensibilities.
   (C)   None of the provisions of division (B) of this section shall apply to
owners, operators or employees of duly licensed veterinary hospitals, nor to
physically impaired persons for whom the dog serves as a guide, leader or
support.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a
first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for each subsequent
offense.
(Prior Code, § 618.06) (Ord. 97-5, passed 3-25-1997)
§ 90.07 ABANDONING ANIMALS.
   (A)   No owner of a dog, cat or other domestic animal shall abandon such
animal.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a
first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for each subsequent
offense.
(Prior Code, § 618.07) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.08 KILLING OR INJURING ANIMALS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no person shall
maliciously or willfully, and without the consent of the owner, kill or injure
any dog, cat or other animal that is the property of another. This section does
not apply to a licensed veterinarian, animal warden or law enforcement officer
while acting in an official capacity.
   (B)   An unsecured dog that is chasing, menacing or injuring any person or
domestic farm animal which is the property of another, can be killed at that
time, except when necessary to comply with the requirements of a rabies
quarantine period.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree if the value of the animal killed or the injury caused amounts to less
than $300. If the value of the animal killed or the injury caused amounts to
$300 or more, such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Prior Code, § 618.08) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.09 POISONING ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person, other than a licensed veterinarian or animal warden acting
in an official capacity, shall, with intent to injure or kill any animal,
except a wild rodent, knowingly administer poison to any animal that is the
property of another, nor shall any person knowingly place any poisoned food
where it may be easily found and eaten by any such animal, either upon his or
her own premises, the premises of another, or in any public place within the
city.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Prior Code, § 618.09) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.10 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; CRUELTY TO COMPANION ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Torture an animal, deprive one of necessary sustenance,
unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill, or impound or
confine an animal without supplying it during the confinement with a sufficient
quantity of good wholesome food and water;
      (2)   Impound or confine an animal without affording it, during the
confinement, access to shelter from wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct
sunlight, if it can reasonably be expected that the animal would otherwise
become sick or in some other way suffer. This division does not apply to
animals impounded or confined prior to slaughter. For the purpose of this
section, SHELTER means an artificial enclosure, windbreak, sunshade, or natural
windbreak or sunshade that is developed from the earth’s contour, tree
development, or vegetation;
      (3)   Carry or convey an animal in a cruel or inhuman manner;
      (4)   Keep animals other than cattle, poultry or fowl, swine, sheep, or
goats in an enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air, nor feed
cows on food that produces impure or unwholesome milk;
      (5)   Detain livestock in railroad cars or compartments longer than 28
hours after they are so placed without supplying them with necessary food,
water, and attention, nor permit the stock to be so crowded as to overlie,
crush, wound, or kill each other.
   (B)   Upon the written request of the owner or person in custody of any
particular shipment of livestock, which written request shall be separate and
apart from any printed bill of lading or other railroad form, the length of
time in which the livestock may be detained in any cars or compartment without
food, water, and attention may be extended to 36 hours without penalty
therefor. Division (A) of this section does not prevent the dehorning of
cattle.
   (C)   All fines collected for violations of division (A) of this section
shall be paid to the society or association for the prevention of cruelty to
animals, if there is one in the municipality; otherwise, all fines shall be
paid to the General Fund.
(R.C. § 959.13)
   (D)   Cruelty to companion animals.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         ANIMAL RESCUE FOR DOGS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 956.01.
         BOARDING KENNEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 956.01.
         CAPTIVE WHITE-TAILED DEER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.
         COMPANION ANIMAL. Means any animal that is kept inside a residential
dwelling and any dog or cat regardless of where it is kept, including a pet
store as defined in R.C. § 956.01. The term does not include livestock or any
wild animal.
         CRUELTY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         DOG KENNEL. Means an animal rescue for dogs, a boarding kennel, or a
training kennel.
         FEDERAL ANIMAL WELFARE ACT. Means the “Laboratory Animal Act of 1966",
Pub. L. No. 89-544, 80 Stat. 350 (1966), 7 U.S.C. §§ 2131 et seq., as amended
by the “Animal Welfare Act of 1970”, Pub. L. No. 91-579, 84 Stat. 1560 (1970),
the “Animal Welfare Act Amendments of 1976", Pub. L. No. 94-279, 90 Stat. 417
(1976), and the “Food Security Act of 1985”, Pub. L. No. 99-198, 99 Stat. 1354
(1985), and as it may be subsequently amended.
         LIVESTOCK. Means horses, mules, and other equidae; cattle, sheep,
goats, and other bovidae; swine and other suidae; poultry; alpacas; llamas;
captive white-tailed deer; and any other animal that is raised or maintained
domestically for food or fiber.
         PRACTICE OF VETERINARY MEDICINE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4741.01.
         RESIDENTIAL DWELLING. Means a structure or shelter or the portion of a
structure or shelter that is used by one or more humans for the purpose of a
habitation.
         SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Means any of the following:
            1.   Physical harm that carries an unnecessary or unjustifiable
substantial risk of death;
            2.   Physical harm that involves either partial or total permanent
incapacity;
            3.       with sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and
water.
      (6)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall knowingly do any of the
following:
         (a)   Torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or maim, cruelly beat,
poison, needlessly kill, or commit an act of cruelty against the companion
animal;
         (b)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it is reasonably
expected that the companion animal would die or experience unnecessary or
unjustifiable pain or suffering as a result of the deprivation or confinement;
         (c)   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it is reasonably expected
that the companion animal would die or experience unnecessary or unjustifiable
pain or suffering as a result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (7)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall negligently do any of
the following:
         (a)   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty against the
companion animal;
         (b)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it can reasonably be
expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way
as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement;
         (c)   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected
that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a
result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (8)   Divisions (D)(2), (D)(3), (D)(4), (D)(5),(D)(6), and (D)(7) of this
section do not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   A companion animal used in scientific research conducted by an
institution in accordance with the federal animal welfare act and related
regulations;
         (b)   The lawful practice of veterinary medicine by a person who has
been issued a license, temporary permit, or registration certificate to do so
under R.C. Chapter 4741;
         (c)   Dogs being used or intended for use for hunting or field trial
purposes, provided that the dogs are being treated in accordance with usual and
commonly accepted practices for the care of hunting dogs;
         (d)   The use of common training devices, if the companion animal is
being treated in accordance with usual and commonly accepted practices for the
training of animals;
         (e)   The administering of medicine to a companion animal that was
properly prescribed by a person who has been issued a license, temporary
permit, or registration certificate under R.C. Chapter 4741.
      (9)   Notwithstanding any section of the Ohio Revised Code that otherwise
provides for the distribution of fine moneys, the Clerk of Court shall forward
all fines the Clerk collects that are so imposed for any violation of this
division (D) to the Treasurer of the municipality, whose county humane society
or law enforcement agency is to be paid the fine money as determined under this
division. The Treasurer shall pay the fine moneys to the county humane society
or the county, township, municipal corporation, or state law enforcement agency
in this state that primarily was responsible for or involved in the
investigation and prosecution of the violation. If a county humane society
receives any fine moneys under this division, the county humane society shall
use the fine moneys either to provide the training that is required for humane
society agents under R.C. § 1717.061 or to provide additional training for
humane society agents.
(R.C. § 959.131)
   (E)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree. In addition, the court may order the offender
to forfeit the animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition
including but not limited to the sale of the animal or livestock. If an animal
or livestock is forfeited and sold pursuant to this division, the proceeds from
the sale first shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard to the
care of the animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the former
owner. The balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the
former owner of the animal.
(R.C. § 959.99(D))
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (D)(2) or (D)(5) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (D)(3) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (D)(4) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
first degree on each subsequent offense.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D)(6) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (D)(7) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   (a)   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (D) of this section to forfeit to an
impounding agency, as defined in R.C. § 959.132, any or all of the companion
animals in that person’s ownership or care. The court also may prohibit or
place limitations on the person’s ability to own or care for any companion
animals for a specified or indefinite period of time.
         (b)   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a violation of division (A) of this section or division (D) of this section
to reimburse an impounding agency for the reasonably necessary costs incurred
by the agency for the care of a companion animal that the agency impounded as a
result of the investigation or prosecution of the violation, provided that the
costs were not otherwise paid under R.C. § 959.132.
      (7)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of division (D) of this section has a mental or
emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may impose as a
community control sanction or as a condition of probation a requirement that
the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling. The court shall
order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or counseling.
(R.C. § 959.99(E))
(Prior Code, § 618.10)
Statutory reference:
   Impoundment of companion animals; notice and hearing, see R.C. § 959.132
§ 90.11 PROTECTION OF WILDLIFE IN PARKS.
   (A)   No person shall, within any public park, public lands or nature
preserve within the city, molest, trap, hunt, chase, shoot or throw any object
at any wild animal, or remove or have in his or her possession any wild animal
or the eggs or young of any wild animal.
   (B)   This section does not apply to the lawful trapping or hunting of wild
animals as provided in R.C. Chapter 1533 when such trapping or hunting is
otherwise permissible on such public park or lands.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(Prior Code, § 618.11) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.12 ANIMALS PROHIBITED IN STORES.
   (A)   Except for guide and support dogs registered under R.C. § 955.011, no
person shall take, lead or have in his or her possession in any store or
covered mall within the city, any animal except when proceeding to a specific
store or clinic for animals located therein.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 618.12) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.13 REMOVAL OF EXCREMENT.
   (A)   No person, being the owner of or being in charge of any animal, shall
fail to immediately remove excreta deposited by his or her animal or animals on
property, public or private, not owned or possessed by such person.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 618.13) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.14 RESTRAINT OF DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS DOGS.
   (A)   No owner of a dangerous dog, vicious dog, police dog, guard dog or
security dog shall fail to do any of the following, except when the dog is
lawfully engaged in training as a police dog, guard dog or security dog and
accompanied by the owner, harborer or keeper:
      (1)   While on the premises of the owner, securely confine such dog at
all times in a locked enclosure which has a top or in a locked, fenced yard,
except that a dangerous dog, police dog, guard dog or security dog may, in the
alternative, be tied with a leash or tether so that the dog is adequately
restrained and unable to reach any sidewalk or area where any invitee or
licensee would normally be expected to travel; or
      (2)   While on the premises of the owner and lawfully engaged in training
or exercise for the purpose of training as a police dog, guard dog or security
dog, carry out such training otherwise than inside a secured building or, if
outside, within an area fully secured as to access and egress by a chain link,
solid board, or masonry fence, six feet in height above ground, topped by three
strands of barbed wire strung on permanently affixed arms directed toward the
interior of the fenced area.
         (a)   Gates within this fenced area are limited to either two
pedestrian gates or one pedestrian gate and one vehicle gate, neither of which
shall open onto the property of adjacent property owners. The gate shall be
closed and secured during training.
         (b)   It shall be the owner’s responsibility to perform such
maintenance as may be necessary to comply with the provisions and intent of
this chapter.
         (c)   The facility may be inspected for defects without notice by the
law enforcement agency of the city following an incident of escape from that
facility, 90 days from the effective date of this chapter, to comply with the
conditions set forth in this division (A)(2)(c).
      (3)   While off the premises of the owner, keep such dog on a chain-link
leash or tether, not more than six feet in length and being of sufficient
strength to restrain such dog and, additionally, do one of the following:
         (a)   Keep such dog in a locked enclosure which has a top or in a
locked, fenced yard; or
         (b)   Have such dog muzzled and the leash or tether controlled by a
person who is of suitable age and discretion, or securely attach, tie or affix
the leash or tether to the ground or a stationary object or fixture so that the
dog is adequately restrained, and station such a person in close enough
proximity to that dog so as to prevent it from causing injury to any person.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(Prior Code, § 618.14) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.15 SERIOUS HARM BY DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS DOGS.
   (A)   No person, being the owner or having the care, custody or control of
any dangerous or vicious dog within the city, whether hunting, training or
otherwise, shall negligently, or by reason of a violation of any provision of
this chapter, allow such dog, when off the premises of the owner, to cause
serious physical harm to any person or to another dog or a cat or other animal.
   (B)   Lack of intent on the part of such person to allow such dog to injure
a person or another dog or a cat or other animal, or lack of knowledge of the
violent propensities of such dog, is not a defense to a violation of this
section.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Prior Code, § 618.15) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.16 MENACING BY DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS DOGS.
   (A)   No person, being the owner or having custody or control of any
dangerous or vicious dog, and while off the premises of the owner, shall
knowingly cause or allow such dog to menace any person, except in defense of
such owner’s person or property.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
(Prior Code, § 618.16) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.17 INSURANCE FOR VICIOUS DOGS.
   (A)   No owner of a vicious dog shall fail to obtain liability insurance in
this state, providing coverage in each occurrence, subject to a limit exclusive
of interest and costs, of not less than $100,000 because of damage to property
or bodily injury to or death of a person caused by the vicious dog.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(Prior Code, § 618.17) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.18 PRETRIAL IMPOUNDMENT AND DESTRUCTION OF DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS.
   (A)   In the event that the animal warden or any law enforcement officer has
probable cause to believe that a vicious dog is being harbored or cared for in
violation of this chapter, such official may petition a court of competent
jurisdiction to order the seizure and impoundment of the vicious dog pending
trial.
   (B)   Any dangerous or vicious dog that attacks and injures any person or
another dog or a cat or domestic farm animal may be ordered destroyed when, in
the court’s judgment, such dangerous or vicious dog represents a continuing
threat of serious harm to persons or other such animals. Any dangerous or
vicious dog that kills any person, other than a person then committing a
criminal trespass or other crime of violence upon the premises of the owner of
such dog, shall be ordered destroyed by the court.
(Prior Code, § 618.18) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.19 EXOTIC ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall keep, or permit to be kept, upon his or her premises
within the city, any exotic animal, except for the purpose of display or
exhibition, where such display or exhibition is in a circus, zoo or zoological
park certified by the American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums,
and except when such an animal is kept for scientific research purposes in
schools or research institutions, and except when such an animal is kept for
commercial sale in a retail or wholesale pet store otherwise properly zoned for
that purpose, or unless properly licensed by the United States or the state.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(Prior Code, § 618.19) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.20 UNSECURED EXOTIC ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall keep, or permit to be kept, unsecured upon his or her
premises within the city, any exotic animal.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(Prior Code, § 618.20) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.21 EXOTIC ANIMALS AT LARGE.
   (A)   No person shall allow any exotic animal to be at large within the city
or to be removed from the premises of the owner, except for purposes of
transport to a public exhibition or training for a public exhibition, for
scientific study at a school or research institution, for medical treatment at
a licensed veterinarian’s office or facility, or for delivery for sale to any
buyer of such exotic animal.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree for a first offense and a misdemeanor of the second degree for any
subsequent offense.
(Prior Code, § 618.21) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.22 SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS BY EXOTIC ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person, being the owner or having the care, custody or control of
any exotic animal within the city, whether being exhibited or otherwise, shall
suffer or permit such exotic animal to cause serious physical harm to any
person.
   (B)   It is hereby determined that possession of an exotic animal is of such
a danger to the public and is so inimical to the public safety and good order
of the city, that lack of intent, negligence or fault on the part of such
person, or lack of knowledge of the violent propensities of the exotic animal,
is not a defense to a violation of this section.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(Prior Code, § 618.22) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.23 PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS AND ANIMALS BY EXOTIC ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person, being the owner or having the care, custody or control of
any exotic animal within the city, whether being exhibited or otherwise, shall
suffer or permit such exotic animal to cause physical harm to any person, or
serious physical harm to another animal or exotic animal.
   (B)   It is hereby determined that possession of an exotic animal is of such
a danger to the public and is so inimical to the public safety and good order
of the city, that lack of intent, negligence or fault on the part of such
person, or lack of knowledge of the violent propensities of the exotic animal,
is not a defense to a violation of this section.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Prior Code, § 618.23) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.24 INSURANCE FOR EXOTIC ANIMALS.
   (A)   No owner of an exotic animal shall fail to obtain liability insurance,
with an insurer authorized to write liability insurance in this state,
providing coverage in each occurrence, subject to a limit, exclusive of
interest and costs, of not less than $100,000 because of damage to property or
bodily injury to or death of a person caused by the exotic animal.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(Prior Code, § 618.24) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.25 PRETRIAL IMPOUNDMENT AND DESTRUCTION OF EXOTIC ANIMALS.
   (A)   In the event that the animal warden or any law enforcement officer has
probable cause to believe that an exotic animal is being harbored or cared for
in violation of this chapter, such official may petition a court of competent
jurisdiction to order the seizure and impoundment of such exotic animal pending
trial.
   (B)   Any exotic animal that attacks and injures any person or another dog,
cat or domestic farm animal may be ordered destroyed when, in the court’s
judgment, such exotic animal represents a continuing threat of serious harm to
persons or other such animals. Any exotic animal that kills any person, other
than a person then committing a criminal trespass or other crime of violence
upon the premises of the owner of such exotic animal, shall be ordered
destroyed by the court.
(Prior Code, § 618.25) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.26 SALE OF EXOTIC ANIMALS; DISPLAY OF NOTICE.
   (A)   Every person who offers for sale any exotic animal shall post
conspicuously at the place of display and sale the following notice:
   No person may lawfully keep or permit to be kept on his or her premises
within the City of Green any lion, tiger, leopard, cheetah, jaguar, panther,
cougar, lynx, bobcat, hyena, wolverine, bear, bison, elk, moose, wildebeest,
wolf, coyote, fox, gorilla, baboon, orangutan, gibbon, chimpanzee, monkey of a
species whose average adult weight exceeds twenty pounds, elephant, rhinoceros,
hippopotamus, caiman, gavial, alligator or crocodile exceeding thirty-six
inches in length, constricting snake exceeding forty-eight inches in length or
any kind of poisonous or venomous reptile.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a
first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for each subsequent
offense.
(Prior Code, § 618.26) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.27 REPORT OF ESCAPE OF EXOTIC OR DANGEROUS ANIMAL.
   (A)   The owner or keeper of any exotic animal or of a member of a species
of the animal kingdom that is not indigenous to this state, or of an animal
that presents a risk of serious physical harm to persons or property, that
escapes from his or her custody or control, shall, within one hour after he or
she discovers or reasonably should have discovered the escape, report it to a
law enforcement officer of the municipality.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(Prior Code, § 618.27) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.28 COLORING RABBITS AND BABY POULTRY; SALE OR DISPLAY OF POULTRY.
   (A)   No person shall dye or otherwise color any rabbit or baby poultry,
including but not limited to chicks and ducklings. No person shall sell, offer
for sale, expose for sale, raffle or give away any rabbit or baby poultry which
has been dyed or otherwise colored. No poultry younger than four weeks of age
may be sold, given away or otherwise distributed to any person in lots of less
than three. Stores, shops, vendors and others offering young poultry for sale
or other distribution shall provide and operate brooders or other heating
devices that may be necessary to maintain poultry in good health, and shall
keep adequate food and water available to the poultry at all times.
(R.C. § 925.62)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense; each subsequent offense is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(R.C. § 925.99(B))
(Prior Code, § 618.28)
§ 90.29 IMPOUNDING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Any animal, domestic farm animal or exotic animal found running at
large shall be impounded.
   (B)   If the owner of an impounded animal is unknown or cannot with
reasonable diligence be ascertained, such animal shall be turned over to a
suitable pound for safekeeping as may be designated by the animal warden or the
apprehending law enforcement agency. Such animal shall be kept, housed and fed
for at least three days for the purpose of redemption, unless immediate humane
destruction of such animal is necessary because of disease or injury.
   (C)   Any animal impounded may be redeemed by its owner at any time prior to
the expiration of three days from the time it was impounded, or prior to the
time the animal is otherwise disposed of, whichever is later, upon payment to
the place of confinement of all costs assessed against such animal and upon
providing any such dog with a valid registration tag, if it is not a registered
dog, and submitting satisfactory evidence of a rabies inoculation.
(Prior Code, § 618.29) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.30 ANNUAL REGISTRATION OF DOGS; TAGS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Except for guide, leader or listener dogs, or dogs in training to
become guide, leader or listener dogs, registered under R.C. § 955.011, and
dogs kept by an institution or organization for teaching and research purposes
under R.C. § 955.16, no person shall own, keep or harbor a dog more than three
months of age without registering such dog with the County Auditor. Failure of
any dog at any time to wear a valid registration tag shall be prima facie
evidence of lack of registration and subject such dog to impounding and
disposition as provided in § 618.29 and R.C. §§ 955.10 and 955.16.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a
first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for each subsequent
offense.
(Prior Code, § 618.30)
§ 90.31 UNLAWFUL TAGS.
   (A)   No person shall own, keep, or harbor a dog wearing a fictitious,
altered, or invalid registration tag or a registration tag not issued by the
County Auditor in connection with the registration of that animal.
(R.C. § 955.25)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(B))
(Prior Code, § 618.31)
§ 90.32 OWNER’S LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES; TREBLE DAMAGES.
   (A)   The owner of any animal or domestic farm animal which damages or
destroys public or private property shall be held liable for the full value of
the property damaged or destroyed, in addition to any penalty imposed for a
violation of this chapter.
   (B)   The owner of any dangerous or vicious dog or any exotic animal which
damages or destroys public or private property shall be held liable for treble
of the full value of the property damaged or destroyed, in addition to any
penalty imposed for a violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 618.32) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.33 ENFORCEMENT; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The animal warden and any law enforcement officer of the city are hereby
expressly authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to enter
upon private property, other than within any private structure, unless
otherwise authorized by law, for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 618.33) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.34 OBSTRUCTING ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to prevent, obstruct or delay the performance
by the animal warden or any law enforcement officer of any authorized act
within his or her official capacity, shall do any act which hampers or impedes
said official in the performance of his or her lawful duties under the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
(Prior Code, § 618.34) (Ord. 92-14, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 90.35 SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH AN ANIMAL.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ANIMAL. Means a nonhuman mammal, bird, reptile, or amphibian, either dead
or alive.
      OFFENSE. Means a violation of this section or an attempt, in violation of
R.C. § 2923.02, to violate this section.
      OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 959.132.
      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Means either of the following committed for the purpose
of sexual gratification:
         (a)   Any act done between a person and animal that involves contact
of the penis of one and the vulva of the other, the penis of one and the penis
of the other, the penis of one and the anus of the other, the mouth of one and
the penis of the other, the mouth of one and the anus of the other, the vulva
of one and the vulva of the other, the mouth of one and the vulva of the other,
any other contact between a reproductive organ of one and a reproductive organ
of the other, or any other insertion of a reproductive organ of one into an
orifice of the other;
         (b)   Without a bona fide veterinary or animal husbandry purpose to do
so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of a person’s body or any
instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal, anal, or reproductive
opening of an animal.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly engage in sexual conduct with an animal or
knowingly possess, sell, or purchase an animal with the intent that it be
subjected to sexual conduct.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly organize, promote, aid, or abet in the
conduct of an act involving any sexual conduct with an animal.
(R.C. § 959.21)
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree. In addition, the court may order the offender to forfeit the
animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition including but not
limited to the sale of the animal or livestock. If an animal or livestock is
forfeited and sold pursuant to this division, the proceeds from the sale first
shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard to the care of the
animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the former owner. The
balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the former
owner of the animal.
(R.C. § 959.99(D))
      (2)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of this section suffers from a mental or
emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may impose as a
community control sanction or as a condition of probation a requirement that
the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling. The court shall
order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or counseling.
(R.C. § 959.99(E)(7))
CHAPTER 91: CEMETERIES
Section
   
91.01   Artificial flowers
   
91.02   Price for cemetery lots and columbarium niches
   
91.03   Price for grave and niche opening/closings
   
91.04   Price for grave monument/marker foundations
   
91.05   Maximum cost for indigent burials
   
91.06   Mayor may amend or change prices
   
91.07   Conveyance of cemetery lot(s) and niche(s) by city; conveyance to
others prohibited
   
91.08   Valid conveyances of cemetery lots or niches
   
91.09   Conveyances from deceased owner
Statutory reference:
   Burial permits, see R.C. §§ 3705.17 et seq.
   Burial of indigent persons, see R.C. § 5121.53
   Burials may be prohibited, see R.C. § 759.05
   Management and control, see R.C. § 759.09
   Union cemeteries, see R.C. §§ 759.27 et seq.
§ 91.01 ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS.
   No artificial flowers shall be permitted in the city cemeteries during the
period of April 1 through October 1 of each calendar year.
(Prior Code, § 1062.01) (Res. 91-R27, passed 6-11-1991; Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-
13-2012; Ord. 2017-09, passed 5-9-2017)
§ 91.02 PRICE FOR CEMETERY LOTS AND COLUMBARIUM NICHES.
   The price for cemetery lots and columbarium niches in the city shall be as
follows.
   (A)   Cemetery lot - resident of the city.
      (1)   Monument lot with two graves: $1,200;
      (2)   Marker lot with two graves: $950;
      (3)   Marker lot with one grave: $475; and
      (4)   Mausoleum (two lots/four graves): $2,400.
   (B)   Cemetery lot - nonresident of the city.
      (1)   Monument lot with two graves: $2,200;
      (2)   Marker lot with two graves: $1,900;
      (3)   Marker lot with one grave: $850; and
      (4)   Mausoleum (two lots/four graves): $4,800.
   (C)   Columbarium niche:
      (1)   Resident of the city: $1,600.
      (2)   Nonresident of the city: $2,500.
(Prior Code, § 1062.02) (Res. 2003-R02, passed 1-14-2003; Ord. 2012-01, passed
3-13-2012; Ord. 2017-09, passed 5-9-2017; Ord. 2024-08, passed 7-9-2024)
§ 91.03 PRICE FOR GRAVE AND NICHE OPENING/CLOSINGS.
   The price for grave openings/closings in the city shall be as follows.
   (A)   Resident of the city.
      (1)   Monday through Friday burial arrival before 3:00 p.m.: $800;
      (2)   Monday through Friday burial arrival after 3:00 p.m.: $1,200;
      (3)   Saturday burial 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.: $1,800;
      (4)   Sunday and holidays: N/A;
      (5)   Burial of urn: $300;
      (6)   Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. burial of urn: $400;
      (7)   Infant burial: $150;
      (8)   Disinterment: $2,500;
      (9)   Monday through Friday inurnment arrival before 3:00 p.m.: $200;
      (10)   Monday through Friday inurnment arrival after 3:00 p.m.: $300; and
      (11)   Saturday inurnment 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.: $400.
   (B)   Nonresident of the city.
      (1)   Monday through Friday arrival before 3:09 p.m.: $1,200;
      (2)   Monday through Friday arrival after 3:00 p.m.: $1,800;
      (3)   Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.: $1,800;
      (4)   Sunday and holidays: N/A;
      (5)   Burial of urn: $500;
      (6)   Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. burial of urn: $600;
      (7)   Infant burial: $150;
      (8)   Disinterment: $2,500;
      (9)   Monday through Friday inurnment arrival before 3:00 p.m.: $300;
      (10)   Monday through Friday inurnment arrival after 3:00 p.m.: $400; and
      (11)   Saturday inurnment 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.: $500.
(Prior Code, § 1062.03) (Res. 2003-R02, passed 1-14-2003; Ord. 2012-01, passed
3-13-2012; Ord. 2017-09, passed 5-9-2017; Ord. 2024-08, passed 7-9-2024)
§ 91.04 PRICE FOR GRAVE MONUMENT/MARKER FOUNDATIONS.
   The price for the city to install grave monument/marker foundations shall be
$0.75 per square inch. Temporary plating boxes are permitted under certain
conditions and shall be installed at an initial price of $250 and for one year
thereafter at a price of $150.
(Prior Code, § 1062.04) (Res. 2003-R02, passed 1-14-2003; Ord. 2012-01, passed
3-13-2012; Ord. 2017-09, passed 5-9-2017)
§ 91.05 MAXIMUM COST FOR INDIGENT BURIALS.
   The maximum cost authorized by the city for indigent burials, required by
R.C. § 9.15, shall be $1,000.
(Prior Code, § 1062.05) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-13-2012; Ord. 2017-09, passed
5-9-2017)
§ 91.06 MAYOR MAY AMEND OR CHANGE PRICES.
   The Mayor shall have authority to amend and/or change the price for cemetery
lots or niches, the price for grave or niche openings/closings, the price for
grave monument/ marker foundations and the allowance for indigent burial when
determined to be necessary and appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 1062.06) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-13-2012; Ord. 2024-08, passed
7-9-2024)
§ 91.07 CONVEYANCE OF CEMETERY LOT(S) AND NICHE(S) BY CITY; CONVEYANCE TO
OTHERS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   If the owner of a cemetery lot(s) or niche(s) desires to sell the lot
(s) or niche(s), he or she must offer to sell the lot(s) or niche(s) to the
city. The city may buy back a cemetery lot or niche at the purchased price.
   (B)   A cemetery lot or niche owner shall not convey, sell or transfer
cemetery lot(s) or niche(s) to any other person, association or corporation
other than the city, except as provided in § 91.08.
   (C)   A deed transfer administration fee shall apply to any conveyances
permitted under this section of $50 payable to the city.
(Prior Code, § 1062.07) (Ord. 2017-09, passed 5-9-2017; Ord. 2024-08, passed 7-
9-2024)
§ 91.08 VALID CONVEYANCES OF CEMETERY LOTS OR NICHES.
   (A)   Transfers or conveyance of cemetery lots or niches are and shall be
permitted to persons other than the city if the proposed transfer meets all of
the following requirements:
      (1)   The transfer or conveyance is from a record owner (transferor) to:
         (a)   A transferee or transferees who are related to the transferor,
or are related to a deceased person who is interred in the lot or inurned in
the niche, by blood, marriage or adoption. A legal adoption shall be deemed to
have the effect upon all persons as if the adopted person where the natural
child of the adoptive parent. For the purposes of this section, a relationship
is established if the transferee is the transferor’s or deceased person’s:
            1.   Spouse;
            2.   Lineal ancestor or lineal descendent;
            3.   Brother, sister, uncle or aunt;
            4.   Lineal descendant of a brother, sister, uncle or aunt; or
            5.   Spouse of a person in divisions (A)(1)(a)2., (A)(1)(a)3. or
(A)(1)(a)4. of this section.
         (b)   The city; or
         (c)   A trustee or guardian for the transferor or for beneficiaries
who are so related to the transferor.
      (2)   The transfer and/or conveyance shall be gratuitous and cannot be
the result of a sale resulting in any gain or profit to the transferor.
      (3)   A notarized affidavit shall be submitted to the city by the
transferor stating the following:
         (a)   The relationship between the transferor and the transferee;
         (b)   The proposed transfer is not the result of a sale and shall not
result in any gain or profit to the transferor; and
         (c)   The transfer is made of the transferor’s free will.
      (4)   All transfers and/or conveyance made pursuant to this section are
subject to the provisions of this chapter and other existing ordinances and
cemetery rules and regulations.
   (B)   Transfers made in violation of the requirements of this section shall
be void and the title to the plot or niche sought to be transferred shall
revert to the last record owner as determined by official records of the city.
Transfers and/or conveyances of cemetery lots or niches made prior to the date
of this passage of this section which meets all the requirements of this
section are ratified and confirmed.
   (C)   All other transfers and/or conveyances of cemetery lots or niches
shall be as set forth in this chapter and other existing ordinances and/or
cemetery rules and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 1062.08) (Ord. 2017-09, passed 5-9-2017; Ord. 2024-08, passed 7-
9-2024)
§ 91.09 CONVEYANCES FROM DECEASED OWNER.
   (A)   A cemetery lot or niche may be transferred from a deceased owner of
record by will, or under statutes of descent and distribution to any
transferee, except a corporation, other than a fiduciary or the city. If the
estate of a deceased owner is not administered or if such lot, niche or space
is omitted from property administered, the right to succeed to record ownership
may be established by sworn statement or affidavit. In such case, title to the
lot, niche or space shall be deemed to have passed under the statutes of
descent and distribution of the state in effect upon the date of such statement
or affidavit, without regard to the domicile of the decedent, or the date of
death.
   (B)   Regarding the provisions in this chapter providing for the furnishing
of a sworn statement or affidavit, the city and its Director of Public Service
shall be entitled to rely upon the sworn statement or affidavit. Neither the
city nor the Director of Public Service shall be liable for any action taken or
denied in good faith in reliance upon any sworn statement or affidavit provided
pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1062.09) (Ord. 2017-09, passed 5-9-2017; Ord. 2024-08, passed 7-
9-2024)
CHAPTER 92: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Permit required; fees; applications; false statements; transferability
   
92.03   (Reserved)
   
92.04   Proper operation and maintenance
   
92.05   Manual reset
   
92.06   Relay of alarm notifications
   
92.07   Direct reporting of automatic alarm notifications
   
92.08   On-site copy of permit and operating instructions
   
92.09   Records; notice at alarm site
   
92.10   System performance reviews
   
92.11   False alarm notifications
   
92.12   Suspension of permit
   
92.13   Revocation of permit
   
92.14   Reinstatement of permit
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM ADMINISTRATOR. A person or persons designated by the Mayor to
administer, control and review alarm applications, permits and false alarm
notifications.
   ALARM NOTIFICATION. A notification intended to summon a law enforcement
agency or fire department, which is designed either to be initiated purposely
by a person or by an alarm system that responds to stimuli that are
characteristic of unauthorized intrusions, or heat, smoke or fire. At the
discretion of the Alarm Administrator, multiple false ALARM NOTIFICATIONS in a
24-hour period of time may be counted as only one false alarm notification.
   ALARM SITE. A single premises or location served by an alarm system or
systems.
   ALARM SYSTEM. A device or system that emits, transmits or relays a signal
intended to summon, or that would reasonably be expected to summon police or
fire services of the city, including, but not limited to, local alarms. ALARM
SYSTEM does not include:
      (1)   An alarm installed on a vehicle, unless the vehicle is permanently
located at a site; or
      (2)   An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premises and
that does not have an external local alarm.
   FALSE ALARM NOTIFICATION (F.A.N). An alarm notification to a law enforcement
agency or fire department, when the responding officer finds no evidence of a
criminal offense, attempted criminal offense or a fire and/or damage. Excluded
from this definition are:
      (1)   Alarms occurring during electrical storms, hurricanes, tornadoes,
blizzards and acts of God;
      (2)   Alarms caused by the intermittent disruption or the total
disruption of the telephone circuits beyond the control of the alarm company
and/or alarm user;
      (3)   Alarms caused by electrical power disruption or failure; and
      (4)   Alarms caused by a failure of the equipment of the communications
center.
   LOCAL ALARM. An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is
audible or visible from the exterior of a structure.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the city or an authorized representative.
   PERMIT HOLDER. The person designated in the application, as required in §
92.02(C)(1), who is responsible for responding to alarms and giving access to
the site and who is responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the
alarm system and payment of fees.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization
or similar entity.
(Prior Code, § 1066.01) (Ord. 94-19, passed 12-20-1994; Ord. 02-10, passed 8-
27-2002)
§ 92.02 PERMIT REQUIRED; FEES; APPLICATIONS; FALSE STATEMENTS; TRANSFERABILITY.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if he or she operates or causes to be
operated an alarm system without a valid permit therefor issued by the city. A
separate permit is required for each alarm system.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a completed application form, the Mayor shall issue an
alarm permit to an applicant, unless the applicant has:
      (1)   Failed to pay a fee assessed under §
92.11; or
      (2)   Had an alarm permit for the alarm site revoked and the violation
causing the revocation has not been corrected.
   (C)   Each permit applicant must include the following information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the permit holder and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation
of the alarm system, and payment of fees assessed under this chapter;
      (2)   The classification of the alarm site as residential, commercial or
apartment;
      (3)   For each alarm system located at the alarm site, the purpose of the
alarm system, i.e., burglary, robbery, personal hostage, panic or fire;
      (4)   A detailed legible site plan documenting the location of the fire,
alarm panel, related annunciator panels and any known hazards in the occupancy;
      (5)   The name and phone number of the company monitoring the police or
fire alarm system;
      (6)   The applicant for registration shall also provide the name and
telephone number of at least three persons to be notified in the event of an
alarm. The individuals designated to be notified in the event of an alarm may
be changed by contacting the Alarm Administrator; and
      (7)   Any other information required by the Mayor that is necessary for
the enforcement of this chapter.
   (D)   Any false statement of material matter made by an applicant for the
purpose of obtaining a police or fire alarm permit shall be sufficient cause
for refusal to issue a permit.
   (E)   An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another person. A permit
holder shall inform the Mayor, in writing, of any change that alters any
information listed on the permit application within ten business days. No fee
will be assessed for such changes.
   (F)   All fees owed by an applicant must be paid before a permit may be
issued or renewed.
   (G)   When any information in division (C) of this section has changed, it
shall be reported to the enforcement official by the owner within 15 days of
the owner becoming aware of such change.
(Prior Code, § 1066.02) (Ord. 94-19, passed 12-20-1994; Ord. 02-10, passed 8-
27-2002)
§ 92.03 (RESERVED)
§ 92.04 PROPER OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   A permit holder or person in control of an alarm system shall:
      (1)   Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will
minimize or eliminate false alarm notifications;
      (2)   Respond or cause his or her representative to appear at the
system’s location within a reasonable period of time when notified by the Fire
Department or a law enforcement agency to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm
system, to provide access to the premises or to provide security for the
premises; and
      (3)   Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an
occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report.
   (B)   A person in control of a local alarm shall adjust the mechanism or
cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that an alarm signal will sound for no
longer than 15 minutes after being activated.
   (C)   Local alarms shall not resemble the sound of any emergency signal or
civil defense alarm or siren.
(Prior Code, § 1066.04) (Ord. 94-19, passed 12-20-1994; Ord. 02-10, passed 8-
27-2002)
§ 92.05 MANUAL RESET.
   A person in control of a local alarm or alarm system that causes an alarm
notification to be sent directly to the city law enforcement agency or Fire
Department shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so
that, upon activation, the system will not transmit another alarm signal
without first being manually reset.
(Prior Code, § 1066.05) (Ord. 94-19, passed 12-20-1994; Ord. 02-10, passed 8-
27-2002)
§ 92.06 RELAY OF ALARM NOTIFICATIONS.
   A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications to a
law enforcement agency or Fire Department shall:
   (A)   Report alarms only over special trunklines or other communication
facilities designated by the city law enforcement agency; and
   (B)   Communicate alarm notifications only in a manner and form determined
by the city law enforcement agency or Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 1066.06) (Ord. 94-19, passed 12-20-1994; Ord. 02-10, passed 8-
27-2002)
§ 92.07 DIRECT REPORTING OF AUTOMATIC ALARM NOTIFICATIONS.
   A permit holder or person in control of an alarm site, other than an alarm
system in a financial institution, whose alarm system transmits automatic alarm
notifications directly to the communications center of the city law enforcement
agency or Fire Department, shall:
   (A)   Transmit the alarm in the form and with the content specified by the
law enforcement agency or Fire Department;
   (B)   Ensure that any recorded message is intelligible; and
   (C)   If transmitted over telephone lines, ensure that only the special
trunklines or other communication facilities designated by the law enforcement
agency are used.
(Prior Code, § 1066.07) (Ord. 94-19, passed 12-20-1994; Ord. 02-10, passed 8-
27-2002)
§ 92.08 ON-SITE COPY OF PERMIT AND OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS.
   A person in control of an alarm system shall maintain at each alarm site a
copy of the permit and a complete set of written operating instructions for
each alarm system. Special codes, combinations or passwords shall not be
included in these instructions.
(Prior Code, § 1066.08) (Ord. 94-19, passed 12-20-1994)
§ 92.09 RECORDS; NOTICE AT ALARM SITE.
   (A)   The officer responding to a dispatch resulting from a burglary,
robbery, personal hostage, robbery or fire alarm notification shall record such
information as necessary to permit the law enforcement agency or Fire
Department to maintain records, including, but not limited to, the following
information:
      (1)   The identification of the permit holder;
      (2)   The identification of the alarm site;
      (3)   The arrival time and dispatch received time;
      (4)   The time of day, the date and the time zone;
      (5)   The weather conditions;
      (6)   The area and/or sub-area of the premises involved; and
      (7)   The name of the permit holder’s representative on the premises, if
any.
   (B)   The responding police officer or firemedic shall indicate on the
dispatch record whether the notification was caused by a criminal offense, an
attempted criminal offense, a false alarm or a false fire alarm.
   (C)   In the case of an assumed false alarm, the responding police officer
or firemedic shall leave notice at the alarm site that the Police Department or
Fire Department has responded to a false alarm notification. The notice shall
include the following information:
      (1)   The date and time of police or fire response to the false alarm
notification;
      (2)   The identification number of the responding police officer or
firemedic; and
      (3)   A notice urging the permit holder to ensure that the alarm system
is properly operated and maintained in order to avoid service fees.
(Prior Code, § 1066.09) (Ord. 94-19, passed 12-20-1994; Ord. 02-10, passed 8-
27-2002)
§ 92.10 SYSTEM PERFORMANCE REVIEWS.
   If there is a reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used or
maintained in a manner that ensures proper operation and suppresses false
alarms, the Mayor may require a conference with an alarm permit holder and the
individual or association responsible for maintenance of the alarm system to
review the circumstances of each false alarm.
(Prior Code, § 1066.10) (Ord. 94-19, passed 12-20-1994)
§ 92.11 FALSE ALARM NOTIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The holder of an alarm permit or the person in control of an alarm
system shall be subject to warnings and suspension or loss of his or her permit
depending on the number of false alarm notifications emitted from an alarm
system within a 12-month period, based upon the following schedule:
 
Number of False Alarm Notifications Action Taken
1                                   Written notice
2                                   Written notice
3                                   Written notice
4                                   Warning letter
5                                   $100 fine and suspension
6                                   Revocation of permit and $20 fine
 
   (B)   Any person, operating a nonpermitted alarm system will be subject to a
citation and assessment of a $50 fee for each F.A.N., without benefit of the
notifications provided for in division (A) of this section. Subsequent
submittal of an alarm permit application may provide for a waiver of subsequent
fee assessments, but each F.A.N., previously received, shall be counted in
accumulating the total notifications as referenced in division (A) of this
section. The operation of a nonpermitted alarm system will result in a $50 fee.
Further, the operation of an alarm system after the revocation of the alarm
permit will result in a fine equal to the maximum fine listed in §
92.11(A).
   (C)   Alarm activations, caused by an actual criminal offense or with
evidence of a criminal attempt, or with evidence of an actual fire, shall not
be counted in accumulating the total of five notifications.
   (D)   Any alarm owner receiving a false alarm notification pursuant to the
terms of this chapter shall have the opportunity to request a review thereof.
The request for review shall be in writing and sent to the Mayor within 30 days
after the false alarm notification is issued. Upon receipt of a written request
for review, the Mayor shall direct the Alarm Administrator and a designee of
the County Sheriff’s Department or City Fire Department to meet with the alarm
owner to consider the request for review. Within 30 days after the meeting, the
Alarm Administrator shall either uphold or revoke the false alarm notification
and shall give written notification to the alarm owner of his or her decision.
(Prior Code, § 1066.11) (Ord. 94-19, passed 12-20-1994; Ord. 02-10, passed 8-
27-2002)
§ 92.12 SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   The fifth false alarm notification shall result in a notice of suspension of
permit. The suspension shall remain effective until the Mayor has issued a
removal of suspension of permit.
(Prior Code, § 1066.12) (Ord. 94-19, passed 12-20-1994)
§ 92.13 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The Mayor shall revoke an alarm permit if it is determined that:
      (1)   There is a false statement of a material matter in the application
for a permit;
      (2)   The permit holder has violated any of the provisions of §§
92.05 through
92.09;
      (3)   The permit holder has failed to make timely payment of a fee
assessed under §
92.11; or
      (4)   Six false alarm notifications have been emitted from the alarm site
within a 12-month period.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if he or she operates an alarm system
during the period in which an alarm permit is revoked.
(Prior Code, § 1066.13) (Ord. 94-19, passed 12-20-1994)
§ 92.14 REINSTATEMENT OF PERMIT.
   A person whose alarm permit has been revoked may be issued a new permit if
the person:
   (A)   Submits an updated application and pays a reinstatement fee of $50;
and
   (B)   Pays, or otherwise resolves, all citations in the municipal court
issued to the person under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1066.14) (Ord. 94-19, passed 12-20-1994)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100
for each offense. This penalty shall be in addition to any other fees and
requirements set forth in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1066.99) (Ord. 94-19, passed 12-20-1994)
CHAPTER 93: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
Parks
   
93.01   Nonrecreational use of Boettler Park and Greensburg Park
Community Center
   
93.15   Rental fees
   
93.16   Falsification of information
   
93.17   Renaming of Center as John Torok Community and Senior Center
Statutory reference:
   Power to permit use of public buildings, see R.C. § 721.23
   Public building supervision, see R.C. §§ 735.10 et seq.
PARKS
§ 93.01 NONRECREATIONAL USE OF BOETTLER PARK AND GREENSBURG PARK.
   Any person or organization wishing to use Boettler Recreational Park or
Greensburg Park for a nonrecreational use may only due so in accordance with
the following procedure.
   (A)   A written request must be submitted to the Parks and Recreation
Superintendent at least 30 days prior to the intended nonrecreational use.
   (B)   The written request must detail with specificity the reasons, costs
and duration of such nonrecreational use.
   (C)   The written request must include the plans and cost estimates to
restore any affected land in Boettler Recreational Park or Greensburg Park to
its former condition.
   (D)   Concurrent with the submission of the request to the Parks and
Recreation Superintendent, the request shall also be submitted to the Parks and
Recreation Board.
   (E)   Any and all plans for nonrecreational use of Boettler Recreational
Park or Greensburg Park shall not commence until they are approved by a
majority of the members of Council.
(Prior Code, § 1070.01) (Res. 97-R99, passed 12-9-1997; Res. 97-R100, passed
12-9-1997)
COMMUNITY CENTER
§ 93.15 RENTAL FEES.
   The Service Department, which includes the Parks and Recreation Division,
shall, from the date of this section, determine the fair rental fees for the
use of the John Torok Community and Senior Center, and publish those fees as it
deems appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 1068.01) (Ord. 2009-2, passed 3-10-2009)
§ 93.16 FALSIFICATION OF INFORMATION.
   Any person or organization who or which presents false information for the
purposes of receiving a lower rate may be charged with a theft offense under §
131.08.
(Prior Code, § 1068.02) (Res. 97-R67, passed 8-12-1997)
§ 93.17 RENAMING OF CENTER AS JOHN TOROK COMMUNITY AND SENIOR CENTER.
   (A)   The Green Community and Senior Center, 4224 Massillon Road, is hereby
renamed in honor and recognition of John Torok’s service and commitment to the
Green community.
   (B)   The building located at 4224 Massillon Road shall hereafter be known
as the John Torok Community and Senior Center.
(Prior Code, § 1068.03) (Res. 00-R29, passed 5-9-2000)
CHAPTER 94: ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING CENTERS
Section
   
94.01   Fee schedule
   
94.02   Review of fee schedule
   
94.03   Payments collected
§ 94.01 FEE SCHEDULE.
   The City Council hereby authorizes the Mayor to establish a fee schedule for
the electronic charging stations to be charged to and paid by the operator of
any vehicle occupying a designated municipal charging parking space and/or
using the charging equipment.
(Prior Code, § 1072.01) (Ord. 2021-27, passed 12-14-2021)
§ 94.02 REVIEW OF FEE SCHEDULE.
   The fee schedule shall be reviewed annually to confirm that the fees comport
with the average state electric utility rate and charged at a kWh rate.
(Prior Code, § 1072.02) (Ord. 2021-27, passed 12-14-2021)
§ 94.03 PAYMENTS COLLECTED.
   The payments collected by the municipal electric charging stations shall be
used to defray the expense of electricity provided and the life cycle costs to
maintain and replace station equipment.
(Prior Code, § 1072.03) (Ord. 2021-27, passed 12-14-2021)
CHAPTER 95: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Ohio Fire Code
   
95.01   Current edition adopted
   
95.02   Purpose
   
95.03   Application of code
   
95.04   Enforcement; responsibilities of Municipal Fire Safety Inspector
   
95.05   Compliance required
   
95.06   Posting arson laws
   
95.07   Setting fires which spread
   
95.08   Responsibilities upon discovery of unfriendly fires
   
95.09   Inspections
   
95.10   Sale and use of fire equipment; standards; service and repair of
equipment
   
95.11   File and distribution copies
   
95.12   Conflict of laws
   
95.13   Permit fees
Fireworks and Explosives
   
95.25   Definitions
   
95.26   Possession, sale, and use of fireworks
   
95.27   Permit to use fireworks
   
95.28   Manufacturing or wholesale sale without a license; prohibitions
   
95.29   Purchasers to comply with law; unauthorized purchases
   
95.30   Exhibition without a license; prohibitions for exhibitions
   
95.31   Unauthorized transportation or shipping
   
95.32   Application of subchapter
   
95.33   Arrest of offender; seizure and forfeiture of fireworks; distribution
of fines
   
95.34   Safety requirements for fireworks showroom structures
   
95.35   Storage of explosives
   
95.36   Blasting permit
Fire Prevention
   
95.50   Removal of flammable materials or obstructions
   
95.51   Protective appliances
   
95.52   Compliance with order
   
95.53   Waste receptacles
   
95.54   Hotel to have fire warning device producing visible signal
   
95.55   Fire suppression systems
   
95.56   Violations of State Fire Code prohibited
   
95.57   Posting arson notices in hotels, motels and other places
   
95.58   Negligent burning
   
95.59   Spreading alarm of unfriendly fire
   
95.60   Unvented heaters
Open Burning
   
95.75   Definitions
   
95.76   Relations to other prohibitions
   
95.77   Open burning in restricted areas
   
95.78   Permission and notice to open burn
 
   
95.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Failure to secure dangerous ordnance, see §
137.06
   License to possess dangerous ordnance, see §
137.10
   Vehicles carrying explosives, see §
74.36
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of technical codes, see R.C. § 731.231
   Fire Marshal, fire safety, see R.C. Chapter 3737
   Fireworks, see R.C. Ch. 3743
   Gasoline, oils and paint, see R.C. Ch. 3741
   Ohio Fire Code, see O.A.C. Chapter 1301:7-7
   Open burning, see O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19
   Power to regulate against fires, see R.C. §§ 737.27
   Power to regulate elevators, stairways and fire escapes, see R.C. § 715.26
   Power to regulate explosives, see R.C. § 715.60
   Right to examine buildings, see R.C. §§ 737.37 and 3737.14
   State Fire Marshal, see R.C. Ch. 3737
OHIO FIRE CODE
§ 95.01 CURRENT EDITION ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to R.C. § 731.231, the city shall adopt the most current edition of
the Ohio Fire Code (OFC), as adopted by the Ohio Department of Commerce,
Division of State Fire Marshal, published in O.A.C. Division 1301:7, as the
applicable Fire Code under this chapter. Each time the Ohio Department of
Commerce, Division of State Fire Marshal updates and adopts a new edition of
the Ohio Fire Code, that edition shall automatically be applicable and
enforceable in the city.
(Prior Code, § 1610.01) (Ord. 2013-27, passed 12-10-2013)
§ 95.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Ohio Fire Code, as adopted in §
95.01, is to prescribe minimum standards and regulations governing conditions
hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion.
(Prior Code, § 1610.02)
§ 95.03 APPLICATION OF CODE.
   The Ohio Fire Code, as adopted in §
95.01, applies to the use of all lands and properties within the municipality
and such other lands or properties owned by the municipality which are situated
outside the corporate limits thereof.
(Prior Code, § 1610.03)
§ 95.04 ENFORCEMENT; RESPONSIBILITIES OF MUNICIPAL FIRE SAFETY INSPECTOR.
   (A)   No person shall serve as a Municipal Fire Safety Inspector, unless he
or she has received a certificate issued by the Ohio Superintendent of Public
Instruction under R.C. § 3303.07 evidencing his or her satisfactory completion
of a fire safety inspection training program.
(R.C. § 3737.34)
   (B)   The Municipal Fire Safety Inspector, upon examination or inspection,
shall issue citations when he or she finds conditions as specified in R.C. §
3737.41 which are especially dangerous to the safety of persons, buildings,
premises or property, and shall make any necessary remedial orders in
connection therewith. Citation enforcement may be by use of the procedures
established by R.C. § 3737.42 for hearing on the citation or R.C. § 3737.44 for
injunctive relief or a temporary restraining order and oral order for vacation
of the building or premises.
   (C)   The Municipal Fire Safety Inspector, upon reasonable belief and after
inspection or investigation, shall, with reasonable promptness, issue a
citation to the responsible person for a violation of the Ohio Fire Code or any
order issued by the Ohio Fire Marshal or any Municipal Fire Safety Inspector.
The citation shall fix a reasonable time for abatement of the violation. Each
citation issued under this division (C) shall be prominently posted by the
responsible person, as prescribed by the Ohio Fire Code, at or near each place
a violation referred to in the citation occurs.
   (D)   Upon request of the Municipal Fire Safety Inspector, the Municipal
Attorney shall institute and prosecute any necessary action or proceeding to
enforce this chapter or R.C. Ch. 3737.
(Prior Code, § 1610.04)
§ 95.05 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly violate any provision of the Ohio Fire Code,
as adopted in §
95.01, or any order issued pursuant thereto.
(R.C. § 3737.51(A))
   (B)   No person shall fail to comply with the fire prevention measures or
fire protection activities prescribed in the Ohio Fire Code or fail to comply
with the municipal application and plan submission and processing requirements,
including payment of the fees designated therefor.
(Prior Code, § 1610.05)
§ 95.06 POSTING ARSON LAWS.
   The owner, operator or lessee of any transient residential building shall
post the provisions of R.C. §§ 2909.02 and 2909.03 in a conspicuous place in
each room occupied by guests in such building. The owner, operator or lessee of
any nontransient residential building, institution, school or place of assembly
shall post the provisions of such sections in conspicuous places upon such
premises. No person shall fail to comply with this section.
(R.C. § 3737.61) (Prior Code, § 1610.06)
§ 95.07 SETTING FIRES WHICH SPREAD.
   No person shall set, kindle or cause to be set or kindled any fire which,
through his or her negligence, spreads beyond its immediate confines to any
structure, field or wood lot.
(R.C. § 3737.62) (Prior Code, § 1610.07)
§ 95.08 RESPONSIBILITIES UPON DISCOVERY OF UNFRIENDLY FIRES.
   (A)   The owner, operator or lessee, an employee of any owner, operator or
lessee, an occupant, and any person in direct control of any building regulated
under the Ohio Basic Building Code, upon the discovery of an unfriendly fire or
upon receiving information that there is an unfriendly fire on the premises,
shall immediately and with all reasonable dispatch and diligence call or
otherwise notify the Fire Department concerning the fire and shall spread an
alarm immediately to all occupants of the building.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, UNFRIENDLY FIRE means a fire of a
destructive nature as distinguished from a controlled fire intended for a
beneficial purpose.
   (C)   No person shall fail to comply with this section.
(R.C. § 3737.63) (Prior Code, § 1610.08)
§ 95.09 INSPECTIONS.
   No person who is not a certified Fire Safety Inspector shall act as such or
hold himself or herself out to be such unless, prior to commencing any
inspection function, he or she discloses the purpose for which he or she is
making such inspection, and the fact that he or she is not employed by any
state or local fire service or agency, and that he or she is not acting in an
official capacity for any governmental subdivision or agency.
(R.C. § 3737.64) (Prior Code, § 1610.09)
§ 95.10 SALE AND USE OF FIRE EQUIPMENT; STANDARDS; SERVICE AND REPAIR OF
EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   No person shall sell, offer for sale or use any fire protection or
firefighting equipment that does not meet the minimum standards established by
the Ohio Fire Marshal in the Ohio Fire Code.
   (B)   Except for public and private mobile fire trucks, no person shall
service, test, repair or install for profit any fire protection or firefighting
equipment without a certificate or a provisional certificate issued by the Ohio
Fire Marshal.
(R.C. § 3737.65) (Prior Code, § 1610.10)
§ 95.11 FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   Copies of the Ohio Fire Code, as adopted in §
95.01, are on file with the city for inspection by the public. Copies are also
on file in the County Law Library.
(Prior Code, § 1610.11) (Ord. 01-26, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 95.12 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   (A)   The Ohio Basic Building Code shall supersede and govern any order,
standard, rule or regulation of the Ohio Fire Code or the Division of State
Fire Marshal, Department of Commerce, in all cases where any such order,
standard, rule or regulation is in conflict with the Ohio Basic Building Code,
except that rules adopted and orders issued by the Fire Marshal pursuant to
R.C. Ch. 3743 prevail in the event of a conflict.
(R.C. § 3781.11(B))
   (B)   In all other cases of conflict between the Ohio Fire Code and any
other municipal ordinance or technical code adopted thereby, the stricter
standard shall control.
(Prior Code, § 1610.12)
§ 95.13 PERMIT FEES.
   The fee for all permits issued by the Fire Chief or the Municipal Fire
Safety Inspector shall be $75, unless specifically indicated otherwise in the
Ohio Fire Code.
(Prior Code, § 1610.13)
FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
§ 95.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   1.3G FIREWORKS. Display fireworks consistent with regulations of the United
States Department of Transportation as expressed using the designation
“Division 1.3” in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
   1.4G FIREWORKS. Consumer fireworks consistent with regulations of the United
States Department of Transportation as expressed using the designation
“Division 1.4” in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
   BEER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4301.01.
   BOOBY TRAP. A small tube that has a string protruding from both ends that
has a friction-sensitive composition and that is ignited by pulling the ends of
the string.
   CIGARETTE LOAD. A small wooden peg that is coated with a small quantity of
explosive composition and that is ignited in a cigarette.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   DISCHARGE SITE. An area immediately surrounding the mortars used to fire
aerial shells.
   FIREWORKS. Any composition or device prepared for the purpose of producing a
visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, except
ordinary matches and except as provided in R.C. § 3743.80.
   FIREWORKS INCIDENT. Any action or omission that occurs at a fireworks
exhibition that results in injury or death, or a substantial risk of injury or
death, to any person, and that involves either of the following:
      (1)   The handling or other use, or the results of the handling or other
use, of fireworks or associated equipment or other materials;
      (2)   The failure of any person to comply with any applicable requirement
imposed by this chapter or R.C. Chapter 3743, or any applicable rule adopted
under this chapter or R.C. Chapter 3743.
   FIREWORKS INCIDENT SITE. A discharge site or other location at a fireworks
exhibition where a fireworks incident occurs, a location where an injury or
death associated with a fireworks incident occurs, or a location where evidence
of a fireworks incident or an injury or death associated with a fireworks
incident is found
   FIREWORKS PLANT. All buildings and other structures in which the
manufacturing of fireworks, or the storage or sale of manufactured fireworks by
a manufacturer, takes place.
   FOUNTAIN DEVICE. Means a specific type of 1.4G firework that meets all of
the following criteria:
      (1)   It is nonaerial and nonreport producing.
      (2)   It is recognized and manufactured in accordance with sections 3.1.1
and 3.5 of APA standard 87-1 (2001 edition).
      (3)   It is a ground-based or hand-held sparkler with one or more tubes
containing a nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks
upon ignition, with or without additional effects that may include a colored
flame, audible crackling effect, audible whistle effect, or smoke.
      (4)   It contains not more than 75 grams of the nonexplosive pyrotechnic
mixture in any individual tube and not more than 500 grams or less for multiple
tubes.
   HIGHWAY. Any public street, road, alley, way, lane or other public
thoroughfare.
   INTOXICATING LIQUOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4301.01.
   LICENSED BUILDING. A building on the licensed premises of a licensed
manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks that is approved for occupancy by the
building official having jurisdiction.
   LICENSED EXHIBITOR OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED EXHIBITOR. A person licensed
pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55.
   LICENSED FOUNTAIN DEVICE RETAILER or LICENSED RETAILER. Means a person
licensed pursuant to R.C. § 3743.26.
   LICENSED MANUFACTURER OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED MANUFACTURER. A person
licensed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.02 through 3743.08.
   LICENSED PREMISES. The real estate upon which a licensed manufacturer or
wholesaler of fireworks conducts business.
   LICENSED WHOLESALER OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED WHOLESALER. A person licensed
pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.15 through 3743.21.
   LIST OF LICENSED EXHIBITORS. The list required by R.C. § 3743.51(C).
   LIST OF LICENSED MANUFACTURERS. The list required by R.C. § 3743.03(C).
   LIST OF LICENSED WHOLESALERS. The list required by R.C. § 3743.16(C).
   MANUFACTURING OF FIREWORKS. The making of fireworks from raw materials, none
of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, or the processing of
fireworks.
   NAVIGABLE WATERS. Any body of water susceptible of being used in its
ordinary condition as a highway of commerce over which trade and travel is or
may be conducted in the customary modes, but does not include a body of water
that is not capable of navigation by barges, tugboats, and other large vessels.
   NOVELTIES and TRICK NOISEMAKERS.
      (1)   Devices that produce a small report intended to surprise the user,
including but not limited to booby traps, cigarette loads, party poppers, and
snappers;
      (2)   Snakes or glow worms;
      (3)   Smoke devices;
      (4)   Trick matches.
   PARTY POPPER. A small plastic or paper item that contains not more than 16
milligrams of friction- sensitive explosive composition that is ignited by
pulling a string protruding from the item, and from which paper streamers are
expelled when the item is ignited.
   PROCESSING OF FIREWORKS. The making of fireworks from materials all or part
of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, but does not include the
mere packaging or repackaging of fireworks.
   RAILROAD. Any railway or railroad that carries freight or passengers for
hire, but does not include auxiliary tracks, spurs, and sidings installed and
primarily used in serving a mine, quarry or plant.
   RETAIL SALE or SELL AT RETAIL. A sale of fireworks to a purchaser who
intends to use the fireworks and not to resell them.
   SMOKE DEVICE. A tube or sphere that contains pyrotechnic composition that,
upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect.
   SNAKE or GLOW WORM. A device that consists of a pressed pellet of
pyrotechnic composition that produces a large snake-like ash upon burning,
which ash expands in length as the pellet burns.
   SNAPPER. A small paper-wrapped item that contains a minute quantity of
explosive composition coated on small bits of sand and that, when dropped,
implodes.
   STORAGE LOCATION. A single parcel or contiguous parcels of real estate
approved by the Ohio Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. § 3743.04(I) or R.C. §
3743.17(F) that are separate from a licensed premises containing a retail
showroom, and which parcel or parcels a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler of
fireworks may use only for the distribution, possession, and storage of
fireworks in accordance with this chapter.
   TRICK MATCH. A kitchen or book match that is coated with a small quantity of
explosive composition and that, upon ignition, produces a small report or a
shower of sparks.
   WHOLESALE SALE or SELL AT WHOLESALE. A sale of fireworks to a purchaser who
intends to resell the fireworks so purchased.
   WIRE SPARKLER. A sparkler consisting of a wire or stick coated with a
nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks upon ignition
and that contains no more than 100 grams of this mixture.
(R.C. § 3743.01)
§ 95.26 POSSESSION, SALE, AND USE OF FIREWORKS.
   (A)   No person shall possess fireworks in this municipality or shall
possess for sale or sell fireworks in this municipality, except a licensed
manufacturer of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.02 to 3743.08, a
licensed wholesaler of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.15 to 3743.21, a
shipping permit holder as authorized by R.C. § 3743.40, a licensed fountain
device retailer as authorized by R.C. § 3743.27, a person as authorized by R.C.
§§ 3743.44 and 3743.45, or a licensed exhibitor of fireworks as authorized by
R.C. §§ 3743.50 to 3743.55, or as authorized by any municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any of these statutes, and except as provided in
R.C. § 3743.80 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (H), R.C. §§ 3743.45 and 3743.80 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and except for licensed
exhibitors of fireworks authorized to conduct a fireworks exhibition pursuant
to R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, no person shall discharge, ignite, or explode any fireworks in this
municipality.
   (C)   No person shall use in a theater or public hall what is technically
known as fireworks showers, or a mixture containing potassium chlorate and
sulphur.
   (D)   No person shall sell fireworks of any kind to a person under 18 years
of age. No person under 18 years of age shall enter a fireworks sales showroom
unless that person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or other
responsible adult. No person under 18 years of age shall touch or possess
fireworks on a licensed premises without the consent of the licensee. A
licensee may eject any person from a licensed premises that is in any way
disruptive to the safe operation of the premises.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 3743.44, no person, other than
a licensed manufacturer, licensed wholesaler, licensed exhibitor, or shipping
permit holder shall possess 1.3G fireworks in this municipality.
   (F)   No person shall negligently discharge, ignite, or explode fireworks
while in possession or control of, or under the influence of, any intoxicating
liquor, beer, or controlled substance.
   (G)   No person shall negligently discharge, ignite, or explode fireworks on
the property of another person without that person’s permission to use
fireworks on that property.
(R.C. § 3743.65(A) - (E), (G), (H))
   (H)   Purchase, use, and local regulation of consumer-grade fireworks.
      (1)   Any person who intends to obtain possession in this state of 1.4G
fireworks purchased in this state shall obtain possession of the 1.4G fireworks
only from a licensed retailer, licensed manufacturer, or licensed wholesaler
and shall be subject to this division (H).
      (2)   Any person authorized under this division (H) to possess 1.4G
fireworks in this state may discharge, ignite, or explode those fireworks on
private property, with authorization from the property owner, on the following
days each year:
         (a)   January 1st;
         (b)   Chinese new year’s day;
         (c)   May 5th;
         (d)   The last Monday in May, and the Saturday and Sunday immediately
preceding that day;
         (e)   June 19th;
         (f)   July 3rd, 4th, and 5th;
         (g)   The first Friday, Saturday, and Sunday before and after July
4th;
         (h)   The first Monday of September, and the Saturday and Sunday
immediately preceding that day;
         (i)   Diwali;
         (j)   December 31st.
      (3)   Fireworks discharged, ignited, or exploded pursuant to this
division (H) shall not be considered a public exhibition.
      (4)   The municipality may do either of the following:
         (a)   Restrict the dates and times a person may discharge, ignite, or
explode fireworks purchased pursuant to this division (H).
         (b)   Ban the discharge, ignition, or explosion of fireworks purchased
pursuant to this division (H).
      (5)   This division (H) does not limit the enforcement of any ordinance,
resolution, or statute that regulates noise, disturbance of the peace, or
disorderly conduct.
(R.C. § 3743.45) Penalty, see §
95.99
Statutory reference:
   Felony offense for disabling a fire suppression system, see R.C. § 3743.65
(F)
§ 95.27 PERMIT TO USE FIREWORKS.
   (A)   An exhibitor of fireworks licensed under R.C. §§
3743.50 through
3743.55 who wishes to conduct a public fireworks exhibition shall apply for
approval to conduct the exhibition to the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer
and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
having jurisdiction over the premises.
   (B)   The approval required by division (A) of this section shall be
evidenced by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief
or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, signing a permit for the
exhibition. Any exhibitor of fireworks who wishes to conduct a public fireworks
exhibition may obtain a copy of the form from the State Fire Marshal or, if
available, from the Fire Chief, a fire prevention officer, the Police Chief or
other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of the Police Chief
or other similar chief law enforcement officer.
   (C)   Before a permit is signed and issued to a licensed exhibitor of
fireworks, the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in consultation with the
Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of
the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall inspect
the premises on which the exhibition will take place and shall determine that,
in fact, the applicant for the permit is a licensed exhibitor of fireworks.
Each applicant shall show his or her license as an exhibitor of fireworks to
the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer.
   (D)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and the Police Chief or
other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall give approval to
conduct a public fireworks exhibition only if satisfied, based on the
inspection, that the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted allow
the exhibitor to comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal
pursuant to R.C. §
3743.53(B) and (E) and that the applicant is, in fact, a licensed exhibitor of
fireworks. The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in consultation with the
Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer or with the
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
may inspect the premises immediately prior to the exhibition to determine if
the exhibitor has complied with the rules, and may revoke a permit for
noncompliance with the rules.
   (E)   If the Legislative Authority has prescribed a fee for the issuance of
a permit for a public fireworks exhibition, the Fire Chief or fire prevention
officer and Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or
their designee, shall not issue a permit until the exhibitor pays the requisite
fee.
   (F)   Each exhibitor shall provide an indemnity bond in the amount of at
least one million dollars with surety satisfactory to the Fire Chief or fire
prevention officer and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief
law enforcement officer, conditioned for the payment of all final judgments
that may be rendered against the exhibitor on account of injury, death, or loss
to person or property emanating from the fireworks exhibitor, or proof of
insurance coverage of at least one million dollars for liability arising from
injury, death, or loss of persons or property emanating from the fireworks
exhibition. The Legislative Authority may require the exhibitor to provide an
indemnity bond or proof of insurance coverage in amounts greater than those
required by this division. The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and Police
Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or their designee, shall
not issue a permit until the exhibitor provides the bond or proof of the
insurance coverage required by this division or by the Legislative Authority.
   (G)   Each permit for a fireworks exhibition issued by the Fire Chief or
fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief
law enforcement officer, shall contain a distinct number, designate the
municipality, and identify the certified fire safety inspector, Fire Chief, or
fire prevention officer who will be present before, during and after the
exhibition, where appropriate. A copy of each permit issued shall be forwarded
by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, issuing it to the State Fire Marshal. A
permit is not transferable or assignable.
   (H)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, shall keep a record of issued permits
for fireworks exhibitions. In this list, the Fire Chief, fire prevention
officer, Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
shall list the name of the exhibitor, his or her license number, the premises
on which the exhibition will be conducted, the date and time of the exhibition,
and the number and political subdivision designation of the permit issued to
the exhibitor for the exhibition.
   (I)   The Legislative Authority shall require that a certified fire safety
inspector, Fire Chief or fire prevention officer be present before, during and
after the exhibition, and shall require the certified fire safety inspector,
Fire Chief or fire prevention officer to inspect the premises where the
exhibition is to take place and determine whether the exhibition is in
compliance with this chapter and R.C. Chapter 3743.
(R.C. § 3743.54(B) - (F)) Penalty, see §
95.99
Statutory reference:
   Notice of fireworks incident, see R.C. § 3743.541
§ 95.28 MANUFACTURING OR WHOLESALE SALE WITHOUT A LICENSE; PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No licensed manufacturer or licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall
knowingly fail to comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal
pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.05 and 3743.18 or the requirements of R.C. §§ 3743.06
and 3743.19.
   (B)   No licensed manufacturer or licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall
fail to maintain complete inventory, wholesale sale and retail records as
required by R.C. §§ 3743.07 and 3743.20, or to permit an inspection of these
records or the premises of a fireworks plant or the wholesaler pursuant to R.C.
§§ 3743.08 and 3743.21.
   (C)   No licensed manufacturer or licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall
fail to comply with an order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C.
§§ 3743.01(B)(1) and 3743.21(B)(1) within the specified period of time.
   (D)   No licensed manufacturer or licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall
fail to comply with an order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C.
§§ 3743.08(B)(2) and 3743.21(B)(2) until the nonconformities are eliminated,
corrected or otherwise remedied or the 72 hour period specified in those
divisions has expired, whichever occurs first.
   (E)   No person shall smoke or shall carry a pipe, cigarette, or cigar, or a
match, lighter, other flame- producing item, or open flame on, or shall carry a
concealed source of ignition into, the premises of a fireworks plant or on the
premises of a wholesaler of fireworks, except as smoking is authorized in
specified lunchrooms or restrooms by a manufacturer or wholesaler pursuant to
R.C. § 3743.06(C) or R.C. § 3743.19(D).
   (F)   No person shall have possession or control of, or be under the
influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer, or controlled substance while on
the premises of the fireworks plant or on the premises of a wholesaler of
fireworks.
   (G)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks or licensed wholesaler of
fireworks shall negligently fail to furnish a safety pamphlet to a purchaser of
1.4G fireworks as required by R.C. § 3743.47(A).
   (H)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks or licensed wholesaler of
fireworks shall negligently fail to have safety glasses available for sale as
required by R.C. § 3743.47(B).
(R.C. §§ 3743.60(E) - (L), 3743.61(E) - (L)) Penalty, see §
95.99
Statutory reference:
   Felony provisions, see R.C. §§ 3743.60(A) through (D) and 3743.61(A) through
(D)
§ 95.29 PURCHASERS TO COMPLY WITH LAW; UNAUTHORIZED PURCHASES.
   (A)   No person who purchases fireworks in this municipality shall obtain
possession of the fireworks in this municipality unless the person complies
with R.C. §§ 3743.44 to 3743.46.
   (B)   Except for the purchase of 1.4G fireworks made under R.C. § 3743.45,
no person who resides in another state and who purchases fireworks in this
state shall obtain possession of fireworks in this state other than from a
licensed manufacturer or wholesaler, or fail, when transporting 1.3G fireworks,
to transport them directly out of this state within 72 hours after the time of
their purchase.
   (C)   No person who purchases fireworks in this state under R.C. § 3743.45
shall give or sell to any other person in this municipality fireworks that the
person has acquired in this state.
(R.C. § 3743.63) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.30 EXHIBITION WITHOUT A LICENSE; PROHIBITIONS FOR EXHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall fail to comply with the
applicable requirements of the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant
to R.C. § 3743.53(B) and (E) or to comply with R.C. § 3743.53(C) and (D).
   (B)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall conduct a fireworks
exhibition unless a permit has been secured for the exhibition pursuant to R.C.
§ 3743.54 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or if a permit so
secured is revoked by a Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in consultation
with a Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or with a
designee of a Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
pursuant to those sections.
   (C)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall acquire fireworks for use at
a fireworks exhibition other than in accordance with R.C. §§ 3743.54 and
3743.55, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks or other person associated with the
conduct of a fireworks exhibition shall have possession or control of, or be
under the influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer, or controlled substance
while on the premises on which the exhibition is being conducted.
   (E)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall permit an employee to assist
the licensed exhibitor in conducting fireworks exhibitions unless the employee
is registered with the State Fire Marshal under R.C. § 3743.56.
(R.C. § 3743.64(C) - (G)) Penalty, see §
95.99
Statutory reference:
   Felony provisions, see R.C. § 3743.64(A), (B), and (H)
   Notice of fireworks incident, see R.C. § 3743.541
§ 95.31 UNAUTHORIZED TRANSPORTATION OR SHIPPING.
   (A)   No person shall transport fireworks in this municipality except in
accordance with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. §
3743.58.
   (B)   As used in this division, FIREWORKS includes only 1.3G and 1.4G
fireworks. No person shall ship fireworks into this municipality by mail,
parcel post, or common carrier unless the person possesses a valid shipping
permit issued under R.C. § 3743.40, and the fireworks are shipped directly to
the holder of a license issued under R.C. § 3743.03, 3743.16 or 3743.51.
   (C)   No person shall ship fireworks within this municipality by mail,
parcel post, or common carrier unless the fireworks are shipped directly to the
holder of a license issued under R.C. § 3743.01, 3743.16 or 3743.51.
(R.C. § 3743.66) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.32 APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER.
   This subchapter does not apply to the following:
   (A)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage, or use in
emergency situations of pyrotechnic signaling devices and distress signals for
marine, aviation, or highway use;
   (B)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of
fusees, torpedoes, or other signals necessary for the safe operation of
railroads;
   (C)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of
blank cartridges in connection with theaters or shows, or in connection with
athletics as signals for ceremonial purposes;
   (D)   The manufacture for, the transportation, storage, possession or use
by, or the sale to the armed forces of the United States and the militia of
this state, as recognized by the Adjutant General of Ohio, of pyrotechnic
devices;
   (E)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of
toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic
caps containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive material are used, provided
that they are constructed so that a hand cannot come into contact with a cap
when it is in place for explosion, or apply to the manufacture, sale,
possession, transportation, storage or use of those caps;
   (F)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of
novelties and trick noisemakers, auto burglar alarms, or model rockets and
model rocket motors designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling
recoverable aero models;
   (G)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of
wire sparklers.
   (H)   The conduct of radio-controlled special effect exhibitions that use an
explosive black powder charge of not more than one-quarter pound per charge,
and that are not connected in any manner to propellant charges; provided, that
the exhibition complies with all of the following:
      (1)   No explosive aerial display is conducted in the exhibition;
      (2)   The exhibition is separated from spectators by not less than 200
feet;
      (3)   The person conducting the exhibition complies with regulations of
the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms of the United States Department of
the Treasury and the United States Department of Transportation with respect to
the storage and transport of the explosive black powder used in the exhibition.
(R.C. § 3743.80)
§ 95.33 ARREST OF OFFENDER; SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE OF FIREWORKS; DISTRIBUTION
OF FINES.
   (A)   The Fire Marshal, an assistant fire marshal, or a certified fire
safety inspector may arrest, or may cause the arrest of, any person whom he or
she finds in the act of violating, or who he or she has reasonable cause to
believe has violated, any provision of this subchapter. Any arrest shall be
made in accordance with statutory and constitutional provisions governing
arrests by law enforcement officers.
   (B)   If the Fire Marshal, an assistant fire marshal, or certified fire
safety inspector has probable cause to believe that fireworks are being
manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, or used in violation of this
subchapter, he or she may seize the fireworks. Any seizure of fireworks shall
be made in accordance with statutory and constitutional provisions governing
searches and seizures by law enforcement officers. The Fire Marshal’s office or
certified fire safety inspector’s office shall impound at the site or safely
keep seized fireworks pending the time they are no longer needed as evidence. A
sample of the seized fireworks is sufficient for evidentiary purposes. The
remainder of the seized fireworks may be disposed of pursuant to an order from
a court of competent jurisdiction after notice and a hearing.
   (C)   Fireworks manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, or used in
violation of this subchapter shall be forfeited by the offender. The Fire
Marshal’s office or certified fire safety inspector’s office shall dispose of
seized fireworks pursuant to the procedures specified in R.C. §§ 2981.11 to
2981.13 for the disposal of forfeited property by law enforcement agencies, and
the Fire Marshal or that office is not liable for claims for the loss of or
damages to the seized fireworks.
   (D)   This section does not affect the authority of peace officers, as
defined in R.C. § 2935.01, to make arrests for violations of this subchapter or
to seize fireworks manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, or used in
violation of this subchapter.
   (E)   Any fines imposed for a violation of this subchapter relating to the
sale, purchase, possession, or discharge of fireworks shall be distributed as
set forth in R.C. § 3743.68(D).
(R.C. § 3743.68)
§ 95.34 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS FOR FIREWORKS SHOWROOM STRUCTURES.
   (A)   (1)   Except as described in division (A)(2) of this section, all
retail sales of 1.4G fireworks by a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler shall
only occur from an approved retail sales showroom on a licensed premises or
from a representative sample showroom as described in this section on a
licensed premises. For the purposes of this section, a retail sale includes the
transfer of the possession of the 1.4G fireworks from the licensed manufacturer
or wholesaler to the purchaser of the fireworks.
      (2)   Sales of 1.4G fireworks to a licensed exhibitor for a properly
permitted exhibition shall occur in accordance with the provisions of the Ohio
Revised Code and rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal under R.C. Chapter
119. Such rules shall specify, at a minimum, that the licensed exhibitor holds
a license under R.C. § 3743.51, that the exhibitor possesses a valid exhibition
permit issued in accordance with R.C. § 3743.54, and that the fireworks shipped
are to be used at the specifically permitted exhibition.
   (B)   All wholesale sales of fireworks by a licensed manufacturer or
wholesaler shall only occur from a licensed premises to persons who intend to
resell the fireworks purchased at wholesale. A wholesale sale by a licensed
manufacturer or wholesaler may occur as follows:
      (1)   The direct sale and shipment of fireworks to a person outside of
this state;
      (2)   From an approved retail sales showroom as described in this
section;
      (3)   From a representative sample showroom as described in this section;
      (4)   By delivery of wholesale fireworks to a purchaser at a licensed
premises outside of a structure or building on that premises. All other
portions of the wholesale sales transaction may occur at any location on a
licensed premises.
      (5)   Any other method as described in rules adopted by the Fire Marshal
under R.C. Chapter 119.
   (C)   (1)   A licensed manufacturer or wholesaler shall only sell 1.4G
fireworks from a representative sample showroom or a retail sales showroom.
Each licensed premises shall only contain one sales structure.
      (2)   A representative sample showroom shall consist of a structure
constructed and maintained in accordance with the Nonresidential Building Code
adopted under R.C. Chapter 3781 and the Fire Code adopted under R.C. § 3737.82
for a use and occupancy group that permits mercantile sales. A representative
sample showroom shall not contain any pyrotechnics, pyrotechnic materials,
fireworks, explosives, explosive materials, or any similar hazardous materials
or substances. A representative sample showroom shall be used only for the
public viewing of fireworks product representations, including paper materials,
packaging materials, catalogs, photographs, or other similar product
depictions. The delivery of product to a purchaser of fireworks at a licensed
premises that has a representative sample structure shall not occur inside any
structure on a licensed premises. Such product delivery shall occur on the
licensed premises in a manner prescribed by rules adopted by the State Fire
Marshal pursuant to R.C. Chapter 119.
      (3)   If a manufacturer or wholesaler elects to conduct sales from a
retail sales showroom, the showroom structures, to which the public may have
any access and in which employees are required to work, on all licensed
premises, shall comply with the following safety requirements:
         (a)   A fireworks showroom that is constructed or upon which expansion
is undertaken on and after June 30, 1997, shall be equipped with interlinked
fire detection, fire suppression, smoke exhaust, and smoke evacuation systems
that are approved by the Superintendent of Industrial Compliance in the
Department of Commerce.
         (b)   1.   A fireworks showroom that first begins to operate on or
after June 30, 1997, or that resumes operations at any time after a period of
inactive status of licensure greater than one year, and to which the public has
access for retail purposes shall not exceed 7,500 square feet in floor area.
            2.   A fireworks showroom that, through construction of a new
showroom, expansion of an existing showroom, or similar means, first exceeds
5,000 square feet, to which the public has access for retail purposes, after
February 7, 2022, shall be equipped with a sprinkler system that meets the
criteria for sprinkler systems in extra hazard (group 2) occupancies under
“NFPA 13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems (2019 Edition)”.
            3.   Notwithstanding division (D) of this section, the State Fire
Marshal may provide a variance to the requirements of division (C)(3)(b)2. of
this section pursuant to R.C. § 3743.59 for a sprinkler system that matches or
exceeds the degree of safety provided by a sprinkler system that meets the
criteria for sprinkler systems in extra hazard (group 2) occupancies under
“NFPA 13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems (2019 Edition)”.
         (c)   A newly constructed or an existing fireworks showroom structure
that exists on September 23, 2008, but that, on or after September 23, 2008, is
altered or added to in a manner requiring the submission of plans, drawings,
specifications, or data pursuant to R.C. § 3791.04, shall comply with a graphic
floor plan layout that is approved by the State Fire Marshal and Superintendent
of Industrial Compliance showing width of aisles, parallel arrangement of
aisles to exits, number of exits per wall, maximum occupancy load, evacuation
plan for occupants, height of storage or display of merchandise, and other
information as may be required by the State Fire Marshal and Superintendent of
Industrial Compliance.
         (d)   A fireworks showroom structure that exists on June 30, 1997,
shall be in compliance on or after June 30, 1997, with floor plans showing
occupancy load limits and internal circulation and egress patterns that are
approved by the State Fire Marshal and Superintendent of Industrial Compliance,
and that are submitted under seal as required by R.C. § 3791.04.
   (D)   The safety requirements established in division (C) of this section
are not subject to any variance, waiver, or exclusion pursuant to this chapter
or any applicable building code.
(R.C. § 3743.25) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.35 STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES.
   It shall be unlawful to store at any time within the municipality a quantity
of gunpowder or other similar explosive weighing in excess of 100 pounds.
Penalty, see §
95.99
Statutory reference:
   Illegal manufacture or processing of explosives, felony provisions, see R.C.
§ 2923.17
§ 95.36 BLASTING PERMIT.
   No person shall cause a blast to occur within the municipality without
making application in writing beforehand, setting forth the exact nature of the
intended operation, and receiving a permit to blast from the Mayor or other
proper municipal officer. The Mayor or other proper municipal officer before
granting such permit may require the applicant to provide a bond to indemnify
the municipality and all other persons against injury or damages which might
result from the proposed blasting.
Penalty, see §
95.99
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 95.50 REMOVAL OF FLAMMABLE MATERIALS OR OBSTRUCTIONS.
   Any flammable or combustible materials not arranged or stored in such a
manner as to afford reasonable safety against the danger of fire, or any matter
stored or arranged in such a manner as to impede or prevent access to, or exit
from, any premises in case of fire, shall be ordered by the Fire Chief to be
removed or rearranged in such manner as to eliminate any fire hazard. The order
shall be in writing and delivered to the owner, lessee, or occupant of the
premises.
Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.51 PROTECTIVE APPLIANCES.
   If the Fire Chief finds upon inspection that the appliances for protection
against fire are wholly wanting or are inadequate in number, condition, size,
arrangement, or efficiency for the reasonable protection of the premises
against fire, he or she shall cause an order in writing to be delivered to the
owner, lessee, or occupant requiring the installation, replacement, or repair
of appliances adequate for the reasonable protection of the premises in case of
fire.
Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.52 COMPLIANCE WITH ORDER.
   An order to correct the hazardous conditions specified in either § 91.50 or
91.51 shall be directed to the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises,
building, or structure, or to the person in control of the articles, material,
goods, wares, or merchandise, or to the owner thereof, as the circumstances may
require. It is made the duty of the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises,
building, or structure, and of the person in control of such articles,
materials, goods, wares, and merchandise, or the owner thereof, to comply with
the order with all reasonable dispatch and diligence.
Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.53 WASTE RECEPTACLES.
   Waste paper, ashes, oil rags, waste rags, excelsior, or any material of a
similar hazardous nature shall not be accumulated in any cellar or any other
portion of any building of any kind. Proper fireproof receptacles shall be
provided for such hazardous materials.
Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.54 HOTEL TO HAVE FIRE WARNING DEVICE PRODUCING VISIBLE SIGNAL.
   (A)   Every hotel shall have available at least one operational single
station automatic fire warning device approved by the Fire Chief that produces
a visible warning signal when activated by every product of combustion. The
device, at the discretion of the owner, may also be activated by an early
warning fire protection system. Hotels having fewer than 75 rooms shall have at
least one warning device available for its guests. Hotels having more than 75
rooms shall have available for its guests one device for every group of 75
rooms. Upon the request of a guest, such a device, if available, shall be
installed in the guest’s room.
   (B)   As used in this section, HOTEL means every establishment kept, used,
maintained, advertised, or held out to the public to be a place where sleeping
accommodations are offered to guests in which five or more rooms are used for
accommodation of such guests, whether the rooms are in one or several
structures, except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 5739.091.
(R.C. §§ 3781.107, 5739.01(M))
   (C)   Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not
more than $1,000.
(R.C. §§ 3791.02, 3791.03)
§ 95.55 FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Every building constructed in this municipality with floors used for
human occupancy located more than 75 feet in height above the lower level of
fire department vehicle access shall have a fire suppression system installed
and in operation in conformity with the rules of the state Board of Building
Standards adopted pursuant to R.C. § 3781.10.
   (B)   As used in this section:
      FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEM. Means a system that includes devices and
equipment to detect a fire, actuates an alarm, and suppress or control a fire.
      HUMAN OCCUPANCY. Does not include floors of buildings where occupancy by
humans is limited to ingress, egress, and limited access for maintenance and
repair.
(R.C. § 3781.108(A), (B))
   (C)   Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not
more than $1,000.
(R.C. §§ 3791.02, 3791.03)
§ 95.56 VIOLATIONS OF STATE FIRE CODE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly violate any provision of the State Fire Code
or any order made pursuant to it.
(R.C. § 3737.51(A))
   (B)   Except as a violation of R.C. § 2923.17, regarding the felonies of
unlawful possession of a dangerous ordnance and illegal manufacture or
processing of explosives, involves subject matter covered by the State Fire
Code, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
(R.C. § 3737.99(B))
Statutory reference:
   Fire Code violations, see R.C. §§ 3737.41 et seq.
   Ohio Fire Code, see O.A.C. Chapter 1301:7-7
§ 95.57 POSTING ARSON NOTICES IN HOTELS, MOTELS AND OTHER PLACES.
   (A)   The owner, operator or lessee of any hotel, motel or transient
residential building shall post the provisions of R.C. §§ 2909.02 and 2909.03,
regarding aggravated arson and arson, in a conspicuous place in each room
occupied by guests in such building. The owner, operator or lessee of any
nontransient residential building, institution, school or place of assembly
shall post the provisions of such sections in conspicuous places upon such
premises. No person shall fail to comply with this section.
(R.C. § 3737.61)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3737.99(C))
§ 95.58 NEGLIGENT BURNING.
   (A)   No person shall set, kindle, or cause to be set or kindled any fire
which, through his or her negligence, spreads beyond its immediate confines to
any structure, field or wooded lot.
(R.C. § 3737.62)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 3737.99(D))
Cross-reference:
   Arson, see §
131.02
§ 95.59 SPREADING ALARM OF UNFRIENDLY FIRE.
   (A)   The owner, operator or lessee, an employee of any owner, operator or
lessee, an occupant, and any person in direct control of any building regulated
under the state building code, upon the discovery of an unfriendly fire, or
upon receiving information that there is an unfriendly fire upon the premises,
shall immediately, and with all reasonable dispatch and diligence, call or
otherwise notify the fire department concerning the fire, and shall spread an
alarm immediately to all occupants of the building.
   (B)   As used in this section, UNFRIENDLY FIRE means a fire of a destructive
nature as distinguished from a controlled fire intended for a beneficial
purpose.
(R.C. § 3737.63)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 3737.99(E))
§ 95.60 UNVENTED HEATERS.
   (A)   The use of a brazier, salamander, space heater, room heater, furnace,
water heater, or other burner or heater using wood, coal, coke, fuel oil,
kerosene, gasoline, natural gas, liquid petroleum gas or similar fuel, and
tending to give off carbon monoxide or other harmful gases must comply with the
following provisions;
      (1)   When used in living quarters, or in any enclosed building or space
in which persons are usually present, shall be used with a flue or vent so
designed, installed, and maintained as to vent the products of combustion
outdoors; except in storage, factory, or industrial buildings which are
provided with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide
poisoning.
      (2)   When used as a portable or temporary burner or heater at a
construction site, or in a warehouse, shed, or structure in which persons are
temporarily present, shall be vented as provided in division (A)(1) or used
with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning.
   (B)   This section does not apply to domestic ranges, laundry stoves, gas
logs installed in a fireplace with an adequate flue, or hot plates, unless the
same are used as space or room heaters.
   (C)   No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in
charge, or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a burner or
heater in violation of the standards for venting and ventilation provided in
this section.
   (D)   Division (A) above does not apply to any kerosene-fired space or room
heater that is equipped with an automatic extinguishing tip-over device, or to
any natural gas-fired or liquid petroleum gas-fired space or room heater that
is equipped with an oxygen depletion safety shut-off system, and that has its
fuel piped from a source outside the building in which it is located, that are
approved by an authoritative source recognized by the State Fire Marshal in the
State Fire Code adopted by him or her under R.C. § 3737.82.
   (E)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules to ensure the safe use of
unvented kerosene, natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas heaters exempted from
division (A) above when used in assembly buildings, business buildings, high
hazard buildings, institutional buildings, mercantile buildings, and type R-
1 and R-2 residential buildings, as these groups of buildings are defined in
rules adopted by the Board of Building Standards under R.C. § 3781.10. No
person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge or occupant
of premises, negligently permit the use of a heater in violation of any rules
adopted under this division.
   (F)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules prescribing standards for
written instructions containing ventilation requirements and warning of any
potential fire hazards that may occur in using a kerosene, natural gas, or
liquid petroleum gas heater. No person shall sell or offer for sale any
kerosene, natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas heater unless the manufacturer
provides with the heater written instructions that comply with any rules
adopted under this division.
   (G)   No product labeled as a fuel additive for kerosene heaters and having
a flash point below 100°F or 37.8°C shall be sold, offered for sale, or used in
any kerosene space heater.
   (H)   No device that prohibits any safety feature on a kerosene, natural
gas, or liquid petroleum gas space heater from operating shall be sold, offered
for sale, or used in connection with any kerosene, natural gas, or liquid
petroleum gas space heater.
   (I)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any kerosene-fired, natural
gas, or liquid petroleum gas-fired heater that is not exempt from division (A)
above, unless it is marked conspicuously by the manufacturer on the container
with the phrase “Not Approved For Home Use”.
   (J)   No person shall use a cabinet-type, liquid petroleum gas-fired heater
having a fuel source within the heater, inside any building, except as
permitted by the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him or
her under R.C. § 3737.82.
(R.C. § 3701.82)
   (K)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 3701.99(B))
OPEN BURNING
§ 95.75 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AGRICULTURAL WASTE. Any waste material generated by crop, horticultural,
or livestock production practices, and includes such items as woody debris and
plant matter from stream flooding, bags, cartons, structural materials, and
landscape wastes that are generated in agricultural activities, but does not
include land clearing waste; buildings (including dismantled/fallen barns);
garbage; dead animals; animal waste; motor vehicles and parts thereof; nor
economic poisons and containers thereof, unless the manufacturer has identified
open burning as a safe disposal procedure.
      AIR CURTAIN BURNER. An engineered apparatus consisting of a motorized
high-velocity fan and an air distribution system designed to aid in the
efficient combustion of materials placed in a manufactured steel structure and
for which a permit-to-install has been obtained as required in O.A.C. Chapter
3745-31 and a permit-to-operate has been obtained as required in O.A.C. Chapter
3745-77.
      AIR CURTAIN DESTRUCTOR. An engineered apparatus consisting of a motorized
high-velocity fan and an air distribution system designed to aid in the
efficient combustion of materials placed in an adjacent pit. An air curtain
burner may be used in place of an air curtain destructor, but an air curtain
destructor may not be used in place of an air curtain burner.
      BUILDING MATERIALS. Those materials resulting from the alteration,
construction, destruction, rehabilitation, or repair of any human-made physical
structure, including, without limitation, houses, buildings, industrial or
commercial facilities, or roadways.
      ECONOMIC POISONS. Include but are not restricted to pesticides such as
insecticides, fungicides, rodenticides, miticides, nematocides and fumigants;
herbicides; seed disinfectants; and defoliants.
      EMERGENCY BURNING. The burning of clean wood waste or deceased animals
caused by a natural disaster or an uncontrolled event such as the following:
         (a)   A tornado.
         (b)   High winds.
         (c)   An earthquake.
         (d)   An explosion.
         (e)   A flood.
         (f)   A hail storm, a rain storm, or an ice storm.
      GARBAGE. Any waste material resulting from the handling, processing,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food or food products.
      INHABITED BUILDING. Any inhabited private dwelling house and any public
structure which may be used as a place of resort, assembly, education,
entertainment, lodging, trade, manufacture, repair, storage, traffic, or
occupancy by the public. Examples would include, but are not limited to,
highway rest stops, restaurants, motels, hotels and gas stations.
      LAND CLEARING WASTE. Plant waste material which is removed from land,
including plant waste material removed from stream banks during projects
involving more than one property owner, for the purpose of rendering the land
useful for residential, commercial, or industrial development. Land clearing
waste also includes the plant waste material generated during the clearing of
land for new agricultural development.
      LANDSCAPE WASTE. Any plant waste material, except garbage, including
trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass,
shrubbery, yard trimmings, and crop residues.
      OHIO EPA. The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency Director or agencies
delegated authority by the Director of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency
pursuant to R.C. § 3704.03 or the Chief of any Ohio Environmental Protection
Agency District Office.
      OPEN BURNING. The burning of any materials wherein air contaminants
resulting from combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without
passing through a stack or chimney. Open burning includes the burning of any
refuse or salvageable material in any device not subject to or designed
specifically to comply with the requirements of O.A.C. 3745-17-09 or O.A.C.
3745-17-10.
      RESIDENTIAL WASTE. Any waste material, including landscape waste,
generated on the property of a one-, two- or three-family residence as a result
of residential activities, but not including garbage, rubber, grease, asphalt,
liquid petroleum products, or plastics.
      RESTRICTED AREA. The area within the boundary of the municipality, plus a
zone extending 1,000 feet beyond the boundaries of a municipality having a
population of 1,000 to 10,000 persons and a zone extending one mile beyond any
municipality having a population of 10,000 persons or more according to the
latest federal census.
      UNRESTRICTED AREA. All areas outside the boundaries of a restricted area
as defined in this section.
   (B)   Referenced materials. This subchapter includes references to certain
matter or materials. The text of the referenced materials is not included in
the legislation contained in this subchapter. Information on the availability
of the referenced materials as well as the date of, and/or the particular
edition or version of the material is included in this section. For materials
subject to change, only the specific versions specified in this section are
referenced. Material is referenced as it exists on the effective date of this
section. Except for subsequent annual publication of existing (unmodified) Code
of Federal Regulation compilations, any amendment or revision to a referenced
document is not applicable unless and until this section has been amended to
specify the new dates.
      (1)   Availability. The referenced materials are available as follows:
         (a)   Clean Air Act. Information and copies may be obtained by writing
to: Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders, PO Box 371954, Pittsburgh,
PA 15250-7954. The full text of the act as amended in 1990 is also available in
electronic format at www.epa.gov/oar/caa/. A copy of the act is also available
for inspection and use at most public libraries and the State Library of Ohio.
         (b)   Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.). Information and copies may
be obtained by writing to: Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders, PO
Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. The full text of the C.F.R. is also
available in electronic format at http://www.ecfr.gov. The C.F.R. compilations
are also available for inspection and use at most public libraries and the
State Library of Ohio.
         (c)   National Fire Protection Association. Information on the
National Fire Protection Association codes may be obtained by contacting the
Association at 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02169-7471, 617-770-
3000. Codes may be ordered at www.nfpa.org/catalog/home/index.asp. Copies of
the code exist or are available at most public libraries and the State Library
of Ohio.
      (2)   Referenced materials.
         (a)   40 C.F.R. § 60.2974: “Am I required to apply for and obtain a
title V operating permit for my air curtain incinerator that burns only wood
waste, clean lumber, and yard waste?” as published in the July 1, 2017 Code of
Federal Regulations.
         (b)   40 C.F.R. § 60.3069: “Am I required to apply for and obtain a
title V operating permit for my air curtain incinerator that burns only wood
waste, clean lumber, and yard waste?” as published in the July 1, 2017 Code of
Federal Regulations.
         (c)   NFPA publication 1403: “Standard on Live Fire Training
Evolutions, Chapter 4, Acquired Structures” published April 30, 2007.
         (d)   Section 129 of the Clean Air Act, contained in 42 U.S.C. § 7429:
“Solid waste combustion” published January 6, 2017 in Supplement IV of the 2012
Edition of the United States Code.
(O.A.C. § 3745-19-01)
§ 95.76 RELATIONS TO OTHER PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any provision in O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19, no open
burning shall be conducted in an area where an air alert, warning or emergency
under O.A.C. Chapter 3745-25 is in effect.
   (B)   No provisions of O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19 permitting open burning, and
no permission to open burn granted by the Ohio EPA, shall exempt any person
from compliance with any section of the Ohio Revised Code, or any regulation of
any state department, or any local ordinance or regulation dealing with open
burning.
(O.A.C. § 3745-19-02) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.77 OPEN BURNING IN RESTRICTED AREAS.
   (A)   No person or property owner shall cause or allow open burning in a
restricted area except as provided in divisions (B) to (D) of this section or
in R.C. § 3704.11.
   (B)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes without
notification to or permission from the Ohio EPA:
      (1)   Heating tar, welding, acetylene torches, highway safety flares,
heating for warmth of outdoor workers and strikers, smudge pots and similar
occupational needs.
      (2)   Bonfires, campfires and outdoor fireplace equipment, whether for
cooking food for human consumption, pleasure, religious, ceremonial, warmth,
recreational, or similar purposes, if the following conditions are met:
         (a)   They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or
equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or
lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood;
         (b)   They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and
         (c)   They shall have a total fuel area of three feet or less in
diameter and two feet or less in height.
      (3)   Disposal of hazardous explosive materials, military munitions or
explosive devices that require immediate action to prevent endangerment of
human health, public safety, property or the environment and that are excluded
from the requirement to obtain a hazardous waste permit pursuant to O.A.C.
3745-50-45(D)(1)(d).
      (4)   Recognized training in the use of fire extinguishers for commercial
or industrial fire prevention.
      (5)   Fires set at the direction of federal, state, and local law
enforcement officials for the purpose of destruction of cannabis sativa
(marijuana) plant vegetation, processed marijuana material and/or other drugs
seized by federal, state, or local law enforcement officials.
      (6)   Fires allowed by divisions (B)(1), (B)(2), and (B)(4) of this
section shall not be used for waste disposal purposes and shall be of minimum
size sufficient for their intended purpose; the fuel shall be chosen to
minimize the generation and emission of air contaminants.
   (C)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes with prior
notification to the Ohio EPA in accordance with §
95.78(B):
      (1)   Prevention or control of disease or pests, with written or oral
verification to the Ohio EPA from the Ohio Department of Health or local health
department, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, cooperative
extension service, Ohio Department of Agriculture, or U.S. Department of
Agriculture, that open burning is the only appropriate disposal method.
      (2)   Bonfires or campfires used for ceremonial purposes that do not meet
the requirements of division (B)(2) of this section, provided the following
conditions are met:
         (a)   They have a total fuel area no greater than five feet in
diameter by five feet in height and burn no longer than three hours;
         (b)   They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and
         (c)   They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or
equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or
lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood.
      (3)   Disposal of agricultural waste generated on the premises if the
following conditions are observed:
         (a)   The fire is set only when atmospheric conditions will readily
dissipate contaminants;
         (b)   The fire does not create a visibility hazard on the roadways,
railroad tracks, or air fields;
         (c)   The fire is located at a point on the premises no less than
1,000 feet from any inhabited building not located on said premises;
         (d)   The wastes are stacked and dried to provide the best practicable
condition for efficient burning; and
         (e)   No materials are burned which contain rubber, grease, asphalt,
liquid petroleum products, plastics or building materials.
      (4)   Recognized horticultural, silvicultural (forestry), range
management, prairie and grassland management, invasive species management, or
wildlife management practices, if all of the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The fire shall be performed within 180 days of submitting the
notification.
         (b)   The fire shall be performed when it is anticipated weather
conditions will minimize the dispersion of smoke near populated areas and the
smoke does not create a visibility hazard on roadways, railroad tracks, or air
fields. Smoke dispersion conditions shall be evaluated before, during, and
after the fire and actions taken to minimize smoke impacts.
         (c)   The person making the notification shall notify the local fire
department having jurisdiction over the burn area at least 24 hours before the
fire is anticipated to occur.
         (d)   The person making the notification shall provide reasonable
notification to populations potentially impacted by the smoke before the fire
occurs. Populations potentially impacted shall include, at a minimum, those
within one-quarter mile of the burn site. Reasonable notification shall include
one of the following:
            1.   Posting notice of intent to burn, including contact
information for the person making the notification and the anticipated date
that the fire will occur, within open view from a public roadway adjacent to
and outside of the property on which the fire will occur.
            2.   Posting a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the
local community in which the fire will occur. The notice shall include, at a
minimum, the address of the property at which the fire will occur, contact
information for the person making the notification and the anticipated date
that the fire will occur.
            3.   Delivering written notice directly to residences and
businesses within a minimum of one- quarter mile of the burn site. Notices
shall include, at a minimum, the address of the property at which the fire will
occur, contact information for the person making the notification and the
anticipated date that the fire will occur.
         (e)   The person making the notification shall document information on
the weather, smoke conditions, any air quality concerns before, during, and
after the fire, the actual number of acres burned, the time the fire was
initially kindled, the time when active kindling ceased and the time at which
mop up activities ceased. The person making the notification shall maintain
this information for a minimum of one year from the date of the fire and shall
provide this information to the appropriate Ohio EPA district office or local
air agency within ten days upon request.
         (f)   Reasonable access to the burn site shall be provided to Ohio EPA
representatives at any time during the fire.
   (D)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes upon receipt
of written permission from the Ohio EPA, in accordance with §
95.78(A), provided that any conditions specified in the permission are
followed:
      (1)   Disposal of ignitable or explosive materials where the Ohio EPA
determines that there is no practical alternate method of disposal, excluding
those materials identified in division (B)(3) of this section;
      (2)   Instruction in methods of fire fighting or for research in the
control of fires as recognized by the State Fire Marshal Division of the Ohio
Department of Commerce and the guidelines set forth in the National Fire
Protection Association’s (NFPA) publication 1403, Standard on Live Fire
Training Evolutions, Chapter 4, Acquired Structures, provided that the
application required in §
95.78(A)(1) is submitted by the commercial or public entity responsible for the
instruction;
      (3)   In emergency or other extraordinary circumstances for any purpose
determined to be necessary by the Director and performed as identified in the
appendix to O.A.C. § 3745-19-03. If deemed necessary, the open burning may be
authorized with prior oral approval by the Director followed by the issuance of
a written permission to open burn within seven working days of the oral
approval;
      (4)   Fires or pyrotechnic effects, for purposes other than waste
disposal, set as part of commercial film- making or video production activities
for motion pictures and television.
(O.A.C. § 3745-19-03) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.78 PERMISSION AND NOTICE TO OPEN BURN.
   (A)   Permission.
      (1)   An application for permission to open burn shall be submitted in
writing to Ohio EPA. The applicant shall allow Ohio EPA at least ten working
days to review the permit. Applicant may proceed with burn upon receipt of
written permission from Ohio EPA. Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays shall
not be considered working days. The application shall be in such form and
contain such information as required by the Ohio EPA.
      (2)   Except as provided in divisions (A)(6) and (A)(7) of this section,
such applications shall contain, as a minimum, the following information:
         (a)   The purpose of the proposed burning;
         (b)   The quantity or acreage and the nature of the materials to be
burned;
         (c)   The date or dates when such burning will take place;
         (d)   The location of the burning site, including a map showing
distances to residences, populated areas, roadways, air fields, and other
pertinent landmarks; and
         (e)   The methods or actions which will be taken to reduce the
emissions of air contaminants.
      (3)   Permission to open burn shall not be granted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Ohio EPA that open burning is necessary
to the public interest; will be conducted in a time, place, and manner as to
minimize the emission of air contaminants, when atmospheric conditions are
appropriate; and will have no serious detrimental effect upon adjacent
properties or the occupants thereof. The Ohio EPA may impose such conditions as
may be necessary to accomplish the purpose of O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (A)(6) of this section, permission
to open burn must be obtained for each specific project. In emergencies where
public health or environmental quality will be seriously threatened by delay
while written permission is sought, the fire may be set with oral permission of
the Ohio EPA.
      (5)   Violations of any of the conditions set forth by the Ohio EPA in
granting permission to open burn shall be grounds for revocation of such
permission and refusal to grant future permission, as well as for the
imposition of other sanctions provided by law.
      (6)   The Ohio Department of Commerce, Division of State Fire Marshal,
may request permission to open burn on an annual basis for the purpose of
training firefighters on pre-flashover conditions using the Ohio Fire Academy’s
mobile training laboratory at either the academy or at other training sites in
Ohio. The annual application required pursuant to division (A)(1) of this
section shall contain information as required in division (A)(2) of this
section, except the information required in divisions (A)(2)(c) and (A)(2)(d)
of this section need not be provided unless it is available at the time of
submittal of the application. The Academy shall contact the appropriate Ohio
EPA District Office or local air agency at least five working days before each
training session of the date or dates when the training session will take place
and its location. Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays shall not be considered
a working day.
      (7)   For open burning defined under §
95.77(D)(2) and O.A.C. 3745-19-04(C)(2), permission to open burn shall not be
granted unless the applicant provides proof of written notice of intent to
demolish received by the appropriate Ohio EPA field office in accordance with
O.A.C. 3745-20-03.
   (B)   Notification.
      (1)   Notification shall be submitted in writing at least ten working
days before the fire is to be set. Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays shall
not be considered a working day. It shall be in such form and contain such
information as shall be required by the Ohio EPA.
      (2)   Such notification shall inform the Ohio EPA regarding the
following:
         (a)   The purpose of the proposed burning;
         (b)   The nature and quantities of materials to be burned;
         (c)   The date or dates when such burning will take place; and
         (d)   The location of the burning site.
      (3)   The Ohio EPA, after receiving notification, may determine that the
open burning is not allowed under O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19 and the Ohio EPA shall
notify the applicant to this effect.
(O.A.C. § 3745-19-05) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another
penalty is not specifically provided shall be subject to the penalty as
provided in §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates §
95.05(A) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not
more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both.
(R.C. § 3737.99(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates §§
95.05(B) or
95.06 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100.
(R.C. § 3737.99(C))
      (3)   Whoever violates §§
95.07 or
95.09 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be fined not
more than $250 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.
(R.C. § 3737.99(D))
      (4)   Whoever violates §§
95.08 or
95.10 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both.
(R.C. § 3737.99(E))
   (C)   (1)   Any person who has received a citation for a serious violation
of the Ohio Fire Code or any order issued pursuant to it shall be assessed a
civil penalty of not more than $1,000 for each such violation.
      (2)   Any person who has received a citation for a violation of the Ohio
Fire Code or any order issued pursuant to it, and such violation is
specifically determined not to be of a serious nature, may be assessed a civil
penalty of not more than $1,000 for each such violation.
      (3)   Any person who fails to correct a violation for which a citation
has been issued, within the period permitted for its correction, may be
assessed a civil penalty of not more than $1,000 for each day during which such
failure or violation continues.
      (4)   Any person who violates any of the posting requirements prescribed
by §
95.04(C) shall be assessed a civil penalty of not more than $1,000 for each
violation.
      (5)   Due consideration to the appropriateness of the penalty with
respect to the gravity of the violation, the good faith of the person being
charged and the history of previous violations shall be given whenever a
penalty is assessed under this chapter.
      (6)   For purposes of this section, a serious violation shall be
considered to exist if there is a substantial probability that an occurrence
causing death or serious physical harm to persons could result from a condition
which exists, or from one or more practices, means, methods, operations or
processes which have been adopted or are in use, unless the person did not and
could not, with the exercise of reasonable diligence, know of the presence of
the violation.
      (7)   Civil penalties imposed under this chapter shall be paid to the
Clerk of Council for deposit into the general fund. Such penalties may be
recovered in a civil action in the name of the municipality brought in the
Court of Common Pleas.
(R.C. § 3737.51(B) to (H))
(Prior Code, § 1610.99)
   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(2) or (D)(3) of
this section, whoever violates any provisions of §§
95.25 through
95.32 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of R.C. § 3743.60(I) or R.C. § 3743.61(I), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, a violation of §
95.28(E) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates §
95.30(A) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to any
other penalties that may be imposed on a licensed exhibitor of fireworks under
this division and unless the third sentence of this division applies, the
person’s license as an exhibitor of fireworks or as an assistant exhibitor of
fireworks shall be suspended. If the violation of §
95.30(A) results in serious physical harm to persons or serious physical harm
to property, the person’s license as an exhibitor of fireworks or as an
assistant exhibitor of fireworks shall be revoked.
      (4)   Whoever violates §
95.26(F) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Notwithstanding any
other provision of law to the contrary, a person may be convicted at the same
trial or proceeding of a violation of §
95.26(F) and a violation of R.C. § 2917.11(B), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of the charge of the violation
of §
95.26(F).
      (5)   Whoever violates §
95.28(G) or (H) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (6)   Whoever violates §
95.26(G) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3743.99(C), (D), (F) - (H))
Statutory reference:
   Civil penalties for violations of State Fire Code, see R.C. § 3737.51(B)
through (H)
CHAPTER 96: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
96.01   Definitions
   
96.02   Sales to underage persons; prohibitions and misrepresentations
   
96.03   Sales to intoxicated persons
   
96.04   Consumption in motor vehicle
   
96.05   Permit required
   
96.06   Posting age and firearm warning signs
   
96.07   Open container prohibited
   
96.08   Hours of sale or consumption
   
96.09   Sales of low-alcohol beverages to underage persons; prohibitions and
misrepresentations
   
96.10   Alcohol vaporizing devices prohibited
Statutory reference:
   Liquor Control Law, see R.C. Ch. 4301
   Liquor permits, see R.C. Ch. 4303
   Local option, see R.C. § 4303.32 et seq.   
   Suspension of alcohol sales during emergency, see R.C. § 4301.251
§ 96.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, whether rectified or diluted with water or not,
whatever its origin may be, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol. The term does
not include denatured alcohol and wood alcohol.
   AT RETAIL. For use or consumption by the purchaser and not for resale.
   BEER.
      (1)   Includes all beverages brewed or fermented wholly or in part from
malt products and containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
      (2)   BEER, regardless of the percent of alcohol by volume, is not
intoxicating liquor for purposes of this code, the Ohio Revised Code, or any
rules adopted under it.
   CIDER. All liquids that are fit to use for beverage purposes that contain
0.5% of alcohol by volume, but not more than 6% of alcohol by weight that are
made through the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of sound, ripe
apples, including without limitation flavored, sparkling or carbonated cider
and cider made from pure condensed apple must.
   CLUB. A corporation or association of individuals organized in good faith
for social, recreational, benevolent, charitable, fraternal, political,
patriotic or athletic purposes, which is the owner, lessor or occupant of a
permanent building or part of a permanent building operated solely for those
purposes, membership in which entails the prepayment of regular dues, and
includes the place so operated.
   COMMUNITY FACILITY. Either of the following:
      (1)   Any convention, sports or entertainment facility or complex, or any
combination of these, that is used by or accessible to the general public and
that is owned or operated in whole or in part by the state, a state agency or a
political subdivision of the state or that is leased from, or located on
property owned by or leased from, the state, a state agency, a political
subdivision of the state or a convention facilities authority created pursuant
to R.C. § 351.02;
      (2)   An area designated as a community entertainment district pursuant
to R.C. § 4301.80.
   CONTROLLED ACCESS ALCOHOL AND BEVERAGE CABINET. A closed container, either
refrigerated, in whole or in part, or nonrefrigerated, access to the interior
of which is restricted by means of a device that requires the use of a key,
magnetic card or similar device and from which beer, intoxicating liquor, other
beverages or food may be sold.
   HOTEL. The same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01, subject to the exceptions
mentioned in R.C. § 3731.03.
   INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR. All liquids and compounds, other than beer,
containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume which are fit to use for beverage
purposes, from whatever source and by whatever process produced, by whatever
name called, and whether they are medicated, proprietary or patented.
INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR include cider and alcohol, and all solids and
confections which contain 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
   LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGE. Any brewed or fermented malt product or any product
made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits or other agricultural products
that contains either no alcohol or less than 0.5% of alcohol by volume. The
beverages described in this definition do not include a soft drink such as root
beer, birch beer or ginger beer.
   MANUFACTURE. All processes by which beer or intoxicating liquor is produced,
whether by distillation, rectifying, fortifying, blending, fermentation,
brewing, or in any other manner.
   MANUFACTURER. Any person engaged in the business of manufacturing beer or
intoxicating liquor.
   MIXED BEVERAGES. Includes bottled and prepared cordials, cocktails,
highballs, and solids and confections that are obtained by mixing any type of
whiskey, neutral spirits, brandy, gin or other distilled spirits with, or over,
carbonated or plain water, pure juices from flowers and plants, and other
flavoring materials. The completed product shall contain not less than 0.5% of
alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume. The phrase
includes the contents of a pod.
   NIGHTCLUB. A place habitually operated for profit, where food is served for
consumption on the premises, and one or more forms of amusement are provided or
permitted for a consideration that may be in the form of a cover charge or may
be included in the price of the food and beverages, or both, purchased by
patrons.
   PERSON. Includes firms and corporations.
   PHARMACY. An establishment as defined in R.C. § 4729.01, that is under the
management or control of a licensed pharmacist in accordance with R.C. §
4729.27.
   POD. A sealed capsule made from plastic, glass, aluminum, or a combination
thereof to which all of the following apply:
(1)   The capsule contains intoxicating liquor of more than 21% of alcohol by
volume.
(2)   The capsule also contains a concentrated flavoring mixture.
      (3)   The contents of the capsule are not readily accessible or intended
for consumption unless certain manufacturer’s processing instructions are
followed.
      (4)   The instructions include releasing the contents of the capsule
through a machine specifically designed to process the contents.
      (5)   After being properly processed according to the manufacturer's
instructions, the final product produced from the capsule contains not less
than 0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume.
   RESTAURANT. A place located in a permanent building provided with space and
accommodations wherein, in consideration of the payment of money, hot meals are
habitually prepared, sold and served at noon and evening, as the principal
business of the place. The term does not include pharmacies, confectionery
stores, lunch stands, nightclubs and filling stations.
   SALE and SELL. The exchange, barter, gift, offer for sale, sale,
distribution and delivery of any kind, and the transfer of title or possession
of beer and intoxicating liquor either by constructive or actual delivery by
any means or devices whatever, including the sale of beer or intoxicating
liquor by means of a controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet pursuant to
R.C. § 4301.21. These terms do not include the mere solicitation of orders for
beer or intoxicating liquor from the holders of permits issued by the Division
of Liquor Control authorizing the sale of the beer or intoxicating liquor, but
no solicitor shall solicit any orders until the solicitor has been registered
with the Division pursuant to R.C. § 4303.25.
   SALES AREA OR TERRITORY. An exclusive geographic area or territory that is
assigned to a particular A or B permit holder and that either has one or more
political subdivisions as its boundaries or consists of an area of land with
readily identifiable geographic boundaries. “Sales area or territory” does not
include, however, any particular retail location in an exclusive geographic
area or territory that had been assigned to another A or B permit holder before
April 9, 2001.
   SEALED CONTAINER. Any container having a capacity of not more than 128 fluid
ounces, the opening of which is closed to prevent the entrance of air.
   SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR. All intoxicating liquors containing more than 21% of
alcohol by volume. The phrase does not include the contents of a pod.
   VEHICLE. All means of transportation by land, by water or by air, and
everything made use of in any way for the transportation.
   WHOLESALE DISTRIBUTOR and DISTRIBUTOR. A person engaged in the business of
selling to retail dealers for purposes of resale.
   WINE. All liquids fit to use for beverage purposes containing not less than
0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume, that is
made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other agricultural
products. The term includes cider, except as used in R.C. §§ 4301.13, 4301.421,
4301.422, 4301.432, and 4301.44, and, for purposes of determining the rate of
the tax that applies, R.C. § 4301.43(B), the term does not include cider.
(R.C. §§ 4301.01, 4301.244) (Prior Code, § 612.01)
§ 96.02 SALES TO UNDERAGE PERSONS; PROHIBITIONS AND MISREPRESENTATIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor to an underage person, shall
buy beer or intoxicating liquor for an underage person, or shall furnish it to
an underage person unless given by a physician in the regular line of the
physician’s practice or given for established religious purposes or unless the
underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage
person, or legal guardian. In proceedings before the Liquor Control Commission,
no permit holder, or no employee or agent of a permit holder, charged with a
violation of this division shall be charged, for the same offense, with a
violation of R.C. § 4301.22(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (B)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private place
shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place while
possessing or consuming beer or intoxicating liquor, unless the intoxicating
liquor or beer is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that
person’s parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian and
the parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present
at the time of the person’s possession or consumption of the beer or
intoxicating liquor. An owner of a public or private place is not liable for
acts or omissions in violation of this division that are committed by a lessee
of that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s acts
or omissions.
   (C)   No person shall engage or use accommodations at a hotel, inn, cabin,
campground or restaurant when the person knows or has reason to know either of
the following:
      (1)   That beer or intoxicating liquor will be consumed by an underage
person on the premises of the accommodations that the person engages or uses,
unless the person engaging or using the accommodations is the spouse of the
underage person and who is not an underage person, or is the parent or legal
guardian of all of the underage persons, who consume beer or intoxicating
liquor on the premises and that person is on the premises at all times when
beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by an underage person.
      (2)   That a drug of abuse will be consumed on the premises of the
accommodations by any person, except a person who obtained the drug of abuse
pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professionals authorized
to prescribe drugs and has the drug of abuse in the original container in which
it was dispensed to the person.
   (D)   (1)   No person is required to permit the engagement of accommodations
at any hotel, inn, cabin or campground by an underage person or for an underage
person, if the person engaging the accommodations knows or has reason to know
that the underage person is intoxicated, or that the underage person possesses
any beer or intoxicating liquor and is not supervised by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person, or legal guardian who is or will be present at all
times when the beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by the underage
person.
      (2)   No underage person shall knowingly engage or attempt to engage
accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin or campground by presenting
identification that falsely indicates that the underage person is 21 years of
age or older for the purpose of violating this section.
   (E)   (1)   No underage person shall knowingly order, pay for, share the
cost of, attempt to purchase, possess or consume any beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public or private place. No underage person shall knowingly be
under the influence of any beer or intoxicating liquor in any public place. The
prohibitions set forth in this division against an underage person knowingly
possessing, consuming or being under the influence of any beer or intoxicating
liquor shall not apply if the underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse
who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or the beer or intoxicating
liquor is given by a physician in the regular line of the physician’s practice
or given for established religious purposes.
      (2)   (a)   If a person is charged with violating division (E)(1) of this
section in a complaint filed under R.C. § 2151.27, the court may order the
child into a diversion program specified by the court and hold the complaint in
abeyance pending successful completion of the diversion program. A child is
ineligible to enter into a diversion program under this division if the child
previously has been diverted pursuant to this division. If the child completes
the diversion program to the satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss
the complaint and order the child’s record in the case sealed under R.C. §§
2151.356 through 2151.358. If the child fails to satisfactorily complete the
diversion program, the court shall proceed with the complaint.
         (b)   If a person is charged in a criminal complaint with violating
division (E)(1) of this section, R.C. § 2935.36 shall apply to the offense,
except that a person is ineligible for diversion under that section if the
person previously has been diverted pursuant to divisions (E)(2)(a) or (E)(2)
(b) of this section. If the person completes the diversion program to the
satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss the complaint and order the
record in the case sealed under R.C. § 2953.33. If the person fails to
satisfactorily complete the diversion program, the court shall proceed with the
complaint.
   (F)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
a minor shall knowingly permit the minor to violate this section or R.C. §
4301.63, 4301.633 or 4301.634, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (G)   The operator of any hotel, inn, cabin or campground shall make the
provisions of this section available in writing to any person engaging or using
accommodations at the hotel, inn, cabin or campground.
   (H)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
      HOTEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01.
      LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS and
PRESCRIPTION. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
      MINOR. A person under the age of 18 years.
      UNDERAGE PERSON. A person under the age of 21 years.
(R.C. § 4301.69)
   (I)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person under the age of 21 years shall purchase beer or intoxicating liquor.
(R.C. § 4301.63)
   (J)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the name, age or
other identification of any person under 21 years of age, for the purpose of
obtaining, or with the intent to obtain, beer or intoxicating liquor for a
person under 21 years of age, by purchase or as a gift.
(R.C. § 4301.633)
   (K)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person under the age of 21 years shall knowingly show or give false
information concerning his or her name, age or other identification for the
purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining beer or intoxicating liquor in any
place in this municipality where beer or intoxicating liquor is sold under a
permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control, or sold by the Division of
Liquor Control.
(R.C. § 4301.634)
   (L)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor, shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, and in
addition to the fine, may be imprisoned for a definite term of not more than
six months.
(R.C. § 4301.99(I))
   (M)   Whoever violates division (B), (C), (D),(F), (G) or (J) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
   (N)   Whoever violates division (E)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If an offender who violates division (E)(1) of
this section was under the age of 18 years at the time of the offense and the
offense occurred while the offender was the operator of or a passenger in a
motor vehicle, the court, in addition to any other penalties it imposes upon
the offender, shall suspend the offender’s temporary instruction permit or
probationary driver’s license for a period of not less than six months and not
more than one year. If the offender is 15 years and six months of age or older
and has not been issued a temporary instruction permit or probationary driver’s
license, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or
permit for a period of six months. If the offender has not attained the age of
15 years and six months, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a
temporary instruction permit until the offender attains the age of 16 years.
(R.C. § 4301.99(D))
   (O)   Whoever violates division (I) of this section shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $100. The court imposing a fine for a violation of this
section may order that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at a
reasonable hour rate established by the court. The court shall designate the
time within which the public work shall be completed.
(R.C. § 4301.99(E))
   (P)   (1)   Whoever violates division (K) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If, in committing a first violation of
division (k), the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $250 and not
more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more
than six months.
      (2)   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the offender
presented to the permit holder or his or her employee or agent a false,
fictitious or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver’s
license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s license issued by any
state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, and
may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months. The
court also may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operation privilege from
the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
      (3)   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or
subsequent time, the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more
than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than
six months. Except as provided in this division, the court also may impose a
class six suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that the suspension or denial remain in
effect until the offender attains the age of 21 years. The court, in lieu of
suspending the offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s
license, or driver’s license, instead may order the offender to perform a
determinate number of hours of community service, with the court determining
the actual number of hours and the nature of the community service the offender
shall perform.
(R.C. § 4301.99(F))
(Prior Code, § 612.02)
§ 96.03 SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS.
   (A)   No permit holder and no agent or employee of a permit holder shall
sell or furnish beer or intoxicating liquor to an intoxicated person.
(R.C. § 4301.22(B))
   (B)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(D), (H))
(Prior Code, § 612.03)
§ 96.04 CONSUMPTION IN MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall consume any beer or intoxicating liquor in a motor
vehicle. This section does not apply to persons described in R.C. § 4301.62(D)
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 4301.64)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If an offender who violates this section was under the age of 18 years
at the time of the offense, the court, in addition to any other penalties it
imposes upon the offender, may suspend the offender’s temporary instruction
permit, probationary driver’s license or driver’s license for a period of not
less than six months and not more than one year. In lieu of suspending the
offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or
driver’s license, the court instead may require the offender to perform
community service for a number of hours determined by the court. If the
offender is 15 years and six months of age or older and has not been issued a
temporary instruction permit or probationary driver’s license, the offender
shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or permit for a period of six
months. If the offender has not attained the age of 15 years and six months,
the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a temporary instruction permit
until the offender attains the age of 16 years.
(R.C. § 4301.99(B))
(Prior Code, § 612.04)
§ 96.05 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   No person personally or by the person’s clerk, agent or
employee, shall manufacture, manufacture for sale, offer, keep or possess for
sale, furnish or sell, or solicit the purchase or sale of any beer or
intoxicating liquor in this state, or transport, import or cause to be
transported or imported any beer, intoxicating liquor or alcohol in or into
this municipality for delivery, use or sale, unless the person has fully
complied with R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or is the holder of a permit issued
by the Division of Liquor Control and in force at the time.
      (2)   No manufacturer, supplier, wholesale distributor, broker or
retailer of beer or intoxicating liquor, or other person shall employ, retain
or otherwise utilize any person in this state to act as an employee, agent,
solicitor or salesperson, or act in any other representative capacity to sell,
solicit, take orders or receive offers to purchase or expressions of interest
to purchase beer or intoxicating liquor from any person, at any location other
than a liquor permit premises, except as specifically authorized by R.C.
Chapter 4301 or Chapter 4303 or rules adopted thereunder. No function, event or
party shall take place at any location other than a liquor permit premises
where any person acts in any manner to sell, solicit, take orders or receive
offers to purchase or expressions of intent to purchase beer or intoxicating
liquor to or from any person, except as specifically authorized by R.C. Chapter
4301 or Chapter 4303 or rules adopted thereunder.
(R.C. § 4303.25)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 612.05)
§ 96.06 POSTING AGE AND FIREARM WARNING SIGNS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4301.691, every place in
this municipality where beer, intoxicating liquor or any low-alcohol beverage
is sold for beverage purposes shall display at all times, in a prominent place
on the premises thereof, a printed card, which shall be furnished by the
Division of Liquor Control and which shall read substantially as follows:
   WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER AGE
   If you are under the age of 21
Under the statutes of the State of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the cost
of or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume beer or intoxicating liquor in
any public place, or furnish false information as to name, age or other
identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $1,000, or imprisonment up
to 6 months, or both.
   If you are under the age of 18
Under the statutes of the State of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the cost
of or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume, any type of beer or wine that
contains either no alcohol or less than one-half of one percent of alcohol by
volume in any public place, or furnish false information as to the name, age,
or other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $250 or to
imprisonment up to 30 days, or both.
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Department or the Liquor Control Commission for failing
to display this card. No permit issued by the Department shall be suspended,
revoked or canceled because of the failure of the permit holder to display this
card.
   (B)   (1)   Every place in this municipality for which a D permit has been
issued under R.C. Chapter 4303 shall be issued a printed card by the Division
of Liquor Control that shall read substantially as follows:
   WARNING
   If you are carrying a firearm
Under the statutes of Ohio, if you possess a firearm in any room in which
liquor is being dispensed in premises for which a D permit has been issued
under Chapter 4303 of the Revised Code, you may be guilty of a felony and may
be subjected to a prison term of up to one year.
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Division of Liquor Control or the Liquor Control
Commission for failing to display this card. No permit issued by the Department
shall be suspended, revoked or canceled because of the failure of the permit
holder to display this card.
(R.C. § 4301.637)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.70, 4301.99(A))
(Prior Code, § 612.06)
§ 96.07 OPEN CONTAINER PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE. A vehicle registered under R.C. § 4503.24.
      STREET, HIGHWAY, and MOTOR VEHICLE. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
4511.01.
   (B)   No person shall have in the person’s possession an opened container of
beer or intoxicating liquor in any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(1)(e) of this section, in a
state liquor store;
      (2)   Except as provided in division (C) or (J) of this section, on the
premises of the holder of any permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control;
      (3)   In any other public place;
      (4)   Except as provided in division (D) or (E) of this section while
operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on any street, highway
or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking;
      (5)   Except as provided in division (D) or (E) of this section while
being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on any street, highway or other
public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking.
   (C)   (1)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened container
of any of the following:
         (a)   Beer or intoxicating liquor that has been lawfully purchased for
consumption on the premises where bought from the holder of an A-1-A, A-2, A-
2f, A-3a, D-1, D-2, D-3, D-3a, D-4, D-4a, D-5, D-5a, D-5b, D-5c, D-5d, D-5e, D-
5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-5j, D-5k, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, D-7, D-8, D-9, E, F,
F-2, F-5, F-7, F-8, or F-9 permit;
         (b)   Beer, wine, or mixed beverages served for consumption on the
premises by the holder of an F-3 permit, wine served as a tasting sample by an
A-2, A-2f, S-1, or S-2 permit holder for consumption on the premises of a
farmers market for which an F-10 permit has been issued, or wine served for
consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-4 or F-6 permit;
         (c)   Beer or intoxicating liquor consumed on the premises of a
convention facility as provided in R.C. § 4303.201;
         (d)   Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed during tastings and
samplings approved by rule of the Liquor Control Commission;
         (e)   Spiritous liquor to be consumed for purposes of a tasting
sample, as defined in R.C. § 4301.171;
         (f)   Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed in an outdoor area
described in R.C. § 4303.188(B)(1).
      (2)   A person may have in the person’s possession on an F liquor permit
premises an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not
purchased from the holder of the F permit if the premises for which the F
permit is issued is a music festival and the holder of the F permit grants
permission for that possession on the premises during the period for which the
F permit is issued. As used in this division (C)(2), MUSIC FESTIVAL means a
series of outdoor live musical performances extending for a period of at least
three consecutive days and located on an area of land of at least 40 acres.
      (3)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession on a D-2 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of wine that was not purchased
from the holder of the D-2 permit if the premises for which the D-2 permit is
issued is an outdoor performing arts center, the person is attending an
orchestral performance, and the holder of the D-2 permit grants permission for
the possession and consumption of wine in certain predesignated areas of the
premises during the period for which the D-2 permit is issued.
         (b)   As used in division (C)(3)(a) of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
            ORCHESTRAL PERFORMANCE. A concert comprised of a group of not fewer
than 40 musicians playing various musical instruments.
            OUTDOOR PERFORMING ARTS CENTER. An outdoor performing arts center
that is located on not less than 150 acres of land and that is open for
performances from the first day of April to the last day of October of each
year.
      (4)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened or unopened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location at which the
person is attending an orchestral performance as defined in division (C)(3)(b)
of this section if the person with supervision and control over the performance
grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating
liquor in certain predesignated areas of that outdoor location.
      (5)   A person may have in the person’s possession on an F-9 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
that was not purchased from the holder of the F-9 permit if the F-9 permit
holder grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or
intoxicating liquor in certain predesignated areas of the premises during the
period for which the F-9 permit is issued.
      (6)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of an outdoor motorsports facility an opened or unopened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the owner of the facility if
both of the following apply:
            1.   The person is attending a racing event at the facility; and
            2.   The owner of the facility grants permission for the possession
and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor on the property of the facility.
         (b)   As used in division (C)(6)(a) of this section:
            1.   OUTDOOR MOTORSPORTS FACILITY. An outdoor racetrack to which
all of the following apply:
               a.   It is 2.4 miles or more in length.
               b.   It is located on 200 acres or more of land.
               c.   The primary business of the owner of the facility is the
hosting and promoting of racing events.
               d.   The holder of a D-1, D-2, or D-3 permit is located on the
property of the facility.
            2.   RACING EVENT. A motor vehicle racing event sanctioned by one
or more motor racing sanctioning organizations.
      (7)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location within an
outdoor refreshment area created under R.C. § 4301.82 if the opened container
of beer or intoxicating liquor was purchased from an A-1, A-1-A, A-1c, A-2, A-
2f, D class, or F class permit holder to which both of the following apply:
            1.   The permit holder’s premises is located within the outdoor
refreshment area.
            2.   The permit held by the permit holder has an outdoor
refreshment area designation.
         (b)   Division (C)(7) of this section does not authorize a person to
do either of the following:
            1.   Enter the premises of an establishment within an outdoor
refreshment area while possessing an opened container of beer or intoxicating
liquor acquired elsewhere;
            2.   Possess an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
while being in or on a motor vehicle within an outdoor refreshment area, unless
the possession is otherwise authorized under division (D) or (E) of this
section.
         (c)   As used in division (C)(7) of this section, D CLASS PERMIT
HOLDER does not include a D-6 or D-8 permit holder.
      (8)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of a market, within a defined F-8 permit premises, an opened container of beer
or intoxicating liquor that was purchased from a D permit premises that is
located immediately adjacent to the market if both of the following apply:
            1.   The market grants permission for the possession and
consumption of beer and intoxicating liquor within the defined F-8 permit
premises;
            2.   The market is hosting an event pursuant to an F-8 permit and
the market has notified the division of liquor control about the event in
accordance with R.C. § 4303.208(A)(3).
         (b)   As used in division (C)(8) of this section, MARKET means a
market, for which an F-8 permit is held, that has been in operation since 1860.
   (D)   This section does not apply to a person who pays all or a portion of
the fee imposed for use of a chauffeured limousine pursuant to a prearranged
contract or the guest of the person, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person or guest is a passenger in the limousine.
      (2)   The person or guest is located in the limousine, but is not
occupying a seat in the front compartment of the limousine where the operator
of the limousine is located.
      (3)   The limousine is located on any street, highway or other public or
private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking.
   (E)   An opened bottle of wine that was purchased from the holder of a
permit that authorizes the sale of wine for consumption on the premises where
sold is not an opened container for the purposes of this section if both of the
following apply:
      (1)   The opened bottle of wine is securely resealed by the permit holder
or an employee of the permit holder before the bottle is removed from the
premises. The bottle shall be secured in such a manner that it is visibly
apparent if the bottle has been subsequently opened or tampered with.
      (2)   The opened bottle of wine that is resealed in accordance with
division (E)(1) of this section is stored in the trunk of a motor vehicle or,
if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk, behind the last upright seat or in
an area not normally occupied by the driver or passengers and not easily
accessible by the driver.
   (F)   (1)   Except if an ordinance or resolution is enacted or adopted under
division (F)(2) of this section, this section does not apply to a person who,
pursuant to a prearranged contract, is a passenger riding on a commercial
quadricycle when all of the following apply:
         (a)   The person is not occupying a seat in the front of the
commercial quadricycle where the operator is steering or braking.
         (b)   The commercial quadricycle is being operated on a street,
highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking.
         (c)   The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle
an opened container of beer or wine.
         (d)   The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle
not more than either 36 ounces of beer or 18 ounces of wine.
      (2)   The Legislative Authority may enact an ordinance or adopt a
resolution, as applicable, that prohibits a passenger riding on a commercial
quadricycle from possessing an opened container of beer or wine.
      (3)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL QUADRICYCLE means a vehicle
that has fully-operative pedals for propulsion entirely by human power and that
meets all of the following requirements:
         (a)   It has four wheels and is operated in a manner similar to a
bicycle.
         (b)   It has at least five seats for passengers.
         (c)   It is designed to be powered by the pedaling of the operator and
the passengers.
         (d)   It is used for commercial purposes.
         (e)   It is operated by the vehicle owner or an employee of the owner.
   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person that has in the person’s
possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor on the premises
of a market if the beer or intoxicating liquor has been purchased from a D
liquor permit holder that is located in the market.
      (2)   As used in division (G) of this section, MARKET means an
establishment that:
         (a)   Leases space in the market to individual vendors, not less than
50% of which are retail food establishments or food service operations licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3717;
         (b)   Has an indoor sales floor area of not less than 22,000 square
feet;
         (c)   Hosts a farmer’s market on each Saturday from April through
December.
   (H)   (1)   As used in this section, ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 4303.185.
      (2)   An alcoholic beverage in a closed container being transported under
R.C. § 4303.185 to its final destination is not an opened container for the
purposes of this section if the closed container is securely sealed in such a
manner that it is visibly apparent if the closed container has been
subsequently opened or tampered with after sealing.
   (I)   This section does not apply to a person who has in the person’s
possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor in a public-use
airport, as described in R.C. § 4303.181(D)(2)(a)(iii), when both of the
following apply:
      (1)   Consumption of the opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
occurs in the area of the airport terminal that is restricted to persons taking
flights to and from the airport; and
      (2)   The consumption is authorized under R.C. § 4303.181(D)(2)(a).
   (J)   This section does not apply to a person that has in the person’s
possession an opened container of homemade beer or wine that is served in
accordance with R.C. § 4301.201(E).
(R.C. § 4301.62)
   (K)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.99(A))
(Prior Code, § 612.07)
§ 96.08 HOURS OF SALE OR CONSUMPTION.
   (A)   This section shall apply to the retail sale of beer, wine, mixed
beverages or spirituous liquor.
   (B)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1, A-1C, A-2, B-1, B-2, B-4, B-5, C-1, C-2, C-2X, D-1, D-2,
D-2X, D-3 when issued without a D-3A, D-3X, D-4, D-5H, D-5K, D-8, F, F-1, F-2,
F-3, F-4, F-5, F-6, F-7, F-8, F-9, G, or I permit holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30
a.m.
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and Sunday midnight,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise.
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (C)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1A, D-3 when issued with a D-3A, D-4A, D-5, D-5A, D-5B, D-5C,
D-5D, D-5E, D-5F, D-5G, D-5I, D-5J, D-5L, D-5M, D-5N, D-5O, or D-7 permit
holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30
a.m.
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and Sunday midnight,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise.
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (D)   Permit holders authorized to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages or
spirituous liquor at retail who are not specifically identified in divisions
(B) or (C) above shall be subject to the provisions of division (B), unless
statutorily authorized otherwise.
   (E)   The hours on Sunday during which sales, delivery or consumption of
alcoholic beverages may take place are established by statute, but in no event
shall they begin prior to 5:30 a.m.
(O.A.C. 4301:1-1-49)
   (F)   No association, corporation, local unit of an association or
corporation or D permit holder who holds an F-2 permit shall sell beer or
intoxicating liquor beyond the hours of sale allowed by the permit. This
division imposes strict liability on the holder of the permit and on any
officer, agent or employee of the permit holder.
(R.C. § 4303.202(D)(2))
   (G)   No F-8 permit holder shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor beyond the
hours of sale allowed by the permit. This division imposes strict liability on
the holder of an F-8 permit and on any officer, agent or employee of that
permit holder.
(R.C. § 4303.208(C))
   (H)   Whoever violates divisions (F) or (G) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4303.99(D))
(Prior Code, § 612.08)
§ 96.09 SALES OF LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGES TO UNDERAGE PERSONS; PROHIBITIONS AND
MISREPRESENTATIONS.
   (A)   As used in this section, UNDERAGE PERSON means a person under 18 years
of age.
   (B)   No underage person shall purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (C)   No underage person shall order, pay for, share the cost of or attempt
to purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the
name, age or other identification of any underage person for the purpose of
obtaining or with the intent to obtain any low-alcohol beverage for an underage
person, by purchase or as a gift.
   (E)   No underage person shall knowingly show or give false information
concerning his or her name, age or other identification for the purpose of
purchasing or otherwise obtaining any low-alcohol beverage in any place in this
municipality.
   (F)   No person shall sell or furnish any low-alcohol beverage to, or buy
any low-alcohol beverage for, an underage person, unless given by a physician
in the regular line of his or her practice or given for established religious
purposes, or unless the underage person is accompanied by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person, or legal guardian.
   (G)   (1)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private
place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place
while possessing or consuming any low-alcohol beverage, unless the low-alcohol
beverage is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that person’s
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, and the
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present when
the person possesses or consumes the low-alcohol beverage.
      (2)   An owner of a public or private place is not liable for acts or
omissions in violation of division (G)(1) that are committed by a lessee of
that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s acts or
omissions.
   (H)   No permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control shall be suspended,
revoked or cancelled because of a violation of either division (F) or (G).
   (I)   No underage person shall knowingly possess or consume any low-alcohol
beverage in any public or private place, unless he or she is accompanied by a
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or unless the
low-alcohol beverage is given by a physician in the regular line of his or her
practice or given for established religious purposes.
   (J)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
an underage person shall knowingly permit the underage person to violate this
section.
(R.C. § 4301.631)
   (K)   No low-alcohol beverage shall be sold to any person under 18 years of
age.
(R.C. § 4301.22(A)(2))
   (L)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $100. The court imposing a fine for a violation of
division (B) of this section may order that the fine be paid by the performance
of public work at a reasonable hour rate established by the court. The court
shall designate the time within which the public work shall be completed.
(R.C. § 4301.99(E))
   (M)   Whoever violates divisions (C) through (K) hereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(B))
(Prior Code, § 612.10)
§ 96.10 ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section, ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICE means a machine or
other device that mixes beer or intoxicating liquor with pure oxygen or any
other gas to produce a vaporized product for the purpose of consumption by
inhalation.
   (B)   No person shall sell or offer for sale an alcohol vaporizing device.
   (C)   No person shall purchase or use an alcohol vaporizing device.
(R.C. § 4301.65)
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
misdemeanor of the third degree. For a second or subsequent violation occurring
within a period of five consecutive years after the first violation, a person
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(J))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.99(A))
(Prior Code, § 612.11)
CHAPTER 97: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
97.01   Venting of heaters and burners
   
97.02   Dumping
   
97.03   Noxious odors; filthy accumulations; polluting and diverting
watercourses
   
97.04   Duty to keep sidewalks in repair and clean
   
97.05   Abandoned refrigerators and airtight containers
   
97.06   Storage of junk vehicles
   
97.07   Open burning
   
97.08   Barricades and warning lights
   
97.09   Sidewalk obstructions; damage or injury
   
97.10   Notice to fill lots, remove putrid substances
   
97.11   Smoking in places of public assembly
   
97.12   (Reserved)
   
97.13   Smoking and smokeless vaping products prohibited in all city
properties, buildings, and vehicles
   
97.14   Offensive weeds and grass
   
97.15   Notice of contamination from the illegal manufacture of methamphetamine
Littering
   
97.30   Definitions
   
97.31   Throwing or depositing litter in public places; use of receptacles and
dumps
   
97.32   Using receptacles to prevent scattering; damaging receptacles
   
97.33   Responsibility of landowners
   
97.34   Responsibility of merchants
   
97.35   Litter thrown from vehicles
   
97.36   Litter in parks
   
97.37   Litter in bodies of water
   
97.38   Dropping litter from aircraft
   
97.39   Billposting
   
97.40   Litter on occupied private property
   
97.41   Litter on vacant private property
   
97.42   Construction sites
   
97.43   Loading and unloading operations
   
97.44   Clearing of litter by municipality
   
97.45   Distributing handbills in or on public places
   
97.46   Placing handbills on vehicles
   
97.47   Depositing handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises
   
97.48   Distributing handbills prohibited where posted
   
97.49   Distributing handbills at inhabited private premises
Statutory reference:
   Excavation liability, see R.C. §§ 723.49 et seq.
   Nuisances, see R.C. Ch. 3767
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 97.01 VENTING OF HEATERS AND BURNERS.
   (A)   The use of a brazier, salamander, space heater, room heater, furnace,
water heater, or other burner or heater, using wood, coal, coke, fuel oil,
kerosene, gasoline, natural gas, liquid petroleum gas or similar fuel, and
tending to give off carbon monoxide or other harmful gases, must comply with
the following provisions;
      (1)   When used in living quarters, or in any enclosed building or space
in which persons are usually present, shall be used with a flue or vent so
designed, installed and maintained as to vent the products of combustion
outdoors; except in storage, factory or industrial buildings which are provided
with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning.
      (2)   When used as a portable or temporary burner or heater at a
construction site, or in a warehouse, shed or structure in which persons are
temporarily present, shall be vented as provided in division (A)(1) or used
with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning.
   (B)   This section does not apply to domestic ranges, laundry stoves, gas
logs installed in a fireplace with an adequate flue, or hot plates, unless the
same are used as space or room heaters.
   (C)   No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge
or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a burner or heater in
violation of the standards for venting and ventilation provided in this
section.
   (D)   Division (A) above does not apply to any kerosene-fired space or room
heater that is equipped with an automatic extinguishing tip-over device, or to
any natural gas-fired or liquid petroleum gas-fired space or room heater that
is equipped with an oxygen depletion safety shut-off system, and that has its
fuel piped from a source outside the building in which it is located, that are
approved by an authoritative source recognized by the State Fire Marshal in the
State Fire Code adopted by him or her under R.C. § 3737.82.
   (E)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules to ensure the safe use of
unvented kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas heaters exempted from
division (A) above when used in assembly buildings, business buildings, high
hazard buildings, institutional buildings, mercantile buildings and type R-
1 and R-2 residential buildings, as these groups of buildings are defined in
rules adopted by the Board of Building Standards under R.C. § 3781.10. No
person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge or occupant
of premises, negligently permit the use of a heater in violation of any rules
adopted under this division.
   (F)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules prescribing standards for
written instructions containing ventilation requirements and warning of any
potential fire hazards that may occur in using a kerosene, natural gas or
liquid petroleum gas heater. No person shall sell or offer for sale any
kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas heater unless the manufacturer
provides with the heater written instructions that comply with any rules
adopted under this division.
   (G)   No product labeled as a fuel additive for kerosene heaters and having
a flash point below 100°F or 37.8°C shall be sold, offered for sale or used in
any kerosene space heater.
   (H)   No device that prohibits any safety feature on a kerosene, natural gas
or liquid petroleum gas space heater from operating shall be sold, offered for
sale or used in connection with any kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum
gas space heater.
   (I)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any kerosene-fired, natural gas
or liquid petroleum gas-fired heater that is not exempt from division (A)
above, unless it is marked conspicuously by the manufacturer on the container
with the phrase “Not Approved For Home Use.”
   (J)   No person shall use a cabinet-type, liquid petroleum gas-fired heater
having a fuel source within the heater, inside any building, except as
permitted by the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him or
her under R.C. § 3737.82.
(R.C. § 3701.82)
   (K)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 3701.99(B))
(Prior Code, § 660.01)
§ 97.02 DUMPING.
   (A)   No person shall dump any waste or other refuse in an amount in excess
of five pounds upon any public or private property or waters. DUMPING includes,
but is not limited to, discarding, dropping, placing, throwing, depositing or
dispensing. WASTE includes, but is not limited to, garbage, trash, dead
animals, junk, tires, used automobile parts, used building materials, used oil,
used chemicals and any other similar substances, human-made or otherwise,
serving no function use for which the same was intended at the location where
it is dumped or which may become noxious, offensive, injurious or dangerous to
the public health, comfort or safety.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(Prior Code, § 660.03) (Ord. 91-17, passed 6-11-1991)
§ 97.03 NOXIOUS ODORS; FILTHY ACCUMULATIONS; POLLUTING AND DIVERTING
WATERCOURSES.
   (A)   No person shall erect, continue to use or maintain a building,
structure or place for the exercise of a trade, employment or business or for
keeping or feeding an animal which, by occasioning noxious exhalations or
noisome or offensive smells, becomes injurious to the health, comfort or
property of individuals or of the public.
   (B)   No person shall cause or allow offal, filth or noisome substances to
be collected or remain in any place to the damage or prejudice of others or of
the public.
   (C)   No person shall unlawfully obstruct or impede the passage of a
navigable river, harbor or collection of water, or corrupt or render
unwholesome or impure a watercourse, stream of water or unlawfully divert the
watercourse from its natural course or state to the injury or prejudice of
others.
   (D)   Persons who are engaged in agriculture-related activities, as
AGRICULTURE is defined in R.C. § 519.01, and who are conducting those
activities outside the municipality, in accordance with generally accepted
agricultural practices, and in such a manner so as not to have a substantial,
adverse effect on the public health, safety or welfare, are exempt from
divisions (A) and (B) above and from any ordinances, resolutions, rules, or
other enactments of the municipality that prohibit excessive noise.
(R.C. § 3767.13)
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 3767.99(C))
(Prior Code, § 660.04)
§ 97.04 DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS IN REPAIR AND CLEAN.
   (A)   No owner or occupant of lots or lands abutting any sidewalk, curb or
gutter shall fail to keep the sidewalks, curbs and gutters in repair and free
from snow, ice or any nuisance, and to remove from the sidewalks, curbs or
gutters all snow and ice accumulated thereon within a reasonable time, which
will ordinarily not exceed 12 hours after any storm during which the snow and
ice has accumulated.
(R.C. § 723.011)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 660.05)
§ 97.05 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS AND AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS.
   (A)   No person shall abandon, discard or knowingly permit to remain on
premises under the person’s control, in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight
container which has a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more and an
opening of 50 square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with a
hinge, latch or other fastening device capable of securing the door or lid,
without rendering the equipment harmless to human life by removing the hinges,
latches or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein. This
section shall not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-
airtight container located in that part of a building occupied by a dealer,
warehouse or repairer.
(R.C. § 3767.29)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 3767.99(B))
(Prior Code, § 660.06)
§ 97.06 STORAGE OF JUNK VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   For purposes of this section, JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE means any motor
vehicle that meets any three of the following requirements:
         (a)   Is three years old or older;
         (b)   Is extensively damaged or in disrepair, such damage or disrepair
may include, but not be limited to any of the following: missing wheels, tires,
motor, transmission, or similar major part;
         (c)   Is apparently not operable (OPERABLE means able to be started
and driven under its own power to the nearest service station);
         (d)   Has a fair market value of $1,500 or less;
         (e)   The vehicle is without a valid current registration and license
tags;
         (f)   The vehicle is without a fully inflated tire(s); or
         (g)   The vehicle that does not comply with all safety laws and
equipment provisions for motor vehicles as found in Chapter 74.
      (2)   (a)   A junk motor vehicle that is left uncovered in the open on
private property for more than 72 hours with the permission of the person
having the right to possession of the property is declared a nuisance and shall
be abated in accordance with the provisions of this section. A junk motor
vehicle may only be excepted from this section if the person is operating a
junk yard or scrap metal processing facility licensed under the authority of
R.C. §§ 4737.05 through 4737.12, or otherwise regulated under authority of a
political subdivision; or if the property on which the motor vehicle is left is
not subject to licensure or regulation by any governmental authority, unless
the person having the right to the possession of the property can establish
that the motor vehicle is part of a bona fide commercial operation; or if the
motor vehicle is a licensed and operable collector’s vehicle.
         (b)   The municipality shall not prevent a person from storing or
keeping, or restrict him or her in the method of storing or keeping any
collector’s vehicle on private property with the permission of the person
having the right to the possession of the property, except that the
municipality shall require a person having such permission to conceal, by means
of being enclosed in a building or garage, fence, vegetation, terrain, or other
suitable obstruction, any licensed collector’s vehicle.
      (3)   MOTOR VEHICLE shall be as defined in §
70.01.
      (4)   LEFT IN THE OPEN shall mean not enclosed in a building or garage.
      (5)   COLLECTOR’S VEHICLE means any motor vehicle that is of special
interest, that has a fair market value of $100 or more, whether operable or
not, and that is owned, operated, collected, preserved, restored, maintained,
or used essentially as a collector’s item, leisure pursuit, or investment, but
not as the owner’s principal means of transportation, LICENSED COLLECTOR’S
VEHICLE means a collector’s vehicle that displays current, valid license tags
issued under R.C. § 4503.45, or a similar type of motor vehicle that displays
current, valid license tags issued under substantially equivalent provisions in
the laws of other states.
      (6)   Law enforcement, the Council, or the zoning authority may send
notice, by certified mail or express/overnight mail with return receipt
requested, or by personal deliver, to the person having the right to the
possession of the property on which a junk motor vehicle is left, that within
ten days of receipt of the notice, the junk motor vehicle either shall be
covered by being housed in a garage or other suitable structure, or shall be
removed from the property.
      (7)   No person shall willfully leave a junk motor vehicle uncovered in
the open for more than ten days after receipt of a notice as provided in this
section. The fact that a junk motor vehicle is so left is prima facie evidence
of willful failure to comply with the notice, and each subsequent period of 30
days that a junk motor vehicle continues to be so left constitutes a separate
offense.
   (B)   (1)   After a motor vehicle has been determined to be a junk motor
vehicle, as provided herein, and the same has not been removed after proper
notice, law enforcement shall cause the junk motor vehicle to be removed from
the property where the junk motor vehicle is located by a salvage service and
stored in a designated facility.
      (2)   Any junk motor vehicle which has been removed and stored pursuant
to this section shall be disposed of in accordance with the procedure set forth
in R.C. § 4513.61.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor of a first offense. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of
this section, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   All costs and expenses incurred by the city in removing any junk motor
vehicle, together with the administrative charge of $100 per junk motor
vehicle, shall be reported to the Director of Finance, who shall mail an
invoice thereof to the owner of the property. If after 30 days, the amount
remains unpaid, the Director of Finance shall refer the matter to the City Law
Director, including a statement of all costs and expenses incurred by the city
along with the administrative charge. Upon receipt of such statement, the City
Law Director shall make written return to the County Auditor of the action
taken pursuant in this section, with the statement and a proper description of
the premises, to be entered upon the tax duplicate for the county for the
purpose of making the same a lien upon such lands, to be collected as other
taxes and returned to the city with the General Fund in accordance with R.C. §
731.54.
(Prior Code, § 660.07) (Ord. 2017-17, passed 9-12-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Willfully leaving junk motor vehicle, see R.C. § 4513.65
§ 97.07 OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         AGRICULTURAL WASTE. Any waste material generated by crop,
horticultural, or livestock production practices, and includes such items as
woody debris and plant matter from stream flooding, bags, cartons, structural
materials, and landscape wastes that are generated in agricultural activities,
but does not include land clearing waste; buildings (including dismantled/
fallen barns); garbage; dead animals; animal waste; motor vehicles and parts
thereof; nor economic poisons and containers thereof, unless the manufacturer
has identified open burning as a safe disposal procedure.
         AIR CURTAIN BURNER. An engineered apparatus consisting of a motorized
high-velocity fan and an air distribution system designed to aid in the
efficient combustion of materials placed in a manufactured steel structure and
for which a permit-to-install has been obtained as required in O.A.C. Chapter
3745-31 and a permit-to-operate has been obtained as required in O.A.C. Chapter
3745-77.
         AIR CURTAIN DESTRUCTOR. An engineered apparatus consisting of a
motorized high-velocity fan and an air distribution system designed to aid in
the efficient combustion of materials placed in an adjacent pit. An air curtain
burner may be used in place of an air curtain destructor, but an air curtain
destructor may not be used in place of an air curtain burner.
         BUILDING MATERIALS. Those materials resulting from the alteration,
construction, destruction, rehabilitation, or repair of any human-made physical
structure, including, without limitation, houses, buildings, industrial or
commercial facilities, or roadways.
         ECONOMIC POISONS. Include but are not restricted to pesticides such as
insecticides, fungicides, rodenticides, miticides, nematocides and fumigants;
herbicides; seed disinfectants; and defoliants.
         EMERGENCY BURNING. The burning of clean wood waste or deceased animals
caused by a natural disaster or an uncontrolled event such as the following:
            1.   A tornado;
            2.   High winds;
            3.   An earthquake;
            4.   An explosion;
            5.   A flood; or
            6.   A hail storm, a rain storm, or an ice storm.
         GARBAGE. Any waste material resulting from the handling, processing,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food or food products.
         INHABITED BUILDING. Any inhabited private dwelling house and any
public structure which may be used as a place of resort, assembly, education,
entertainment, lodging, trade, manufacture, repair, storage, traffic, or
occupancy by the public. Examples would include, but are not limited to,
highway rest stops, restaurants, motels, hotels and gas stations.
         LAND CLEARING WASTE. Plant waste material which is removed from land,
including plant waste material removed from stream banks during projects
involving more than one property owner, for the purpose of rendering the land
useful for residential, commercial, or industrial development. LAND CLEARING
WASTE also includes the plant waste material generated during the clearing of
land for new agricultural development.
         LANDSCAPE WASTE. Any plant waste material, except garbage, including
trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass,
shrubbery, yard trimmings, and crop residues.
         OHIO EPA. The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency Director or
agencies delegated authority by the Director of the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency pursuant to R.C. § 3704.03 or the Chief of any Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency District Office.
         OPEN BURNING. The burning of any materials wherein air contaminants
resulting from combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without
passing through a stack or chimney. OPEN BURNING includes the burning of any
refuse or salvageable material in any device not subject to or designed
specifically to comply with the requirements of O.A.C. 3745-17-09 or O.A.C.
3745-17-10.
         RESIDENTIAL WASTE. Any waste material, including landscape waste,
generated on the property of a one-, two- or three-family residence as a result
of residential activities, but not including garbage, rubber, grease, asphalt,
liquid petroleum products, or plastics.
         RESTRICTED AREA. The area within the boundary of the municipality,
plus a zone extending 1,000 feet beyond the boundaries of a municipality having
a population of 1,000 to 10,000 persons and a zone extending one mile beyond
any municipality having a population of 10,000 persons or more according to the
latest federal census.
         UNRESTRICTED AREA. All areas outside the boundaries of a restricted
area as defined in this section.
      (2)   Referenced materials. This section includes references to certain
matter or materials. The text of the referenced materials is not included in
the legislation contained in this section. Information on the availability of
the referenced materials as well as the date of, and/or the particular edition
or version of the material is included in this section. For materials subject
to change, only the specific versions specified in this section are referenced.
Material is referenced as it exists on the effective date of this section.
Except for subsequent annual publication of existing (unmodified) Code of
Federal Regulation compilations, any amendment or revision to a referenced
document is not applicable unless and until this section has been amended to
specify the new dates.
         (a)   Availability. The referenced materials are available as follows:
            1.   Clean Air Act. Information and copies may be obtained by
writing to: Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders, PO Box 371954,
Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. The full text of the act as amended in 1990 is also
available in electronic format at www.epa.gov/oar/caa/. A copy of the act is
also available for inspection and use at most public libraries and the State
Library of Ohio.
            2.   Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.). Information and copies
may be obtained by writing to: Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders,
PO Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. The full text of the C.F.R. is also
available in electronic format at http://www.ecfr.gov. The C.F.R. compilations
are also available for inspection and use at most public libraries and the
State Library of Ohio.
            3.   National Fire Protection Association. Information on the
National Fire Protection Association codes may be obtained by contacting the
Association at 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02169-7471, 617-770-
3000. Codes may be ordered at www.nfpa.org/catalog/home/index.asp. Copies of
the code exist or are available at most public libraries and the State Library
of Ohio.
         (b)   Referenced materials.
            1.   40 C.F.R. § 60.2974: “Am I required to apply for and obtain a
title V operating permit for my air curtain incinerator that burns only wood
waste, clean lumber, and yard waste?” as published in the July 1, 2017 Code of
Federal Regulations.
            2.   40 C.F.R. § 60.3069: “Am I required to apply for and obtain a
title V operating permit for my air curtain incinerator that burns only wood
waste, clean lumber, and yard waste?” as published in the July 1, 2017 Code of
Federal Regulations.
            3.   NFPA publication 1403: “Standard on Live Fire Training
Evolutions, Chapter 4, Acquired Structures” published April 30, 2007.
            4.   Section 129 of the Clean Air Act, contained in 42 U.S.C. §
7429: “Solid waste combustion” published January 6, 2017 in Supplement IV of
the 2012 Edition of the United States Code.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-01)
   (B)   Relation to other laws.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any provision in O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19, no open
burning shall be conducted in an area where an air alert, warning or emergency
under O.A.C. Chapter 3745-25 is in effect.
      (2)   No provisions of O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19 permitting open burning,
and no permission to open burn granted by the Ohio EPA, shall exempt any person
from compliance with any section of the Ohio Revised Code, or any regulation of
any state department, or any local ordinance or regulation dealing with open
burning.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-02)
   (C)   Open burning in restricted areas.
      (1)   No person or property owner shall cause or allow open burning in a
restricted area except as provided in divisions (C)(2) to (C)(4) of this
section or in R.C. § 3704.11.
      (2)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes without
notification to or permission from the Ohio EPA:
         (a)   Heating tar, welding, acetylene torches, highway safety flares,
heating for warmth of outdoor workers and strikers, smudge pots and similar
occupational needs.
         (b)   Bonfires, campfires and outdoor fireplace equipment, whether for
cooking food for human consumption, pleasure, religious, ceremonial, warmth,
recreational or similar purposes, if the following conditions are met:
            1.   They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or
equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or
lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood;
         2.   They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and
            3.   They shall have a total fuel area of three feet or less in
diameter and two feet or less in height.
         (c)   Disposal of hazardous explosive materials, military munitions or
explosive devices that require immediate action to prevent endangerment of
human health, public safety, property or the environment and that are excluded
from the requirement to obtain a hazardous waste permit pursuant to O.A.C.
3745-50-45(D)(1)(d).
         (d)   Recognized training in the use of fire extinguishers for
commercial or industrial fire prevention.
         (e)   Fires set at the direction of federal, state, and local law
enforcement officials for the purpose of destruction of cannabis sativa
(marijuana) plant vegetation, processed marijuana material and/or other drugs
seized by federal, state, or local law enforcement officials.
         (f)   Fires allowed by divisions (C)(2)(a), (C)(2)(b) and (C)(2)(d) of
this section shall not be used for waste disposal purposes and shall be of
minimum size sufficient for their intended purpose; the fuel shall be chosen to
minimize the generation and emission of air contaminants.
      (3)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes with prior
notification to the Ohio EPA in accordance with division (D)(2) of this
section:
         (a)   Prevention or control of disease or pests, with written or oral
verification to the Ohio EPA from the Ohio Department of Health or local health
department, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, cooperative
extension service, Ohio Department of Agriculture or U.S. Department of
Agriculture, that open burning is the only appropriate disposal method.
         (b)   Bonfires or campfires used for ceremonial purposes that do not
meet the requirements of division (C)(2)(b) of this section, provided the
following conditions are met:
            1.   They have a total fuel area no greater than five feet in
diameter by five feet in height and burn no longer than three hours;
            2.   They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and
            3.   They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or
equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or
lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood.
         (c)   Disposal of agricultural waste generated on the premises if the
following conditions are observed:
            1.   The fire is set only when atmospheric conditions will readily
dissipate contaminants;
            2.   The fire does not create a visibility hazard on the roadways,
railroad tracks or air fields;
            3.   The fire is located at a point on the premises no less than
1,000 feet from any inhabited building not located on the premises;
            4.   The wastes are stacked and dried to provide the best
practicable condition for efficient burning; and
            5.   No materials are burned which contain rubber, grease, asphalt,
liquid petroleum products, plastics or building materials.
         (d)   Recognized horticultural, silvicultural (forestry), range
management, prairie and grassland management, invasive species management, or
wildlife management practices, if all of the following conditions are met:
            1.   The fire shall be performed within 180 days of submitting the
notification.
            2.   The fire shall be performed when it is anticipated weather
conditions will minimize the dispersion of smoke near populated areas and the
smoke does not create a visibility hazard on roadways, railroad tracks, or air
fields. Smoke dispersion conditions shall be evaluated before, during, and
after the fire and actions taken to minimize smoke impacts.
            3.   The person making the notification shall notify the local fire
department having jurisdiction over the burn area at least 24 hours before the
fire is anticipated to occur.
            4.   The person making the notification shall provide reasonable
notification to populations potentially impacted by the smoke before the fire
occurs. Populations potentially impacted shall include, at a minimum, those
within one-quarter mile of the burn site. Reasonable notification shall include
one of the following:
               a.   Posting notice of intent to burn, including contact
information for the person making the notification and the anticipated date
that the fire will occur, within open view from a public roadway adjacent to
and outside of the property on which the fire will occur.
               b.   Posting a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in
the local community in which the fire will occur. The notice shall include, at
a minimum, the address of the property at which the fire will occur, contact
information for the person making the notification and the anticipated date
that the fire will occur.
               c.   Delivering written notice directly to residences and
businesses within a minimum of one-quarter mile of the burn site. Notices shall
include, at a minimum, the address of the property at which the fire will
occur, contact information for the person making the notification and the
anticipated date that the fire will occur.
            5.   The person making the notification shall document information
on the weather, smoke conditions, any air quality concerns before, during, and
after the fire, the actual number of acres burned, the time the fire was
initially kindled, the time when active kindling ceased and the time at which
mop up activities ceased. The person making the notification shall maintain
this information for a minimum of one year from the date of the fire and shall
provide this information to the appropriate Ohio EPA district office or local
air agency within ten days upon request.
            6.   Reasonable access to the burn site shall be provided to Ohio
EPA representatives at any time during the fire.
      (4)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes upon
receipt of written permission from the Ohio EPA, in accordance with division
(D)(1) of this section, provided that any conditions specified in the
permission are followed:
         (a)   Disposal of ignitable or explosive materials where the Ohio EPA
determines that there is no practical alternate method of disposal, excluding
those materials identified in division (C)(2)(c) of this section;
         (b)   Instruction in methods of fire fighting or for research in the
control of fires as recognized by the State Fire Marshal Division of the Ohio
Department of Commerce and the guidelines set forth in the National Fire
Protection Association’s (NFPA) publication 1403, Standard on Live Fire
Training Evolutions, Chapter 4, Acquired Structures, provided that the
application required in division (D)(1)(a) of this section is submitted by the
commercial or public entity responsible for the instruction;
         (c)   In emergency or other extraordinary circumstances for any
purpose determined to be necessary by the Director and performed as identified
in the appendix to O.A.C. § 3745-19-03. If deemed necessary, the open burning
may be authorized with prior oral approval by the Director followed by the
issuance of a written permission to open burn within seven working days of the
oral approval;
         (d)   Fires or pyrotechnic effects, for purposes other than waste
disposal, set as part of commercial film-making or video production activities
for motion pictures and television.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-03)
   (D)   Permission to individuals and notification to the Ohio EPA.
      (1)   Permission.
         (a)   An application for permission to open burn shall be submitted in
writing to Ohio EPA. The applicant shall allow Ohio EPA at least ten working
days to review the permit. Applicant may proceed with burn upon receipt of
written permission from Ohio EPA. Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays shall
not be considered working days. The application shall be in such form and
contain such information as required by the Ohio EPA.
         (b)   Except as provided in divisions (D)(1)(f) and (D)(1)(g) of this
section, the applications shall contain, as a minimum, the following
information:
            1.   The purpose of the proposed burning;
            2.   The quantity or acreage and the nature of the materials to be
burned;
            3.   The date or dates when the burning will take place;
            4.   The location of the burning site, including a map showing
distances to residences, populated areas, roadways, air fields and other
pertinent landmarks; and
            5.   The methods or actions which will be taken to reduce the
emissions of air contaminants.
         (c)   Permission to open burn shall not be granted unless the
applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Ohio EPA that open burning is
necessary to the public interest; will be conducted in a time, place and manner
as to minimize the emission of air contaminants, when atmospheric conditions
are appropriate; and will have no serious detrimental effect upon adjacent
properties or the occupants thereof. The Ohio EPA may impose such conditions as
may be necessary to accomplish the purpose of O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19.
         (d)   Except as provided in division (D)(1)(f) of this section,
permission to open burn must be obtained for each specific project. In
emergencies where public health or environmental quality will be seriously
threatened by delay while written permission is sought, the fire may be set
with oral permission of the Ohio EPA.
         (e)   Violations of any of the conditions set forth by the Ohio EPA in
granting permission to open burn shall be grounds for revocation of that
permission and refusal to grant future permission, as well as for the
imposition of other sanctions provided by law.
         (f)   The Ohio Department of Commerce, Division of State Fire Marshal,
may request permission to open burn on an annual basis for the purpose of
training firefighters on pre-flashover conditions using the Ohio Fire Academy’s
mobile training laboratory at either the academy or at other training sites in
Ohio. The annual application required pursuant to division (D)(1)(a) of this
section shall contain information as required in division (D)(1)(b) of this
section, except the information required in divisions (D)(1)(b)3. and (D)(1)
(b)4. of this section need not be provided unless it is available at the time
of submittal of the application. The Academy shall contact the appropriate Ohio
EPA District Office or local air agency at least five working days before each
training session of the date or dates when the training session will take place
and its location. Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays shall not be considered a
working day.
         (g)   For open burning defined under division (C)(4)(b) of this
section and O.A.C. 3745-19-04(C)(2), permission to open burn shall not be
granted unless the applicant provides proof of written notice of intent to
demolish received by the appropriate Ohio EPA field office in accordance with
O.A.C. 3745-20-03.
      (2)   Notification.
         (a)   Notification shall be submitted in writing at least ten working
days before the fire is to be set. Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays shall
not be considered a working day. It shall be in such form and contain such
information as shall be required by the Ohio EPA.
         (b)   Such notification shall inform the Ohio EPA regarding the
following:
            1.   The purpose of the proposed burning;
            2.   The nature and quantities of materials to be burned;
            3.   The date or dates when the burning will take place; and
            4.   The location of the burning site.
         (c)   The Ohio EPA, after receiving notification, may determine that
the open burning is not allowed under O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19 and the Ohio EPA
shall notify the applicant to this effect.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-05)
   (E)   Penalty. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition, the
offender shall be required to pay the cost of proper disposal of the materials
burned. The cost of proper disposal of the materials burned shall be the amount
it would have cost to dispose of the materials in a manner that is consistent
with the air, water and solid waste laws, ordinances and regulations of the
municipality and the state.
(Prior Code, § 660.08)
§ 97.08 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
   (A)   No person shall abandon or knowingly permit to remain on public or
private property, any excavation, well, cesspool or structure which is in the
process of construction, reconstruction, repair or alteration unless the same
is adequately protected by suitable barricades and guarded by warning devices
or lights at night so that the condition will not reasonably prove dangerous to
life or limb.
   (B)   No person shall destroy, remove, damage or extinguish any barricade or
warning light that is placed for the protection of the public so as to prevent
injury to life or limb.
   (C)   Any owner or agent in control of a premises upon which a basement,
cellar, well or cistern has been abandoned due to demolition, failure to build
or any other reason shall cause the same to be filled to the ground surface
with rock, gravel, earth or other suitable material.
   (D)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 660.09)
§ 97.09 SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS; DAMAGE OR INJURY.
   (A)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a sidewalk or
playground any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or other articles which may
damage property of another or injure any person or animal traveling along or
upon the sidewalk or playground.
   (B)   No person shall walk on, or allow any animal upon, or injure or deface
in any way, any soft or newly laid sidewalk pavement.
   (C)   No person shall place, deposit or maintain any merchandise, goods,
material or equipment upon any sidewalk so as to obstruct pedestrian traffic
thereon except for such reasonable time as may be actually necessary for the
delivery or pickup of the articles. In no case shall the obstruction remain on
the sidewalk for more than one hour.
   (D)   No person shall unload upon, or transport any heavy merchandise,
goods, material or equipment over or across any sidewalk or curb without first
placing some sufficient protection over the pavement to protect against damage
or injury.
   (E)   No person shall allow any cellar or trap door, coal chute or elevator
or lift opening in any sidewalk to remain open without providing suitable
safeguards to protect and warn pedestrian traffic of the dangerous conditions.
   (F)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 660.10)
§ 97.10 NOTICE TO FILL LOTS, REMOVE PUTRID SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   No person shall fail to comply with the following requirements within
the lawful time after service or publication of the notice or resolution is
made as required by law: to fill or drain any lot or land or remove all putrid
substances therefrom, or remove all obstructions from culverts, covered drains
or natural watercourses as provided in R.C. § 715.47.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 660.11)
§ 97.11 SMOKING IN PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY.
   (A)   As used in this section, PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY means:
      (1)   Enclosed theaters, except the lobby; opera houses; auditoriums;
classrooms; elevators; rooms in which persons are confined as a matter of
health care, including but not limited to a hospital room and a room in a
residential care facility serving as the residence of a person living in the
residential care facility.
      (2)   All buildings and other enclosed structures owned by the state, its
agencies, or political subdivisions, including but not limited to hospitals and
state institutions for persons with mental illnesses and persons with
intellectual disabilities; university and college buildings, except rooms
within those buildings used primarily as the residences of students or other
persons affiliated with the university or college; office buildings; libraries;
museums; and vehicles used in public transportation. That portion of a building
or other enclosed structure that is owned by the state, a state agency or a
political subdivision, and that is used primarily as a food service
establishment, is not a place of public assembly.
      (3)   Each portion of a building or enclosed structure that is not
included in division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is a place of public
assembly if it has a seating capacity of 50 or more persons and is available to
the public. Restaurants, food service establishments, dining rooms, cafes,
cafeterias or other rooms used primarily for the service of food, as well as
bowling alleys and places licensed by the Ohio Division of Liquor Control to
sell intoxicating beverages for consumption on the premises, are not places of
public assembly.
   (B)   For the purpose of separating persons who smoke from persons who do
not smoke for the comfort and health of persons not smoking, in every place of
public assembly there shall be an area where smoking is not permitted, which
shall be designated a no smoking area, provided that not more than one-half of
the rooms in any health care facility in which persons are confined as a matter
of health care may be designated as smoking areas in their entirety. The
designation shall be made before the place of public assembly is made available
to the public. In places included in division (A)(1) of this section, the local
fire authority having jurisdiction shall designate the no smoking area. In
places included in division (A)(2) of this section that are owned by the state
or its agencies, the Ohio Director of Administrative Services shall designate
the area, and if the place is owned by a political subdivision, its legislative
authority shall designate an officer who shall designate the area. In places
included in division (A)(3) of this section, the person having control of the
operations of the place of public assembly shall designate the no smoking area.
In places included in division (A)(2) of this section which are also included
in division (A)(1) of this section, the officer who has authority to designate
the area in places in division (A)(2) of this section shall designate the no
smoking area. A no smoking area may include the entire place of public
assembly. Designations shall be made by the placement of signs that are clearly
visible and that state “no smoking.” No person shall remove signs from areas
designated as no smoking areas.
   (C)   This section does not affect or modify the prohibition contained in
R.C. § 3313.751(B).
   (D)   No person shall smoke in any area designated as a no smoking area in
accordance with division (B) of this section.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3791.031) (Prior Code, § 660.13)
§ 97.12 (RESERVED)
§ 97.13 SMOKING AND SMOKELESS VAPING PRODUCTS PROHIBITED IN ALL CITY
PROPERTIES, BUILDINGS, AND VEHICLES.
   (A)   All smoking and vaping, as defined below, is prohibited on or within
all city properties, including the use of tobacco, marijuana, and any other
smoke producing products or substances.
   (B)   CITY PROPERTY is defined as any enclosed and/or unenclosed land owned
or managed by the city (excepting the right-of-way), including but not limited
to city buildings, city parks, city trails, public parking lots, landscaped
areas, and any vehicles owned, leased, or controlled by the city.
   (C)   TOBACCO means any lit or unlit cigarette, electronic cigarette, vape
pen, or any other smoking product in any form.
   (D)   MARIJUANA means marijuana as defined in R.C. § 3719.01, and any
amendment thereto.
   (E)   SMOKING AND VAPING means inhaling, exhaling, burning, the act of
lighting, or carrying any lighted or smoldering or heated tobacco product or
plant product intended for inhalation in any manner or form, including the use
of an electronic smoking device and a vapor product.
      (1)   No person found to be smoking or using smokeless vaping products on
or within city property shall fail to immediately cease said activity when
requested to do so by city staff, a law enforcement officer or a person charged
with the management, operation or care of city property.
      (2)   Any person found to be smoking or using smokeless vaping products
on or within city property who does not immediately cease said activity when
requested to do so, shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   Persons who repeatedly violate this section, may be permanently
banned from city property.
      (4)   Lack of intent to violate this section shall not be a defense to a
violation.
      (5)   Notwithstanding this city-wide smoking ban on or within city
property, smoking and vaping of tobacco products only shall be permitted in
designated outdoor areas of public golf courses. The golf course must clearly
mark designated non-smoking areas with clear signage.
   (F)   At least one sign informing the public of the ban shall be placed at
each entrance to city property and notification of the prohibition shall be
included in appropriate forms, documents and other materials provided to
residents and others when reserving city property, facilities and grounds.
(Prior Code, § 660.1355) (Ord. 2016-12, passed 10-11-2016; Ord. 2024-13, passed
12-10-2024)
§ 97.14 OFFENSIVE WEEDS AND GRASS.
   (A)   Intent. The intent of this section is to uniformly address offensive
weeds and grass on vacant lots, lots with vacant buildings and lots being
neglected, and is in the interest of the public’s health and safety.
Enforcement shall be deemed necessary as a means of reducing pollen, litter and
the risk of attracting nuisance animals to populated areas. It is not the
intent of this section to establish standards for lawn care.
   (B)   Offensive weeds and grass defined.
      (1)   As used in this section, OFFENSIVE WEEDS AND GRASS means:
         (a)   Grass that have attained an overall height of over eight inches;
         (b)   Weeds that have been designated as noxious under O.A.C. 901:5-
37; and
         (c)   Located on any lot or parcel of land situated in the city after
April 15 of any year.
      (2)   As defined herein, OFFENSIVE WEEDS AND GRASS are hereby determined
to create a public nuisance.
      (3)   The following shall be exempted from the definition of OFFENSIVE
WEEDS AND GRASS:
         (a)   Vegetation in wetlands and the area within any designated
riparian corridor; and
         (b)   Maintained flower and vegetable gardens, including wildflower
gardens, rain gardens, bog gardens and any other approved plantings.
   (C)   Removal of offensive weeds and grass by owner.
      (1)   No owner or person in possession or control of any lot or parcel of
land situated within the city, whether the same is improved or unimproved,
vacant or occupied, shall fail to keep the entirety of such lot or parcel, or
any public right-of-way or tree lawn abutting such lot or parcel, free from all
offensive weeds and grass as defined above.
      (2)   The Code Inspector shall exempt lots or parcels of land of one acre
or more in size, either in whole or in part, from the requirements of division
(C)(1) of this section, so long as all of the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The offensive weeds and grass are deemed not to negatively
impact neighboring properties and the neighborhood;
         (b)   All the area within 30 feet of any public or private roadway,
all side adjacent properties, and in areas abutting active and maintained lots
and land is maintained at a height of eight inches or less; and
         (c)   All the area within 30 feet of any residential or commercial
building is maintained at a height of eight inches or less.
      (3)   The Code Inspector shall cause an annual notice to be published
prior to April 15 in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and on the
city’s website/social media pages notifying residents of the requirements of
this chapter.
   (D)   Procedure for removal by city.
      (1)   Upon receipt of information that OFFENSIVE WEEDS OR GRASS, as
defined in division (B) of this section, are present on a lot or land within
the city, the Code Inspector is authorized to determine if in fact such
offensive weeds or grass are present. After a determination has been made that
such offensive weeds or grass are present, it shall be the duty of the Code
Inspector to cause written notice to be served upon the owner or person in
possession or control of such lot or land that the offensive weeds or grass
must be cut and destroyed and that such destruction must be completed within
five days after the service of such notice. The notice shall also indicate that
the failure to comply with the notice shall result in the city’s destruction of
the offensive weeds or grass and shall require the owner or person in
possession or control to reimburse the city for all expenses incurred in
connection with the destruction of such weeds or grass.
      (2)   Notice to the owner or person in possession or control of such lot
or land shall be served by sending it to his or her address by certified mail
or by other mail tracking delivery service and shall be posted on the lot or
land.
      (3)   If the address of the owner or person in possession or control of
such lot or land is unknown, or if service of the notice pursuant to division
(D)(1) of this section is incomplete, it shall be sufficient for the Code
Inspector to publish such notice once in a newspaper of general circulation in
the city and on the city’s website.
      (4)   Only one notice per calendar year under division (C) of this
section is required for a lot or parcel. If, after a notice has been served in
accordance with this division (D)(4), the Code Inspector or his or her
designated agent determines that a subsequent violation has occurred, the city
may proceed with the remedy set forth in division (E) of this section without
further notice.
   (E)   Procedure upon failure to comply with notice.
      (1)   If the owner or person in possession or control of such lot or
land, as provided in division (C)(1) of this section, fails to comply with the
notice within five days, the Code Inspector shall cause the offensive weeds or
grass to be cut and destroyed and may employ the necessary labor to perform the
destruction of such weeds or grass and bring the property into compliance with
this section.
      (2)   Upon performance of the labor mentioned in division (E)(1) of this
section, the Zoning Division shall forward the expenses to the Finance
Department and the Finance Department shall bill the owner or person in
possession or control of the lot or land for the cost of cutting and destroying
the weeds, including therein the costs of inspection, record research,
notification and billing. A schedule of such costs shall be on file in the
Zoning Director’s office.
   (F)   Costs as lien.
      (1)   If the bill is not paid within 30 days or if the address of the
owner or person in possession or control is not known, the Finance Department
shall refer the matter to the Law Director, including a statement of all
charges for city services, the amount paid for the performance of the labor and
the fees of the officers who made the service of the notice and return.
      (2)   Upon receipt of such statement of expenses incurred, the Law
Director shall make written return to the County Auditor of the action taken
pursuant to this section, with a statement of the charges for the city’s
services, the amount paid for the performance of the labor, the fees of the
officers who made the service of the notice and return, and a proper
description of the premises, to be entered upon the tax duplicate of the county
for the purpose of making the same a lien upon such lands, to be collected as
other taxes and returned to the city with the General Fund in accordance with
R.C. § 731.54.
   (G)   Penalty. In addition to the remedies previously set forth in this
section, whoever fails to comply with the notice from the Code Inspector, as
provided in division (D) of this section, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and may be fined not more than $500 and imprisoned not more than
six months.
(Prior Code, § 660.14) (Ord. 95-8, passed 5-9-1995; Ord. 01-17, passed 10-23-
2001; Ord. 2017-18, passed 9-26-2017)
§ 97.15 NOTICE OF CONTAMINATION FROM THE ILLEGAL MANUFACTURE OF
METHAMPHETAMINE.
   (A)   In all transfers of residential real property identified as illegal
methamphetamine manufacturing laboratory sites by federal, state, or county,
the transferor must disclose to the transferee the prior or current existence
of an illegal methamphetamine manufacturing laboratory, a chemical dump site,
or any hazardous wastes on the real property, of which the transferor has
actual knowledge.
   (B)   The following terms shall have the meanings as provided below.
      BOX LAB. Any illegal methamphetamine manufacturing laboratory that is
portable, including, but not limited to, motor vehicles used as an illegal
methamphetamine manufacturing laboratory.
      CHEMICAL DUMP SITE. Any place or area where chemicals or other waste
materials used in an illegal methamphetamine manufacturing laboratory have been
located.
      HAZARDOUS WASTES. Waste generated from an illegal methamphetamine
manufacturing laboratory.
      HOTEL.
         (a)   Any structure consisting of one or more buildings, with more
than five sleeping rooms kept, used, maintained, advertised, or held out to the
public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for pay to
transient guests for a period of 30 days or less; or
         (b)   Those facilities specifically constructed, kept, used,
maintained, advertised, and held out to the public to offer a temporary
residence to persons either relocating their residence in an area or on
temporary work assignment in an area.
      ILLEGAL METHAMPHETAMINE MANUFACTURING LABORATORY. Has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 3745.13.
      ILLEGAL METHAMPHETAMINE MANUFACTURING LABORATORY SITE. Any place or area
where law enforcement has determined that the conditions associated with the
operation of an illegal methamphetamine manufacturing laboratory exist.
Conditions associated with the operation of an illegal methamphetamine
manufacturing laboratory include, but are not limited to, the existence of an
illegal methamphetamine manufacturing laboratory, a box lab, chemical dump
site, or the storage of chemicals used in the production of methamphetamine. An
ILLEGAL METHAMPHETAMINE MANUFACTURING LABORATORY SITE may include dwellings,
accessory buildings, accessory structures, motor vehicles or any land.
      METHAMPHETAMINE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3745.13.
      REAL PROPERTY. Any buildings or structures located on the real property
or rental of any hotel room.
      TRANSFERS OF RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY. The transfer or conveyance of any
interest in real property by sale, lease, gift or land contract.
   (C)   All disclosures required in this section shall be made on a form
provided by the Law Department.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to abrogate any
disclosure required by or remedies provided in R.C. § 5302.30. As used in this
section, RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY has the same meaning as used in R.C. §
5302.30(A).
   (E)   Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable by a maximum fine of $1,000 and up
to 180 days in jail.
(Prior Code, § 660.15) (Ord. 2008-17, passed 6-24-2008)
LITTERING
§ 97.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIRCRAFT. Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or
designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word AIRCRAFT includes
helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
   AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE. A litter storage and collection container.
   COMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, including any sample or
device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or other printed
or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature:
      (1)   Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or
thing;
      (2)   Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;
      (3)   Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit, but the terms of this clause
shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up
for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of the same is held,
given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which
is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals and public
peace, safety, and good order; provided that nothing contained in this clause
shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any
meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind without a
license, where such license is or may be required by any law of the state or
ordinance of the municipality; or
      (4)   Which, while containing reading matter other than the advertising
matter, is predominately and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed
or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of
any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
   GARBAGE. The matter, substance or waste resulting from the growing,
handling, storage, preparation, cooking and/or consumption of food, including
animals (including fat and bones), fowl, fish, fruits and vegetables, including
animal and bird feeds.
   LITTER. Garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined herein, and all other waste
material, including appliances, roofing material, siding material, broken
concrete, broken asphalt, bricks, drywall, tree and shrub stumps, limbs,
clippings, branches, and other waste building material, which, if thrown,
stored or deposited, as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public
health, safety and welfare. LITTER shall not include material which is
deposited pursuant to a valid permit issued by the Zoning Department.
   NEWSPAPER. Any newspaper of general circulation, as defined by general law,
any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office of the United States, in
accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and
recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law, and, in
addition thereto, means and includes any periodicals or current magazines
regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the
public.
   NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, including any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper,
booklet or other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any
matter of literature not included in the definitions of commercial handbill and
newspaper.
   PARK. A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or other
public area in the municipality owned or used by the municipality and devoted
to active or passive recreation.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or organization of any kind.
   PRIVATE PREMISES or PREMISES. Any dwelling, house, building or other
structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential
purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant, and includes any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, sidewalks and abutting
property between the property line and the curb line, porch, steps, vestibule,
or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other
structure.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, street
cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial
wastes.
   RUBBISH. Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar
materials.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, on or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn on a highway, including devices used exclusively on
stationary rails or tracks.
(Prior Code, § 632.01) (Ord. 91-17, passed 6-11-1991)
§ 97.31 THROWING OR DEPOSITING LITTER DEPOSIT IN PUBLIC PLACES; USE OF
RECEPTACLES AND DUMPS.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit litter in or on any street, sidewalk
or other public place within the municipality, except in public receptacles, in
authorized private receptacles for collection or in official municipal dumps.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 632.02) (Ord. 91-17, passed 6-11-1991)
§ 97.32 USING RECEPTACLES TO PREVENT SCATTERING; DAMAGING RECEPTACLES.
   (A)   Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or
deposited by the elements on any street, sidewalk, or other public place or
private property.
   (B)   No person shall, without authority, upset, damage, tamper with, or
destroy a public or private receptacle designed or used for the deposit of
litter, or cause or permit its contents to be deposited or strewn in or on any
public place or private premises.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 632.03) (Ord. 91-17, passed 6-11-1991)
§ 97.33 RESPONSIBILITY OF LANDOWNERS.
   (A)   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any ditch, gutter, street or
other public place within the municipality the accumulation of litter from any
building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
   (B)   The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all
times maintain the premises free of litter. However, this section shall not
prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 632.04) (Ord. 91-17, passed 6-11-1991)
§ 97.34 RESPONSIBILITY OF MERCHANTS.
   (A)   No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any ditch, gutter, street or other public place within the
municipality the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any
public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of
business within the municipality shall keep their business premises free of
litter.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 632.05) (Ord. 91-17, passed 6-11-1991)
§ 97.35 LITTER THROWN FROM VEHICLES.
   (A)   No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless of
intent, throw, drop, discard or deposit litter from any motor vehicle in
operation upon any street, road, highway or other public way or place within
the municipality, or on private property, except into a litter receptacle in a
manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (B)   No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road or
highway shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded or deposited from
the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents
its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (C)   As used in this section, LITTER means garbage, trash, waste, rubbish,
ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts, furniture,
glass or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 632.06) (Ord. 91-17, passed 6-11-1991)
§ 97.36 LITTER IN PARKS.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the
municipality, except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter
will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements on any part
of the park or on any street or other public way or place. Where public
receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the
park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of
elsewhere as provided herein.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 632.07) (Ord. 91-17, passed 6-11-1991)
§ 97.37 LITTER IN BODIES OF WATER.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake,
stream, bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere in the
municipality.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 632.08) (Ord. 91-17, passed 6-11-1991)
§ 97.38 DROPPING LITTER FROM AIRCRAFT.
   (A)   No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the
municipality any litter, handbill or other object.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 632.09) (Ord. 91-17, passed 6-11-1991)
§ 97.39 BILLPOSTING.
   (A)   No person shall place, post or affix any notice, poster or other paper
or device on any lamppost, utility pole, structure or tree in the public right-
of-way, except as may be authorized by law.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
   (C)   Arrest or conviction for a violation of this section does not
constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so arrested
or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal record,
including any inquiries contained in any application for employment, a license
or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s appearance
as a witness.
(Prior Code, § 632.10) (Ord. 91-17, passed 6-11-1991)
§ 97.40 LITTER ON OCCUPIED PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private
property within the municipality, whether owned by such person or not, except
that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection in such manner that litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk,
ditch or other public place or upon any private property.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 632.11) (Ord. 91-17, passed 6-11-1991)
§ 97.41 LITTER ON VACANT PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the municipality, whether owned by such person or not.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 632.12) (Ord. 91-17, passed 6-11-1991)
§ 97.42 CONSTRUCTION SITES.
   (A)   Construction sites shall be maintained in such a manner as to prevent
litter from accumulating thereon unrestrained or from being carried by the
elements onto other property. A watertight, covered waste container,
constructed of durable material and having a capacity of at least 50 gallons,
shall be maintained on the site at all times.
   (B)   Dirt, sand, gravel and similar construction materials shall be stored
on construction sites in such manner as not to be deposited or tracked on
public streets or rights-of-way.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 632.13) (Ord. 91-17, passed 6-11-1991)
§ 97.43 LOADING AND UNLOADING OPERATIONS.
   (A)   Any owner or occupant of any establishment or institution at which
litter is attendant to the packing and unpacking and loading and unloading of
materials at exterior locations shall provide at such establishment or
institution watertight, covered containers, constructed of durable material and
having a capacity of at least 50 gallons for the disposal and storage of such
litter, and shall, at all times, maintain the dock area free of litter in such
manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the
elements on any public place or private property.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 632.14) (Ord. 91-17, passed 6-11-1991)
§ 97.44 CLEARING OF LITTER BY MUNICIPALITY.
   (A)   Notice to remove. The Zoning Inspector is hereby authorized to notify
the owner of any open or vacant private property, or any other private property
within the municipality, or the agent of such owner, to properly dispose of
litter located on such owner’s property which is dangerous to public health,
safety or welfare. Such notice shall be personally delivered to such owner or
his or her agent, or shall be sent by certified mail to the residence or place
of business of such owner or his or her agent. If the address of the owner or
person having charge of the land is unknown, it is sufficient to publish the
notice once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county.
   (B)   Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner or agent notified to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the public
health, safety or welfare within five days after service, as provided in
division (A) of this section, the Zoning Inspector or the Road Superintendent
shall cause such litter to be removed, and may employ the necessary labor to
perform such work or cause it to be done by the municipality.
   (C)   Expenses as a lien. All expenses so incurred by the Zoning Inspector
or the Road Superintendent, and the cost of such notice, shall be reported to
the Finance Director, who shall mail a statement thereof to the owner of the
land, if his or her address is known. If, after 30 days, such amount remains
unpaid, the Finance Director shall certify the total amount of the expense, the
name of the owner of the land, and a sufficient description of the premises, to
the County Auditor, to be entered upon the tax duplicate, to be a lien on the
land from the date of entry, and to be collected as other taxes and assessments
and returned to the municipality, pursuant to R.C. § 731.54. The remedy herein
provided shall be in addition to the penalties provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 632.15) (Ord. 91-17, passed 6-11-1991)
§ 97.45 DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS IN OR ON PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or on any sidewalk, street, ditch or other public place within the
municipality. No person shall hand out, distribute or sell any commercial
handbill in any public place. However, it shall not be unlawful on any
sidewalk, street or other public place within the municipality for any person
to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any
noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 632.16) (Ord. 91-17, passed 6-11-1991)
§ 97.46 PLACING HANDBILLS ON VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or on any vehicle. However, it shall not be unlawful in any public
place for a person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver
thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing
to accept it.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 632.17) (Ord. 91-17, passed 6-11-1991)
§ 97.47 DEPOSITING HANDBILLS ON UNINHABITED OR VACANT PREMISES.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or on any private premises which are temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 632.18) (Ord. 91-17, passed 6-11-1991)
§ 97.48 DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS PROHIBITED WHERE POSTED.
   (A)   No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill on any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon
not to do so, or if there is placed on such premises, in a conspicuous position
near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: “No Trespassing,” “No
Peddlers or Agents,” “No advertisements” or any similar notice indicating in
any manner that the occupants of such premises do not desire to be molested or
to have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any handbills left on the
premises.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 632.19) (Ord. 91-17, passed 6-11-1991)
§ 97.49 DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS AT INHABITED PRIVATE PREMISES.
   (A)   No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or on private premises which are inhabited, except by
handing or transmitting such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other
person then present in or on such private premises. However, in the case of
inhabited private premises which are not posted as provided in §
97.48, a person, unless requested by anyone on the premises not to do so, may
place or deposit such a handbill in or on the inhabited private premises if the
handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent it from being blown
or drifted about the premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places,
except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal
law or regulations.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) of this section shall not apply to the
distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, except that
newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent
their being carried or deposited by the elements onto any street, sidewalk or
other public place or onto private property.
   (C)   Arrest or conviction for a violation of this section does not
constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so arrested
or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal record,
including any inquiries contained in any application for employment, a license
or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s appearance
as a witness.
(Prior Code, § 632.20) (Ord. 91-17, passed 6-11-1991)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   CABLE TELEVISION AND OTHER VIDEO SERVICE
      
111.   GAMES OF SKILL AND ADULT AMUSEMENT ARCADES
      
112.   TAXICABS AND TRANSPORTATION SERVICES
      
113.   TRANSIENT VENDORS
      
114.   MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATORS, PROCESSORS AND RETAIL DISPENSARIES
      
115.   USE OF PUBLIC WAYS BY SERVICE PROVIDERS
CHAPTER 110: CABLE TELEVISION AND OTHER VIDEO SERVICE
Section
   
110.01   Video service provider fee
Statutory reference:
   Interrupting or impairing television service, see R.C. § 2909.04
   Regulation of political broadcasts, see R.C. § 3599.09
§ 110.01 VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE.
   In accordance with the requirements of R.C. § 1332.32, all video service
providers providing video service in the city pursuant to a video service
authorization obtained from the Director of the Ohio Department of Commerce
shall pay video service provider fees (VSP fees) in the amount of 4% of gross
revenues received from providing video service in the city, which gross revenue
base shall include advertising revenues. The VSP fee shall be paid quarterly,
not sooner than 45 days after the end of each calendar quarter. During any
quarter there is an effective franchise agreement, the VSP fee shall be the
same percentage as the franchise agreement.
(Prior Code, § 810.01) (Res. 2007-R71, passed 11-13-2007)
CHAPTER 111: GAMES OF SKILL AND ADULT AMUSEMENT ARCADES
Section
   
111.01   Purpose and findings
   
111.02   Definitions
   
111.03   Operation; license required
   
111.04   Application information
   
111.05   Corporations, trusts, and partnerships
   
111.06   Affidavit required
   
111.07   License issuance; effective period; fee
   
111.08   License administration
   
111.09   Submission of source code for approval
   
111.10   License validity and display
   
111.11   Operation of arcade
   
111.12   License revocation
   
111.13   Revocation process
   
111.14   Transfer of license
   
111.15   Appeal
   
111.16   Inspection
   
111.17   Nuisance
   
111.18   Effect of partial invalidity
   
111.19   Fees collected
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to minimize and control the negative effects of amusement
arcades within the city in order to promote the health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of the city. It is not the purpose or intent of this chapter to
restrict or deny access to recreational and skilled-based amusement machines.
   (B)   Findings. The state currently allows certain games of skill while
games of chance are deemed illegal. Certain arcades identified as operating
games of skill, have generated various complaints by citizens involving thefts,
questionable pay practices, considerable sums of cash being transacted, food
management concerns, fire code and access, and other issues of compliance with
local and state laws.
   (C)   It is the specific finding that games of skill operated electronically
may easily be altered to illegal games of chance. Further, the city has a duty
to its citizens to require businesses open to the public to maintain safe
ingress and egress, to maintain adequate security where a considerable volume
of cash is transacted and to otherwise operate within the bounds of the law.
(Prior Code, § 830.01) (Ord. 2007-18, passed 7-10-2007)
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMUSEMENT ARCADE. Any place of business where one or more amusement devices
are located for the use or entertainment of persons patronizing the place of
business.
   AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any machine, device or instrument which either may be
activated for play by a third party, person or device, or upon the insertion of
paper money, a coin, token, slug, or card, operates or may be operated as a
game, contest, or test of skill, or other amusement of any kind. AMUSEMENT
DEVICE does not include vending machines.
   GAME MACHINE. Any amusement device.
   GOOD MORAL CHARACTER. Not having been convicted of a crime involving moral
turpitude within five years next preceding the date of the application.
   MALFUNCTION. Failure to operate in accordance with design.
   MORAL TURPITUDE. A conviction for a theft offense, fraud, falsification,
drug offense, sex offense, an offense involving gambling or a felony.
   OPERATOR. Any individual, corporation or other entity conducting the
business of an amusement arcade.
   OWNER. Any individual, corporation or other entity owning title to any
amusement device or the real property at which an amusement arcade is operated.
   PLAYING AREA. The portion of the premises where the primary use is for
customer play on amusement devices.
   SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINE. A skill-based amusement device, such as a
mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device, or machine, whether or not
the SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINE requires payment for use through a coin or
bill validator or other payment of consideration or value to participate in the
machine’s offering or to activate the machine; provided that all of the
following apply:
      (1)   The machine involves a task, game, play, contest, competition or
tournament in which the player actively participates in the task, game, play,
contest, competition or tournament;
      (2)   The outcome of an individual’s play and participation is not
determined largely or wholly by chance. For purposes of this chapter, LARGELY
or WHOLLY means at least by 51%;
      (3)   The outcome of play during a game is not controlled by a person not
actively participating in the game;
      (4)   The machine only charges one price to play a task, game, play,
contest, competition or tournament; and
      (5)   All of the following apply to any machine that is operated as
described in this section.
         (a)   As used in this section, TASK, GAME and PLAY mean one event from
the initial activation of the machine until the results of play are determined
without payment of additional consideration. An individual utilizing a machine
that involves a single task, game, play, contest, competition or tournament may
be awarded prizes based on the results of play, the prizes or rewards shall be
established prior to the individual placing a wager, and the individual shall
be aware of what prize or reward will occur prior to the start of play.
         (b)   Advance play for a single task, game, play, contest, competition
or tournament participation may be purchased. The cost of the contest,
competition or tournament participation may be greater than a single non-
contest, competition or tournament play.
         (c)   To the extent that the machine is used in a contest, competition
or tournament, that contest, competition or tournament has a defined starting
and ending date, and is open to participants in competition for scoring and
ranking results toward the awarding of prizes without payment of additional
consideration.
         (d)   No machine shall have a guessing game at the end of a
successfully completed task, game, play, contest, competition or tournament.
(Prior Code, § 830.02) (Ord. 2007-18, passed 7-10-2007)
§ 111.03 OPERATION; LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No individual, corporation or other entity shall be an operator of an
amusement arcade at any place of business, unless such operator holds a valid
amusement arcade license for the place of business where such amusement arcade
is operated.
   (B)   No individual, corporation or other entity shall permit or cause to be
permitted any amusement machine, game machine or amusement device to be
operated, placed into operation, moved onto the area of play or played, without
a current and valid license for that machine displayed on that machine.
   (C)   No individual, corporation or other entity shall play any amusement
device unless it is validly licensed by the city.
(Prior Code, § 830.03) (Ord. 2007-18, passed 7-10-2007)
§ 111.04 APPLICATION INFORMATION.
   The original and renewal application for an amusement arcade license and the
license for each skill-based amusement machine, game machine or amusement
device shall be upon a form prescribed by the Director of Public Safety and
shall set forth therein information, such as the name and address of the
operator, the address of the place of business which is to be the licensed
amusement arcade, the year for which the license is sought, the number of
skill-based game machines or amusement devices located at such place of
business, the name and address of the owner of each machine, a detailed
explanation of the machine operation, applicable software license
authorization, player skills and training required qualifying each machine as a
game of skill, and such other information as the Director of Public Safety
reasonably requires. The application shall be signed by the operator in whose
name the city licenses are to be issued, as well as the owner of the real
property.
(Prior Code, § 830.04) (Ord. 2007-18, passed 7-10-2007)
§ 111.05 CORPORATIONS, TRUSTS AND PARTNERSHIPS.
   (A)   If the operator filing the application for a license under this
chapter is a corporation, the application shall list the names and addresses of
all officers and directors, and any individual, corporation or other entity
owning 25% or more of the issued and outstanding shares of every class of stock
of such corporation.
   (B)   If the operator filing the application for a license is a partnership,
the application shall list the names and addresses of all partners.
   (C)   If the operator filing the application for a license is a trust, the
application shall list the names and addresses of all trustees and/or co-
trustees.
   (D)   The listing required of any corporation, trust or partnership shall be
repeated and further repeated for any corporation, partnership or other entity
who or which appears as a shareholder, trustee, co-trustee or partner on the
application.
(Prior Code, § 830.05) (Ord. 2007-18, passed 7-10-2007)
§ 111.06 AFFIDAVIT REQUIRED.
   The application for a license under this chapter shall be submitted on forms
provided by the Director of Public Safety and be accompanied by an affidavit
attesting that the operator and all employees and agents of the operation have
not been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude and to the truth of the
matters set forth in such application. No person shall swear falsely in any
affidavit required to be filed under this section.
(Prior Code, § 830.06) (Ord. 2007-18, passed 7-10-2007)
§ 111.07 LICENSE ISSUANCE; EFFECTIVE PERIOD; FEE.
   The Director of Public Safety or his or her designee is authorized to issue
amusement arcade licenses and amusement and/or game machine licenses, in such
form as he or she determines to be appropriate, for a period of up to one year,
upon satisfaction of all of the following conditions:
   (A)   The operator of the amusement arcade has properly filed the
application required by this chapter. The owner of the game machines and the
real property owner shall sign the application;
   (B)   A fee of $2,500 per arcade location per year has been paid;
   (C)   A fee of $300 per machine per month has been paid in advance annually;
   (D)   The operator or any employee of the operator has not been convicted of
a crime of moral turpitude within the past five years;
   (E)   The Director of Public Safety has determined that no other reasonable
cause exists to deny the issuance of such license;
   (F)   Compliance with §
111.09; and
   (G)   License fees are nonrefundable.
(Prior Code, § 830.07) (Ord. 2007-18, passed 7-10-2007)
§ 111.08 LICENSE ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Safety or his or her
designee to administer the licensing regulations of this chapter.
   (B)   The Director of Public Safety or his or her designee is empowered to
adopt and enforce such rules and regulations relating to any matter or thing
pertaining to the issuance, administration and enforcement of this chapter.
   (C)   The burden shall rest on the owner, applicant, operator and/or agent
of the operator, owner, or applicant to timely produce the complete, accurate,
and true records, documents, programs source codes, or other data or objects
necessary to substantiate the licensing requirements of this chapter. Absent
such substantiation, the decision of the Director of Public Safety shall be
final subject to §
111.15.
   (D)   A license shall be issued within 45 days of receipt of complete
application and compliance with this chapter.
   (E)   No arcade license shall be issued until all individual amusement
devices are licensed.
(Prior Code, § 830.08) (Ord. 2007-18, passed 7-10-2007)
§ 111.09 SUBMISSION OF SOURCE CODE FOR APPROVAL.
   (A)   Each applicant submitting an application for an amusement arcade
license shall submit to the Director of Public Safety:
      (1)   A written report prepared by an independent laboratory satisfactory
to the Director of Public Safety stating that the specific amusement device,
including, but not limited to, the source code, has been tested and examined
under the requirements of the Ohio Revised Code and this chapter, and the
specific amusement device is largely or wholly a game of skill;
      (2)   A report must be prepared for each amusement device to be licensed;
and
      (3)   An exact and sealed copy of the source code for each device shall
accompany the report. Such sealed code shall be deemed proprietary and shall be
held by the Director of Public Safety or his or her designee until the license
is expired, revoked or there are reasonable grounds to believe a violation of
this chapter has occurred. If reasonable grounds exist, the sealed source code
will be provided to law enforcement for investigation. Otherwise, the source
code will be returned to the licensee.
   (B)   The Director of Public Safety shall provide the names of at least two
laboratories deemed satisfactory.
(Prior Code, § 830.09) (Ord. 2007-18, passed 7-10-2007)
§ 111.10 LICENSE VALIDITY AND DISPLAY.
   Each license under this chapter shall be valid for only so long as the
amusement arcade is operated by the operator listed on such license, at the
place of business listed thereon. Each skill-based amusement machine and/or
amusement device shall be valid for operation or use only so long as the game
machine and/or amusement device has displayed on it a current license, or until
the license is revoked by the city or until such machines are determined to be
games of chance or otherwise deemed illegal by the state or a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 830.10) (Ord. 2007-18, passed 7-10-2007)
§ 111.11 OPERATION OF ARCADE.
   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted on the
premises.
   (B)   No doors shall be locked preventing ingress or egress by members of
the public while patrons are on the premises.
   (C)   The operator shall adopt and enforce a no loitering policy on the
premises.
   (D)   The premises of every amusement arcade shall be equipped with exterior
lighting of sufficient intensity to illuminate every means of ingress and
egress and adjacent parking areas.
   (E)   Each arcade shall be maintained so that it is handicap accessible
throughout.
   (F)   Each arcade shall be smoke free, even if state law permits smoking at
such establishments under certain conditions.
   (G)   Each arcade shall be operated with a glass storefront allowing full
visibility at the sidewalk or right-of-way from the front through the playing
area to the rear of the facility, exclusive of restrooms. No machines shall be
placed in restrooms.
   (H)   Windows shall be clear and free of tint and signs. No obstructions
shall prevent observing at least 50% of the arcade games from outside the front
door.
   (I)   The operator shall maintain a record of each game machine taken out of
play for any reason, including, but not limited to, machine malfunction. The
record shall include, but not be limited to, the following: name of operator
taking the device out of play; name and address of player who last played; the
amount reflected as won but not paid or lost by the arcade; a description of
the malfunction; a description of how the game machine was designed to operate;
time and date of removal from play; and make, model and serial number of the
game machine. Said record shall be maintained on the premises for at least two
years from date of removal. Further, the record shall be available for
inspection to the Director of Public Safety, his or her agents and designees
during regular business hours.
   (J)   No arcade shall operate during the hours of 1:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.
   (K)   Each operator shall maintain a record of the full name, address,
telephone number, date, tax identification number and gross value amount for
each player receiving consideration or anything of value exceeding $200. This
record shall be filed with the Director of Finance at least quarterly. Further,
such record shall be available for inspection to the Director of Public Safety,
his or her agents, and designees during regular business hours for a period of
two years.
   (L)   Each operator shall clearly post in a conspicuous place all
circumstances in which a player may not cash out, be reimbursed or receive a
cash payment for the value of winnings, credits, rewards or prepayments.
   (M)   Each operator, employee and agent thereof shall wear a full name
identification nameplate during working hours.
   (N)   All on premises, food service shall comply with state and local health
regulations.
   (O)   Each operator shall conspicuously display by posting with each skill-
based amusement machine the established prize or reward for each play. This
information shall be posted so that the player can observe it prior to and
during play.
   (P)   Each operator shall make available and have on display forms as
prescribed by the Director of Public Safety for the recovery of losses pursuant
to R.C. Ch. 3763.
   (Q)   No weapons, firearms or dangerous ordnances are permitted on the
premises.
(Prior Code, § 830.11) (Ord. 2007-18, passed 7-10-2007)
§ 111.12 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   It shall be cause for revocation of any license required under this chapter,
by the issuing authority, or for nonrenewal of such license, for an operator or
operator’s officers, directors, agents or employees, trustee, 25% of the
shareholders of an operator, or any other person to:
   (A)   Operate an amusement arcade without a valid license;
   (B)   Operate or permit to be operated an amusement device or game machine
without a valid license for that machine or device;
   (C)   Fail to display any license required by this chapter;
   (D)   Provide any false or misleading information in the material submitted
during the application process;
   (E)   Permit any violation of:
      (1)   An ordinance or regulation of the city;
      (2)   Regulation of the county, including, but not limited to, rules of
the County Department of Health; or
      (3)   Statute of the state, any for which a criminal penalty may be
invoked, to take place at any amusement arcade operated by such operator.
   (F)   Knowingly allow gambling on the premises;
   (G)   Transfer or alter any license issued under this chapter;
   (H)   Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter; or
   (I)   Be convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude.
(Prior Code, § 830.12) (Ord. 2007-18, passed 7-10-2007)
§ 111.13 REVOCATION PROCESS.
   (A)   The Director of Public Safety shall notify the licensee in writing, at
the address of the amusement arcade, of the reason for revocation. Service
shall be made by regular first class mail with proof of service or personally.
   (B)   When the city revokes a license, the licensee shall not be issued
another license for one year from the date the revocation became effective. If
the city finds, subsequent to revocation, that the basis for the revocation has
been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90
days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.
(Prior Code, § 830.13) (Ord. 2007-18, passed 7-10-2007)
§ 111.14 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   (A)   An amusement arcade license is not transferable from one licensee to
another or from one location to another. Any purported transfer of an amusement
arcade license shall automatically and immediately revoke that license.
   (B)   A skill-based amusement machine or amusement device license is not
transferable from one machine or device to another or to a machine or device
moved to a different location. Any purported such transfer of a license shall
automatically and immediately revoke that license.
(Prior Code, § 830.14) (Ord. 2007-18, passed 7-10-2007)
§ 111.15 APPEAL.
   (A)   Any licensee may appeal the decision of the Director of Public Safety
for the denial of the issuance of a license, the denial of a renewal of a
license or the revocation of a license. An appeal must be filed within ten days
of notice of nonissuance, nonrenewal or revocation, in writing, to the Board of
Zoning Appeals, c/o Public Service Director, P.O. Box 278, Green, Ohio 44223-
0278 stating the reason for the appeal.
   (B)   Any decision of the Board shall be a final, appealable order and the
applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative
action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 830.15) (Ord. 2007-18, passed 7-10-2007)
§ 111.16 INSPECTION.
   (A)   The Director of Public Safety or his or her designee shall, from time
to time and at least four times a year, inspect that portion of the arcade
business open to the public licensed hereunder in order to assess compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The Director of Public Safety shall, from time to time, request the
County Health Department to inspect that portion of each arcade business open
to the public and licensed in order to assess compliance with the provisions of
this chapter and relevant Health Department regulations.
   (C)   The Fire Chief shall, from time to time, and at least four times a
year, inspect that portion of the arcade business open to the public and
licensed hereunder in order to assess compliance with all applicable fire,
building and zoning code regulations.
(Prior Code, § 830.16) (Ord. 2007-18, passed 7-10-2007)
§ 111.17 NUISANCE.
   A violation of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and is subject to
civil proceedings, including an injunction, in addition to prosecution for
criminal violations of the state and the codified ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 830.17) (Ord. 2007-18, passed 7-10-2007)
§ 111.18 EFFECT OF PARTIAL INVALIDITY.
   If any section, division or clause of this chapter shall be deemed to be
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity and enforcement of the
remaining sections, divisions and clauses shall not be affected.
(Prior Code, § 830.18) (Ord. 2007-18, passed 7-10-2007)
§ 111.19 FEES COLLECTED.
   All license fees collected shall be deposited into the general fund of the
city. Such monies shall be used for expenses incurred during enforcement of
this code.
(Prior Code, § 830.19) (Ord. 2007-18, passed 7-10-2007)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter, for which no penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a second
degree misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties in accordance with the
Ohio Revised Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs.
(Prior Code, § 830.99) (Ord. 2007-18, passed 7-10-2007)
CHAPTER 112: TAXICABS AND TRANSPORTATION SERVICES
Section
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   Rates of fare
   
112.03   Liability insurance
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIXED RATES OF FARE. A pre-arranged fare filed by taxicab companies or
transportation companies with the city to provide transportation from a
location in the city to a specifically identified location. A FIXED RATE OF
FARE cannot be a range of charges to a single location; instead, it must be a
single amount.
   RATES OF FARE. The fee or charge by taxicab companies or transportation
companies, whether expressed as a dollar amount per distance traveled, time
elapsed; or, a combination of distance traveled and time elapsed.
   STREET. Any public street, alley or public way within the corporate limits
of the city.
   TAXICAB, TAXI and CAB. All motor-driven vehicles equipped with a taximeter
engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire on the streets of the
city.
   TAXICAB COMPANY. Every corporation, company, association, joint stock
association, person, firm or partnership, or their lessees, trustees, receivers
or trustees appointed by any court owning, controlling, operating or managing
any taxicab engaged in the business of transporting persons for hire on the
streets of the city.
   TAXIMETER. A mechanical, electronic or digital electronic instrument or
device by which the charge for hire of a taxicab is calculated, either for
distance traveled or for waiting time or for both, and upon which such charge
is indicated by means of monetary figures.
   TRANSPORTATION COMPANY. Every corporation, company, association, joint stock
association, person, firm or partnership, or their lessees, trustees and
trustees appointed by any court owning, controlling, operating or managing any
vehicle engaged in the business of transporting persons for hire on the streets
of the city, except taxicabs and motor vehicles owned or operated by a taxing
authority or district of the state.
(Prior Code, § 850.01) (Ord. 2013-28, passed 2-11-2014; Ord. 2014-07, passed 7-
8-2014)
§ 112.02 RATES OF FARE.
   (A)   The rates of fare to be charged by taxicabs and/or transportation
companies operating in the city shall be provided in writing to the Service
Director, on a form created, approved and published by the city, at least 30
days prior to the implementation of those rates.
   (B)   The rates of fare provided to the city shall be conspicuously posted
within the taxicab or transportation vehicle and all meters within the taxicab
or transportation vehicle shall be programmed for the rates of fare previously
provided to the city, pursuant to division (a) of this section.
      (1)   Rates of fare established by taxicab companies shall be effective
30 days following written notice of such new fares delivered to the Service
Director or after all taximeters have been programmed for the new rates of fare
and the new rates of fare have been conspicuously posted in all taxicab
vehicles, whichever occurs later.
      (2)   Rates of fare established by taxicab companies shall be accurately
metered by all taxicab vehicles, except, if the taxicab company or
transportation company only provides pre-arranged, fixed rates of fare, to
specific locations, taximeters in their vehicles are not required. The city, or
an agent or independent contractor acting on behalf of the city, shall certify
the accuracy of the taximeters in all taxicabs.
      (3)   Rates of fare established by taxicab companies or transportation
companies may be based on different rate schedules in effect during specified
days of the week or hours of the day, or both; provided each of such different
schedule of rates is metered and the meter at all times conspicuously displays
the schedule of rates being recorded and charged to passengers. Taxicab
companies and transportation companies may also publish and charge
predetermined fixed rates of fare for travel to specifically identified
locations or areas.
   (C)   Any taxicab or transportation company providing services within the
city shall provide to passengers, upon request, dated and signed receipt for
services rendered. In the event a transportation company receives advance
payment from passenger(s), the company shall provide a dated and signed receipt
that specifies all the material terms, conditions, rates and fares of the
transportation service to be provided during such future purchase and upon
request, both the date and driver’s identity on such receipt after each trip is
concluded. A transportation company may not solicit, either directly or
indirectly, additional compensation for the services.
(Prior Code, § 850.02) (Ord. 2013-28, passed 2-11-2014; Ord. 2014-07, passed 7-
8-2014)
§ 112.03 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   No person shall operate a taxicab company or transportation company without
having in effect:
   (A)   Public liability insurance for each vehicle with a combined single
limit of $3,000,000 covering both passengers and third parties, plus a
comprehensive general liability policy with limits of $1,000,000;
   (B)   Such policy or certificate shall be provided by an insurance or
liability carrier authorized to issue this type of insurance in the state and
shall contain a provision obligating the insurance carrier to give 15 days’
written notice to the Service Director before cancellation or termination of
the insurance. Such policy or certificate shall list the manufacturer’s serial
number and the state license plate number for each vehicle covered therein. The
policy or certificate shall be refiled with the Service Director whenever any
vehicle is deleted from the transportation service of the insurance or a
vehicle is added to the transportation service of the insured; and
   (C)   The liability insurance required by this section may contain a
deductible or self-insured provision in an amount not to exceed the first
$25,000 of liability for all personal injuries, loss of life and property
damage in any one accident or incident arising from the operation of any
vehicle of a taxicab company or transportation company; provided that the
taxicab company or transportation company shall deposit cash or other similar
collateral acceptable to the Director of Finance.
(Prior Code, § 850.03) (Ord. 2014-07, passed 7-8-2014)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any individual operating a taxicab on the streets of the city in
violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor in the fourth degree
and the court, upon conviction, shall impose a definite jail term of not more
than 30 days and a fine of not more than $2,000.
   (B)   Any entity, i.e., any corporation, limited liability company,
partnership or limited liability partnership, operating taxicab, or
transportation services in the city, which violates any term of this chapter,
shall be fined by the court not more than $2,000.
(Prior Code, § 850.99) (Ord. 2013-28, passed 2-11-2014; Ord. 2014-07, passed 7-
8-2014)
CHAPTER 113: TRANSIENT VENDORS
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   License required
   
113.03   Exemptions
   
113.04   Licensing procedures; fees; falsification; effective period
   
113.05   Hours of sale
   
113.06   Sales from a fixed location or temporary place of business
   
113.07   Prohibited conduct
   
113.08   Notification signs
   
113.09   Violations
 
   
113.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Charitable solicitations, see R.C. Ch. 1716
   Frozen desserts, see R.C. §§ 3717.51 et seq.
   Home solicitation sales, see R.C. §§ 1345.21 et seq.
   Power to regulate, see R.C. §§ 715.61 et seq.
   Sales of goods and services within right-of-way of interstate and other
state highways, see
    R.C. § 5515.07
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HOLIDAY. Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, New Year’s Eve, New Year’s Day,
Valentine’s Day, Mother’s Day, Memorial Day, Labor Day, Sweetest Day and
Thanksgiving Day.
   HOME SOLICITATION SALE. A sale of consumer goods or services in which the
seller or a person acting for him or her engages in a personal solicitation of
the sale at a residence of the buyer. HOME SOLICITATION SALE does not include
sales of goods or services by nonprofit organizations certified as nonprofit
under Internal Revenue Code § 501(c)(3). HOME SOLICITATION SALE also does not
include sales by any nonprofit organizations associated with public or private
schools in the city.
   PERSON. An individual or a business entity. For the licensing requirements
set forth in this chapter, it is understood that a business entity need only
obtain one license, which will cover all employees of the business entity who
are acting as transient vendors within the city.
   TRANSIENT VENDOR. Any person, whether a principal or an agent, who engages
in a temporary or transient business in the city for the sale of goods, wares
or merchandise, or who, on the streets or while traveling about the city,
sells, offers for sale or solicits orders for future delivery of goods, wares
or merchandise where payment is required prior to the delivery of such goods,
wares or merchandise.
(Prior Code, § 860.01) (Ord. 95-20, passed 1-23-1996; Ord. 01-27, passed 11-27-
2001; Res. 2007-R86, passed 12-11-2007)
§ 113.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business or trade of transient vendor or home
solicitation sale, either as principal or agent, without first obtaining a
license from the zoning office.
(Prior Code, § 860.02) (Ord. 95-20, passed 1-23-1996; Ord. 01-27, passed 11-27-
2001) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.03 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any person who
represents a business or organization, including, but not limited to, any
entity exempt from taxation under R.C. § 5709.04 or Internal Revenue Code § 501
(c)(3).
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to persons selling
agricultural articles or products grown on the premises and offered or exposed
for sale by the producer.
(Prior Code, § 860.03) (Ord. 95-20, passed 1-23-1996; Ord. 01-27, passed 11-27-
2001)
§ 113.04 LICENSING PROCEDURES; FEES; FALSIFICATION; EFFECTIVE PERIOD.
   (A)   The zoning office is authorized to grant a license to any person or
entity upon registration and payment by such person of a $100 registration fee,
plus an additional fee of $25 for each individual transient vendor. Checks or
money orders shall be made payable to the city.
   (B)   The zoning office shall maintain a registration log where all
transient vendors and home solicitation sales individuals or entities shall
register. This registration may be made at the zoning office during regular
office hours. All transient vendors shall register at least 48 hours prior to
the date they desire to sell goods, wares or merchandise in the city, exclusive
of weekends.
   (C)   Transient vendors or home solicitation sales individuals shall be
required to fill out a transient vendors application at the time they register,
and they shall sign in and out on the log. The application form shall list all
employees, vehicles and license numbers for those vehicles that will be in the
city. If the transient vendor intends to sell from a fixed location and/or
locations, the transient vendor shall provide the address of each location and
written documentation from the owner or lessee of that property indicating that
the transient vendor has permission to sell its goods, wares or merchandise at
that location.
   (D)   All companies, corporations, businesses or organizations shall provide
to their transient vendors or home solicitation sales individuals a copy of the
transient vendor permit signed by the Zoning Inspector and designating that the
transient vendor is in fact authorized to sell, offer for sale, or solicit
orders for its goods, wares or merchandise within the city, for it or under its
authority or agency. A transient vendor or home solicitation sales individual
shall maintain a copy of the signed permit on his or her person while doing
business in the city and shall produce the permit for inspection upon the
request of any person. If the permit is issued for a fixed location or
locations, the permit shall specifically identify each location.
   (E)   A transient vendor application or log that contains false or untrue
information shall give the city cause to cancel the registration and to
commence prosecution pursuant to §
113.99.
   (F)   A license issued to a transient vendor by the zoning office shall be
valid for a period of 90 days and said period shall commence on the date of
registration. The license shall be renewable upon payment of a $100 renewal
fee, plus an additional fee of $25 for each additional transient vendor for an
additional 90-day period.
(Ord. 95-20, passed 1-23-1996; Ord. 01-27, passed 11-27-2001; Ord. 05-10,
passed 6-14-2005; Res. 2007-R86, passed 12-11-2007)
§ 113.05 HOURS OF SALE.
   (A)   No transient vendor licensed under this chapter shall sell, offer for
sale, or solicit orders, door to door, or location to location, between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. of the following day, Monday through Friday,
or at any time on Saturday, Sunday or holidays, from May through October.
   (B)   No transient vendor licensed under this chapter shall sell, offer for
sale, or solicit orders, door to door, or location to location, between the
hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. of the following day, Monday through Friday,
or at any time on Saturday, Sunday or holidays, from November through April.
(Prior Code, § 860.05) (Ord. 95-20, passed 1-23-1996; Res. 2007-R86, passed 12-
11-2007) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.06 SALES FROM A FIXED LOCATION OR TEMPORARY PLACE OF BUSINESS.
   A transient vendor who sells, offers for sale or solicits orders for future
delivery of goods, wares or merchandise, and who establishes a fixed location
or a temporary place of business shall, in addition to the other requirements
mandated herein:
   (A)   Establish the temporary place of business in an area zoned for the
same. No temporary place of business shall be established in areas zoned as
residential;
   (B)   Not violate any zoning regulation regarding signs, as set forth in §§
157.130 through
157.142;
   (C)   Not sell, offer for sale or solicit orders for future delivery of
goods, wares or merchandise between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. of the
following day; and
   (D)   Comply with all existing zoning regulations.
(Prior Code, § 860.06) (Ord. 95-20, passed 1-23-1996)
§ 113.07 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   No transient vendor shall, together or in combination with 12 or more
persons who are transient vendors, operate within the city at any one time,
whereby they are all selling, offering for sale or soliciting the same goods.
   (B)   No transient vendor shall open a temporary place of business that is
in derogation or violation of the Zoning Code.
   (C)   No transient vendor shall sell, offer for sale or solicit orders for
goods, wares or merchandise at a dwelling, property, building or other
structure that has displayed thereon a sign or notice that its owners or
occupants do not want salespersons, solicitations, transient salespersons or
vendors; provided such sign or notice is reasonably calculated by its size and
placement to so notify the transient vendor.
(Prior Code, § 860.07) (Ord. 95-20, passed 1-23-1996; Ord. 01-27, passed 11-27-
2001; Ord. 05-10, passed 6-14-2005) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.08 NOTIFICATION SIGNS.
   All city identification signs at the entrance to the city that are
maintained by the city shall have placed upon them by the Highway Department a
sign containing the following language:
“ALL TRANSIENT VENDORS MUST REGISTER AT THE CITY OF GREEN ZONING OFFICE BY
ORDINANCE OF THE GREEN CITY COUNCIL.”
(Prior Code, § 860.08) (Ord. 95-20, passed 1-23-1996)
§ 113.09 VIOLATIONS.
   A transient vendor who violates any of the terms, conditions or requirements
of this chapter shall give the city cause to cancel the registration and to
commence prosecution pursuant to §
113.99.
(Prior Code, § 860.09) (Ord. 95-20, passed 1-23-1996)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than
six months, or both.
(Prior Code, § 860.99) (Ord. 95-20, passed 1-23-1996)
CHAPTER 114: MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATORS,    PROCESSORS AND RETAIL
DISPENSARIES
Section
   
114.01   Prohibition
   
114.02   Exceptions
§ 114.01 PROHIBITION.
   Cultivators, processors or retail dispensaries of medical marijuana as
defined and licensed in R.C. Chapter 3796, as it may be amended from time to
time, shall be prohibited in all zoning districts and anywhere in the city,
except that the distribution of medical marijuana shall be permitted by a
licensed pharmacy in the same manner as other prescription drugs are sold.
(Prior Code, § 870.01) (Ord. 2017-16, passed 6-27-2017)
§ 114.02 EXCEPTIONS.
   The prohibition set forth in §
114.01 shall not apply to licensed facilities involving research related to
marijuana conducted at a state university, academic medical center or by a
private research and development organization as part of a research protocol
approved by an institutional review board or equivalent entity as provided in
R.C. § 3796.29.
(Prior Code, § 870.02) (Ord. 2017-16, passed 6-27-2017)
CHAPTER 115: USE OF PUBLIC WAYS BY SERVICE PROVIDERS
Section
   
115.01   Scope of chapter; definitions
   
115.02   Consent to occupy or use the public right-of-way
   
115.03   General public right-of-way use regulations
   
115.04   Location, relocation and removal of micro wireless facility
   
115.05   Notice of work, routine maintenance and emergency work
   
115.06   Miscellaneous provisions
 
   
115.99   Penalty
§ 115.01 SCOPE OF CHAPTER; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:
      (1)   Manage occupancy or use of the public right-of-way;
      (2)   Encourage the provision of advanced, competitive telecommunications
services on the widest possible basis to the businesses, institutions and
residents of the city;
      (3)   Permit and manage reasonable access to the public right-of-way of
the city for telecommunications service purposes on a competitively neutral
basis;
      (4)   Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public right-of-way
held in trust by the city for the benefit of the public;
      (5)   Assure that the city receives cost recovery for the occupancy and
use of the public right-of-way in accordance with law;
      (6)   Assure that all service providers with facilities in the public
right-of-way comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city;
      (7)   Assure that the city fairly and responsibly protects the public
health, safety and welfare; and
      (8)   Enable the city to discharge its public trust consistent with
rapidly evoking federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition and
technological development.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT. Any equipment used in conjunction with a wireless
facility or wireless support structure. ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT includes utility or
transmission equipment, power storage, generation or control equipment, cables,
wiring and equipment cabinets.
      AFFILIATE. A person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is
owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another
person.
      ANTENNA. A system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive
electromagnetic waves or radio frequency signals. Such waves shall include, but
not be limited to, radio, television, cellular, paging, personal
telecommunications service, internet and microwave telecommunications.
      CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT. An addition made to enhance the value or extend the
useful life of an existing system or facilities, including construction,
reconstruction, installation, rehabilitation, renovation, improvement,
enlargement and extension of facilities, but not including, ordinary or routine
maintenance.
      CITY. The City of Green, Ohio.
      CITY PROPERTY. All real property owned by the city, other than public
streets and public easements, and all property held in a proprietary capacity
by the city, which are not subject to public right-of-way consent and
requirements of this chapter.
      CONSTRUCT, CONSTRUCTING, CONSTRUCTION AND THE LIKE. Installing,
repairing, replacing or removing any facility, regardless of the methods
employed.
      DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM. A network or facility to which all of the
following apply:
         (a)   It distributes radio frequency signals to provide wireless
service;
         (b)   It meets the height and size characteristics of a small cell
facility;
         (c)   It consists of all of the following:
            1.   Remote antenna nodes deployed throughout a desired coverage
area;
            2.   A high-capacity signal transport medium connected to a central
hub site; and
            3.   Equipment located at the hub site to process or control the
radio frequency signals through the antennas.
         (d)   It conforms to the size limitations specified in this division.
      EMERGENCY. An unforeseen occurrence or condition calling for immediate
action.
      ENGINEER. The engineer of the city or engineer’s designee.
      EXCAVATE, EXCAVATING or EXCAVATION. Cutting, sawing, breaking, drilling
into, boring under or otherwise altering any public street or sidewalk
pavement, and/or digging, drilling into, or boring under any unpaved portion of
the public right-of-way, including any other work or activity which disturbs
the existing surface or subsurface structure, composition, or soil compaction,
for the purpose of carrying on any construction activity.
      FACILITIES or FACILITY. The plant, equipment and property, including, but
not limited to, accessory equipment, antenna, cables, fibers, wires, pipes,
conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennae, electronics, poles, pipes, mains, plant,
equipment and other appurtenances located under, on or above the surface of the
ground in the public right-of-way of the city for a micro wireless FACILITY.
      LANE OBSTRUCTION. The blocking or diverting of vehicular and/or
pedestrian traffic from a street or sidewalk for the purpose of constructing,
excavating, installing, repairing, maintaining, operating, replacing or
removing any facility, including the lifting or removing of manhole or handhole
covers, and the opening or accessing of at-grade or pole-mounted cabinets,
pedestals, transformers, power supplies, amplifiers, splice enclosures, traps
or other facilities.
      MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. Includes both a distributed antenna system and a
small cell facility, and the related wireless facilities.
      MONOPOLE. A support structure constructed of a single, self-supporting
hollow metal tube securely anchored to a foundation.
      OCCUPANCY, OCCUPY or USE. With respect to the public right-of-way, to
place a tangible thing in the public right-of-way for any purpose, including,
but not limited to, constructing, repairing, positioning, maintaining or
operating lines, poles, pipes, conduits, ducts, equipment or other structures,
appurtenances, or facilities.
      OVERHEAD FACILITIES. Utility poles and wires, cables, and other such
equipment running between and on such poles, including the underground supports
and foundations for such facilities.
      PERSON. Corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies or
associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies, trusts, public
utility, any other entity, and individuals and includes their lessors, trustees
and receivers, but specifically excludes the city itself.
      PRIVATE SERVICE PROVIDER. Any person who, pursuant to the consent to
occupy or use the public right-of-way pursuant to §
115.02, directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates, or manages a micro
wireless facility within the city’s public right-of-way used or to be used for
the purpose of transmitting, receiving, distributing, or providing
telecommunications or wireless services.
      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The surface of, and the space within, through, on,
across, above or below, any public street, public road, public highway, public
freeway, public lane, public path, public alley, public court, public sidewalk,
public boulevard, public parkway, public drive and any other land dedicated or
otherwise designated for a comparable public use, which is owned or controlled
by the city or other public entity or political subdivision.
      PUBLIC STREET. The paved and unpaved portion of any street, road,
boulevard, drive, highway, freeway, parkway, lane, court, alley or other public
right-of-way in which the city has an interest in law or equity, and which has
been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to street purposes.
      PUCO or PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION OF OHIO. The state administrative
agency or successor, authorized to regulate and oversee certain public or
private service providers and services in the state.
      RECONSTRUCT and RECONSTRUCTION. Substantial physical change to all or a
portion of an existing facility or system involving construction in public
streets, utility easements or public right-of-way.
      ROUTINE MAINTENANCE. Repair, upkeep, replacement or restoration of
existing facilities located in the public right-of-way that requires no more
than one working day to complete, is not an emergency and does not include
excavation of the public right-of-way.
      SERVICE PROVIDER. Any private service provider.
      SMALL CELL FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets the requirements
below.
         (a)   1.   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of not more
than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
enclosure of not more than six cubic feet in volume.
            2.   All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is
cumulatively not more than 28 cubic feet in volume. The calculation of
equipment volume shall not include electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, grounding equipment, power transfer
switches, cut-off switches and vertical cable runs for the connection of power
and other services.
         (b)   If the wireless facility were placed on a wireless support
structure or utility pole, the increased height would be not more than ten feet
or the overall resulting height would be not more than 50 feet.
      STATE. The State of Ohio.
      UTILITY POLE. A structure that is designed for, or used for the purpose
of, carrying lines, cables, or wires for electric or telecommunications
services.
      WIRELESS FACILITY. An antenna, accessory equipment, or other wireless
device or equipment used to provide wireless service.
      WIRELESS SERVICE. Any services using licensed or unlicensed wireless
spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless
facilities.
      WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A pole, such as a monopole, either guyed or
self-supporting, light pole, traffic signal, sign pole or utility pole capable
of supporting wireless facilities.
(Prior Code, § 875.01) (Ord. 2018-14, passed 7-10-2018)
§ 115.02 CONSENT TO OCCUPY OR USE THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Consent required to occupy public right-of-way. No person shall occupy
or use a micro wireless facility in the public right-of-way without obtaining
prior consent from the city to do so.
   (B)   Initial consent presumed.
      (1)   A person with a micro wireless facility in the public right-of-way
on the effective date of this chapter, who lawfully occupies the public right-
of-way on the effective date of this chapter, shall be presumed to have initial
consent of the city for its existing micro wireless facility to occupy or use
the public right-of-way which has been previously approved by the city.
      (2)   Initial presumed consent for occupancy or use of the public right-
of-way is limited to the existing micro wireless facility.
      (3)   A person with initial presumed consent is not relieved from
compliance with this chapter with respect to the ongoing occupancy or use of
the public right-of-way including, but not limited to, the insurance and
indemnity requirements set forth in divisions (E) and (F) of this section.
   (C)   Application for consent to occupy or use public right-of-way.
      (1)   The following persons shall apply to the city for consent to occupy
or use the public right-of-way on a form provided by the city, any person who:
         (a)   Does not currently have an existing micro wireless facility in
the city’s public right-of-way and desires to construct a new micro wireless
facility in the public right-of-way; or
         (b)   Has initial presumed consent or city consent to occupy or use
the public right-of-way for an existing micro wireless facility but is
planning:
            1.   A capital improvement or reconstruction of an existing micro
wireless facility; or
            2.   To construct an additional micro wireless facility anywhere in
the city.
      (2)   The application for consent to occupy or use the public right-of-
way shall include the following information with respect to the applicant’s or
service provider’s planned or existing micro wireless facility in the public
right-of-way, as well as plans for any planned capital improvements or
reconstruction:
         (a)   The identity, legal status and federal tax identification number
of the applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant or service provider
in the state that will use or occupy the public right-of-way or are in any way
responsible for the micro wireless facility in the public right-of-way;
         (b)   The name, address and telephone number of the local officer,
agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the application or initial
registration and available at all reasonable times to be notified in case of
emergency;
         (c)   A description of the existing or proposed micro wireless
facility in the city’s public right-of-way, including, but not limited to,
engineering plans, specifications or a map, all in sufficient detail to
identify:
            1.   The location of the applicant’s micro wireless facility or
proposed micro wireless facility;
            2.   The location of all existing overhead and or underground
facilities, facility or micro wireless facility in the public right-of-way in
the area of the applicant’s or service provider’s micro wireless facility or
proposed micro wireless facility that is sufficient to show the impact of the
applicant’s micro wireless facility on other existing facilities, facility or
micro wireless facility; and
            3.   The location of all overhead and underground utility
easements.
         (d)   A preliminary construction schedule and completion date for all
planned capital improvements;
         (e)   Evidence that the applicant or service provider has complied, or
will comply, with indemnification and insurance requirements of this chapter;
         (f)   Information sufficient to determine that the applicant or
service provider has received any certificate of authority required by the
PUCO;
         (g)   A description of the construction methods to be employed for the
protection of existing structures, fixtures and facilities in or adjacent to
the public right-of-way;
         (h)   A description of the structures, improvements and obstructions,
if any, that the applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or
relocate;
         (i)   A description of the impact of construction, reconstruction,
installation, maintenance or repair of a micro wireless facility on trees in or
adjacent to the public right-of-way, together with a landscape plan for
protecting, trimming, removing, replacing and restoring any trees or areas
disturbed during construction;
         (j)   All applications shall be accompanied by the certification of a
state registered professional engineer that the drawings, plans and
specifications submitted with the application comply with applicable technical
codes, rules and regulations;
         (k)   All applications which involve a lane obstruction or work on,
in, under, across or along any public right-of-way shall be accompanied by a
traffic-control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that
will be employed, consistent with the Ohio Department of Transportation’s
Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices and other applicable ODOT
regulations, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property, and to
minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The city
may require the service provider to use and employ the city police force for
traffic control; and
         (l)   Such other and further information as may reasonably be
requested by the city.
      (3)   The city, by and through its Planning Commission, shall grant or
deny, in writing, a person’s application for consent to occupy or use the
public right-of-way within 60 days of the date on which the person filed the
application and all necessary information with the city.
         (a)   The city may withhold, deny or delay its consent to a person’s
application to occupy or use the public right-of-way based on the health,
safety and welfare of the city, and in accordance with city ordinances and
state law. These reasons may include, but not be limited to, those criteria set
forth in division (d) of this section.
         (b)   If the city denies a person’s application to occupy or use the
public right-of-way, the city shall provide its reasons in writing for denying
the application and shall provide any information that the person may
reasonably request necessary for the person to obtain the city’s consent to
occupy or use the public right-of-way.
      (4)   The city’s grant of consent for a person to occupy or use the
public right-of-way shall be in the form of a right-of-way occupancy
certificate which shall set forth the specific terms of the city’s consent for
such person to occupy or use the public right-of-way.
      (5)   Each person submitting an application for consent to occupy or use
the public right-of-way shall pay a fee in the amount of $250 per site and
assessed by the Building Commissioner to reimburse the city for its
administrative costs.
      (6)   The time periods set forth herein may be tolled:
         (a)   By mutual agreement between the person requesting consent and
the city;
         (b)   Where the city determines that the application is incomplete; or
         (c)   By the city in the event it has an extraordinary number of micro
wireless facilities contained in pending requests, in which case the city may
toll the 60-day period for a reasonable amount of time not exceeding an
additional 30 days.
      (7)   To toll the time period for incompleteness, the city shall provide
written notice to the person requesting consent not later than 30 days after
receiving the request, clearly and specifically delineating all missing
documents or information.
      (8)   The time period begins running again when the person makes a
supplemental submission in response to the city’s notice of incompleteness.
      (9)   If a supplemental submission is inadequate, the city shall notify
the person not later than ten days after receiving the supplemental submission
that the supplemental submission did not provide the information identified in
the original notice delineating missing documents or information. The time
period may be tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices under the
procedures identified in divisions (A) to (C) of this section.
   (D)   Micro wireless facility in right-of-way. No person shall occupy or use
the public right-of-way as a micro wireless facility without first obtaining
the approval of the proposal improvements by the Planning Commission. The
person proposing the improvements shall deliver to the Planning Commission 16
sets of the plans and specifications, including all necessary details, profiles
and cross-sections for each proposed improvement. The Planning Commission shall
approve or disapprove of such proposed improvements based on the following
standards:
      (1)   Compliance with all city codes and laws and other governmental laws
where required;
      (2)   The recommendation of all administrative departments in regard to
the improvements;
      (3)   The effect of the proposed improvements on the right-of-way and in
relation to all other improvements already installed or approved;
      (4)   The proposed location of the improvements in regard to such items
as sight lines, drainage, safety and visual interference;
      (5)   The size, bulk and location of the improvements in relation to
obtaining proper light, air, privacy, usable open space and compatibility with
surrounding uses;
      (6)   The proper screening or placement of the improvements to minimize
the negative effects of the improvements on the right-of-way or adjoining uses;
and
      (7)   Compliance with the United States Department of Transportation
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) and Ohio Department of
Transportation Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (OMUTCD).
   (E)   Service provider insurance. As a condition of the consent to occupy or
use the public right-of-way, a service provider must secure and maintain, at a
minimum, the following liability insurance policies insuring both the service
provider and the city as additional insured:
      (1)   Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less
than:
         (a)   One million dollars per occurrence, $2,000,000 annual aggregate,
for bodily injury or death to each person;
         (b)   One million dollars per occurrence, $2,000,000 annual aggregate,
for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
         (c)   One million dollars per occurrence, $2,000,000 annual aggregate,
for all other types of liability.
      (2)   The liability insurance policies required by this section shall be
maintained by the service provider throughout the period of time during which
the service provider is occupying or using the public right-of-way or is
engaged in the removal of its facilities. Each such insurance policy shall
contain the following endorsement:
         “It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be
canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after
receipt by the City, by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the
Building Commissioner of such intent to cancel or not to renew.”
      (3)   Within 30 days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no
event later than 15 days prior to said cancellation, the service provider shall
obtain and furnish to the city replacement insurance policies meeting the
requirements of this section;
      (4)   All insurance policies required herein shall be written with an
insurance company authorized to do business in the state in relation to the
specific type of insurance required; and
      (5)   Upon written application to, and written approval by, the Director
of Finance, a service provider may be self-insured to provide all of the same
coverages as listed in this section. As part of the review process, the
Director of Finance may require, and the self-insurance applicant shall
provide, any and all financial documents necessary to make a valid
determination of the applicant’s ability to meet the needs of this chapter.
   (F)   General indemnification. Each application for consent to occupy or use
the public right-of-way shall include, to the extent permitted by law, the
service provider’s express undertaking to defend, indemnify, and hold the city
and its elected and appointed officers, officials, employees, agents,
representatives, and subcontractors harmless from and against any and all
damages, losses, and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs
of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from, or alleged to arise out of
or result from the negligent, careless, or wrongful acts, omissions, failures
to act, or misconduct of the service provider or its affiliates, officers,
employees, agents, contractors, or subcontractors in the design, construction,
reconstruction, installation, operation, maintenance, repair, or removal of its
micro wireless facility, and in providing or offering services over the micro
wireless facility, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed, or
prohibited by this chapter. Reconstruction, installation, operation,
maintenance, repair or removal of its micro wireless facility, and in providing
or offering services over the micro wireless facility, whether such acts or
omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 875.02) (Ord. 2018-14, passed 7-10-2018)
§ 115.03 GENERAL PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Public right-of-way route. Consent granted to a service provider to
occupy or use the public right-of-way under §
115.02 shall be limited to a grant to occupy or use the specific public right-
of-way and defined portions thereof, including the specific micro wireless
facility and location along the public right-of-way, as approved by the city.
   (B)   Nonexclusive consent to occupy the public right-of-way. No consent
granted under §
115.02 shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to
occupy or use the public right-of-way of the city, other than as specifically
provided in said consent.
   (C)   Rights permitted. No consent granted under §
115.02 shall convey any right, title or interest in the public right-of-way,
but shall be deemed a consent only to occupy or use the public right-of-way for
the limited purposes granted by the consent. Further, no consent shall be
construed as any warranty of title.
   (D)   Height. A micro wireless facility may be attached to a wireless
support structure where the increased height would be not more than ten feet or
the overall resulting height would be not more than 50 feet.
   (E)   Maximum size. The micro wireless facility must conform to the size
limitations as defined for a SMALL CELL FACILITY in §
115.01.
   (F)   Color. The micro wireless facilities shall be a color or colors that
are consistent with or most blends into the wireless support structure on which
they are installed, unless a different color is needed for public safety or
service reliability reasons.
   (G)   Wiring and cabling. Wires and cables connecting the micro wireless
facility shall be installed in accordance with the version of the National
Electrical Code adopted by the city and in force at the time of installation.
In no event shall wiring and cabling serving the micro wireless facility
interfere with any wiring or cabling installed by a cable television or video
service operator, electric utility, telephone utility or other utility.
   (H)   Guy wires restricted. Guy wires and similar support structures may not
be used as part of the installation of any micro wireless facility, unless the
micro wireless facility is proposed to be attached to an existing utility pole
that incorporated guy wires prior to the date of the request for consent.
   (I)   Grounding. The micro wireless facility, including any ground-mounted
equipment, shall be grounded in accordance with the requirements of the most
current edition of the National Electrical Code adopted by the city regarding
grounding of wireless facilities.
   (J)   Signage. Other than warning or notification signs required by federal
law, or identification and location markings required by the city, a micro
wireless facility shall not have signs installed thereon.
   (K)   Maintenance of micro wireless facility. Each service provider shall
maintain its micro wireless facility in good and safe condition and in a manner
that complies with all applicable federal, state and local requirements.
   (L)   Safety procedures. A service provider or other person acting on its
behalf shall use suitable barricades, flags, flagpersons, lights, flares and
other measures as necessary and in accordance with applicable state and local
requirements for the safety of all members of the public, and to prevent injury
or damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or
affecting such public right-of-way or property.
   (M)   Interference with the public right-of-ways. No service provider may
locate or maintain its micro wireless facility so as to unreasonably interfere
with the use of the public right-of-way in the city, by the general public or
by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public right-
of-way. All such micro wireless facilities shall be moved by the service
provider, temporarily or permanently, as determined by the Building
Commissioner when necessary to protect the public, comply with the provisions
of this chapter, or otherwise comply with local, state or federal laws. The
expense or cost to move said micro wireless facility shall be the
responsibility of the service provider.
   (N)   Damage to public and private property. No service provider nor any
person acting on the service provider’s behalf shall take any action or permit
any action to be done which may impair or damage any city property, public
right-of-way, or other public or private property located in, on or adjacent
thereto.
   (O)   Restoration of public right-of-way, other ways and city property.
      (1)   When a service provider, or any person acting on its behalf, does
any work in or affecting any public right-of-way or city property, it shall,
after the work is completed and at its own expense, promptly remove any
obstructions therefrom and restore such ways or property, within ten to 30
days, at the Building Commissioner’s discretion, to as good a condition as
existed before the work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the city.
      (2)   If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete
restoration required by this section, the service provider shall temporarily
restore the affected ways or property as directed by the Building Commissioner.
Such temporary restoration shall be at the service provider’s sole expense and
the service provider shall promptly undertake and complete the required
permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent
such permanent restoration.
   (P)   Damage to service provider’s micro wireless facility. Unless directly
and proximately caused by the willful, intentional or malicious acts of the
city, the city shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of any micro
wireless facility in the public right-of-way of the city as a result of or in
connection with, but not limited to, any public works, public improvements,
construction, excavation, grading, tilling, salting, snow removal, or work of
any kind in the public right-of-way by or on behalf of the city.
   (Q)   Duty to provide information. Within ten days of a written request from
the city, each service provider shall furnish the city with documentation
sufficient to show that the service provider has complied with all requirements
of this chapter.
   (R)   Assignments or transfers of consent. Consent to occupy or use the
public right-of-way may be, directly or indirectly, transferred, assigned or
disposed of by sale, lease, merger, consolidation or other act of the service
provider, by operation of law or otherwise, without consent of the city, so
long as:
      (1)   The city is notified of the proposed transfer on or before the date
of transfer; and
      (2)   The transferee shall fully comply with this chapter within 60 days
of the transfer, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   All information required by the application for consent to
occupy or use the public right-of-way pursuant to §
115.02; and
         (b)   Any other information reasonably required by the city.
   (S)   Revocation of consent. Consent granted by the city to occupy or use
the public right-of-way of the city may be revoked for any one of the following
reasons:
      (1)   Construction, reconstruction, installation, location, operation or
excavation at an unauthorized location;
      (2)   Construction, reconstruction, installation, location, operation or
excavation in violation of city safety and/or construction requirements;
      (3)   Material misrepresentation or lack of candor by or on behalf of a
service provider in any permit application or registration required by the
city;
      (4)   Abandonment of micro wireless facility in the public right-of-way;
      (5)   Failure to relocate or remove a micro wireless facility or failure
to restore the public right-of-way, as required by this chapter;
      (6)   Insolvency or bankruptcy of the service provider;
      (7)   The micro wireless facility is in a state of disrepair which
creates a public nuisance;
      (8)   Violation of material provisions of this chapter; or
      (9)   Construction under the consent is not commenced within two years of
the consent approval date.
   (T)   Notice and duty to cure. In the event that the Building Commissioner
believes that grounds exist for revocation of consent to occupy or use the
public right-of-way or construction permit, the Building Commissioner shall
give the service provider written notice of the apparent violation or
noncompliance, providing a short and concise statement of the nature and
general facts of the violation or noncompliance, and providing the service
provider a reasonable period of time not exceeding 30 days to furnish evidence:
      (1)   That corrective action has been, or is being actively and
expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance;
      (2)   That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance; and/or
      (3)   That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or
sanction less than revocation.
(Prior Code, § 875.03) (Ord. 2018-14, passed 7-10-2018)
§ 115.04 LOCATION, RELOCATION AND REMOVAL OF MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY.
   (A)   Excess capacity. To reduce excavation and congestion in the public
right-of-way, it is the city’s goal to encourage service providers to share
occupancy of utility poles, as well as to construct, whenever possible, excess
available space on utility poles for occupancy of future micro wireless
facilities in the public right-of-way. The service provider may charge a
reasonable market lease rate to other providers for occupancy of the additional
utility pole space as reimbursement.
   (B)   Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 30 days following written
notice from the city, a service provider shall, at its own expense, temporarily
or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any micro
wireless facility in the public right-of-way whenever the city shall have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably
necessary for:
      (1)   The construction, reconstruction, repair, maintenance or
installation of any city or other public improvement in or upon the public
right-of-way; or
      (2)   The operations of the city or other governmental entity in or upon
the public right-of-way.
   (C)   Removal of unauthorized micro wireless facility. Within 30 days
following written notice from the city, any service provider or other person
that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized micro wireless facility or
related appurtenances in the public right-of-way shall, at its own expense,
remove the micro wireless facility or appurtenances from the public right-of-
way of the city. After the 30 days have expired, the city may remove the micro
wireless facility or appurtenances from the public right-of-way at the other
party’s expense. A micro wireless facility is unauthorized and subject to
removal in the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon revocation of the service provider’s consent to occupy or use
the public right-of-way;
      (2)   Upon abandonment of a micro wireless facility in the public right-
of-way of the city;
      (3)   If the micro wireless facility was constructed, reconstructed,
installed, operated, located or maintained without the consent to do so, except
as otherwise provided by this chapter;
      (4)   If the micro wireless facility was constructed, reconstructed,
installed, operated, located or maintained, or any excavation of a public
right-of-way was performed, without prior issuance of a required construction
permit, except as otherwise provided by this chapter; or
      (5)   If the micro wireless facility was constructed, reconstructed,
installed, operated, located or maintained, or any excavation of a public
right-of-way was performed, at a location not permitted pursuant to the city’s
consent to occupy or use the public right-of-way or construction permit.
   (D)   Emergency removal or relocation of micro wireless facility. The city
retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities, or stop work on
any construction, reconstruction and privilege to cut or move any facilities,
or stop work on any construction, reconstruction, installation, operation or
excavation, located in the public right-of-way of the city, as the city may
determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any need to
protect the public health, safety or welfare.
(Prior Code, § 875.04) (Ord. 2018-14, passed 7-10-2018)
§ 115.05 NOTICE OF WORK, ROUTINE MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY WORK.
   (A)   Notice of work. Except in case of emergency, as provided in division
(C) of this section, or for routine maintenance as provided in division (B) of
this section, no service provider, or any person acting on the service
provider’s behalf, shall commence any work in the public right-of-way of the
city without 24 hours advance notice to the city, obtaining consent to occupy
or use the public right-of-way pursuant to §
115.02, if required.
   (B)   Routine maintenance and new service orders.
      (1)   A service provider need not obtain a construction permit or notify
the city prior to or after commencing any routine maintenance or new service
orders that do not include the construction in, or excavation or lane
obstruction of, a public right-of-way or closing of a public street.
      (2)   For routine maintenance and new service orders that require the
service provider to cause a lane obstruction in a public street for more than
two hours, the service provider shall provide the city with 48 hours advance
written notice prior to commencing the routine maintenance or new service
order, and shall submit a drawing showing the planned traffic maintenance and
indicating how the service provider will meet all requirements of ODOT’s Manual
of Traffic Control Devices or other applicable governmental regulations.
   (C)   Emergency work. In the event of the need for any unexpected repair or
emergency work, a service provider may commence such emergency response work as
required under the circumstances; provided that for emergency work that
requires excavation of a public right-of-way or lane obstruction or closing of
a public street, the service provider shall notify the city as promptly as
possible before commencing such emergency work, or as soon as possible
thereafter if advance notice is not practicable. When notice is required, the
service provider shall notify the Building Commissioner.
(Prior Code, § 875.05) (Ord. 2018-14, passed 7-10-2018)
§ 115.06 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Other city ordinances. In the event that any provision of this chapter
conflicts with any other provision of the city’s codified ordinances or other
ordinances or resolutions of the city, the more restrictive provision shall
govern.
   (B)   Preemption by state and federal law. Except as may be pre-empted by
applicable state or federal law, rates, regulations and orders, this chapter
shall apply and be controlling over each service provider engaged in the
business of transmitting, supplying or furnishing of services originating,
passing through or terminating in the city.
   (C)   Exemption for city-owned or operated facilities. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to apply the provisions of this chapter to
facilities, facility, micro wireless facility or private facility owned or
operated by the city or any of its operations.
   (D)   Severability. If any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase or
other portion of this chapter, or its application to any person, is, for any
reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part by any court or agency of
competent jurisdiction, said decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.
(Prior Code, § 875.06) (Ord. 2018-14, passed 7-10-2018)
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Penalties. Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A separate and distinct
offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs or
continues.
   (B)   Civil violations and forfeiture.
      (1)   In lieu of the criminal penalties set forth above, the Building
Commissioner may make an initial finding of a civil violation by the service
provider for violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   The civil forfeiture shall be in an amount payable to the city of
not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each offense. A separate and distinct
offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs or
continues.
      (3)   An action for civil forfeiture shall be commenced by providing the
service provider with written notice describing in reasonable detail the
service provider’s alleged violation of one or more provisions of this chapter
and the amount of the penalty that will be assessed against it.
      (4)   The service provider shall have 15 days subsequent to receipt of
the notice of violation in which to correct the violation before the city may
assess penalties against the service provider. The time in which to cure the
violation may be extended by the city if, in the city’s sole discretion, it
determines that additional time is required to correct the violation; provided
that the service provider commences corrective action within seven days of the
notice of violation and proceeds with reasonable diligence.
      (5)   The service provider may dispute the alleged violation by providing
the city with written notice within five days of receipt of the notice of
violation, setting forth in reasonable detail the reasons for its dispute. The
city shall set a date for hearing of the alleged violation before the Board of
Building Code Appeals no sooner than 30 days and not later than 60 days from
receipt of the notice of dispute.
      (6)   The city shall issue a written decision on the service provider’s
alleged violation within 30 days after the hearing, which decision shall be
final and subject to the administrative appeal procedures under state law. If
the city finds after hearing that the alleged violation(s) did occur, the
penalty shall be assessed starting 15 days from the notice of violation and
shall continue until the violation has been corrected.
   (C)   Other remedies. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting
any administrative or judicial remedies that the city may have, at law or in
equity, for enforcement of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 875.99) (Ord. 2018-14, passed 7-10-2018)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
      
133.   SEX OFFENSES
      
134.   GAMBLING OFFENSES
      
135.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
      
136.   OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
      
137.   WEAPONS CONTROL
      
138.   DRUG OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
130.01   Application of Title XIII
   
130.02   Definitions
   
130.03   Classification of offenses
   
130.04   Common law offenses abrogated
   
130.05   Rules of construction
   
130.06   Limitation of criminal prosecutions
   
130.07   Requirements for criminal liability; voluntary intoxication
   
130.08   Culpable mental states
   
130.09   Organizational criminal liability
   
130.10   Personal accountability for organizational conduct
   
130.11   Attempt
   
130.12   Complicity
   
130.13   Presumption of innocence; proof of offense; affirmative defense
   
130.14   Battered woman syndrome
   
130.15   Delinquency adjudications deemed convictions
   
130.16   Criminal law jurisdiction
   
130.17   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police
Department
   
130.18   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor
   
130.19   Multiple sentences
   
130.20   Apprehension, detention, or arrest of persons on bond
   
130.21   Self defense: limitations on duty to retreat prior to using force
 
   
130.99   Penalty for Title XIII
Statutory reference:
   Mayor’s Court generally, see R.C. Chapter 1905
   Municipal Court generally, see R.C. Chapter 1901
   Trials, Magistrate Courts, see R.C. Chapter 2938
§ 130.01 APPLICATION OF TITLE XIII.
   (A)   Title XIII of this code of ordinances embodies and prescribes
penalties for offenses against the municipality not classifiable in previous
titles and chapters. The word “misdemeanors”, as used in this title, is not
exhaustive and does not imply that offenses found elsewhere in this code of
ordinances are not also misdemeanors and punishable as such.
   (B)   Each act or omission for which a fine, imprisonment, or both is
provided under this Title or elsewhere in this code, or each act or omission
which is declared a violation of this code, is unlawful and is hereby made a
misdemeanor. Upon conviction, the penalty or penalties so provided shall be
imposed by the court.
§ 130.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRABAND. Any property that is illegal for a person to acquire or possess
under a statute, ordinance, or rule, or that a trier of fact lawfully
determines to be illegal to possess by reason of the property’s involvement in
an offense. The term includes but is not limited to all of the following:
      (1)   Any controlled substance, as defined in R.C. § 3719.01, or any
device or paraphernalia related thereto;
      (2)   Any unlawful gambling device or paraphernalia;
      (3)   Any dangerous ordnance or obscene material.
   DANGEROUS OFFENDER. A person who has committed an offense, whose history,
character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she will be a
danger to others, and whose conduct has been characterized by a pattern of
repetitive, compulsive or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences.
   DEADLY FORCE. Any force that carries a substantial risk that it will
proximately result in the death of any person.
   FORCE. Any violence, compulsion, or constraint physically exerted by any
means upon or against a person or thing.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any of the following:
      (1)   A Sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police officer of a township
or joint police district, Marshal, deputy marshal, municipal police officer,
member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under
R.C. § 3735.31(D) or state highway patrol trooper.
      (2)   An officer, agent, or employee of the state or any of its agencies,
instrumentalities, or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, a duty to
conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the
authority to arrest violators is conferred, within the limits of such statutory
duty and authority.
      (3)   The Mayor, in a capacity as chief conservator of the peace within
the municipality.
      (4)   A member of an auxiliary police force organized by the county,
township, or municipal law enforcement authorities, within the scope of the
member’s appointment or commission.
      (5)   A person lawfully called pursuant to R.C. § 311.07 to aid a sheriff
in keeping the peace, for the purposes and during the time when the person is
called.
      (6)   A person appointed by a Mayor pursuant to R.C.§ 737.10 as a special
patrolling officer during a riot or emergency, for the purposes and during the
time when the person is appointed.
      (7)   A member of the organized militia of this state or the armed forces
of the United States, lawfully called to duty to aid civil authorities in
keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence.
      (8)   A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, secret
service officer, or municipal prosecutor.
      (9)   A veterans’ home police officer appointed under R.C. § 5907.02.
      (10)   A member of a police force employed by a regional transit
authority under R.C. § 306.35(Y).
      (11)   A special police officer employed by a port authority under R.C. §
4582.04 or 4582.28.
      (12)   The House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms if the House of
Representatives Sergeant at Arms has arrest authority pursuant to R.C. §
101.311(E)(1) and an Assistant House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms.
      (13)   The Senate Sergeant at Arms and an Assistant Senate Sergeant at
Arms;
      (14)   A special police officer employed by a municipal corporation at a
municipal airport, or other municipal air navigation facility, that has
scheduled operations, as defined in 14 C.F.R. § 119.3, as amended, and that is
required to be under a security program and is governed by aviation security
rules of the Transportation Security Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation as provided in 49 C.F.R. parts 1542 and 1544, as
amended.
   NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF INSANITY. A person is “not guilty by reason of
insanity” relative to a charge of an offense only if the person proves, in the
manner specified in R.C. § 2901.05, that at the time of the commission of the
offense, he or she did not know, as a result of a severe mental disease or
defect, the wrongfulness of his or her acts.
   OFFENSE OF VIOLENCE.
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.11,
2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.15, 2903.18, 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, 2905.01,
2905.02, 2905.11, 2905.32, 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.05, 2909.02, 2909.03,
2909.24, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2917.01, 2917.02, 2917.03, 2917.31,
2917.321, 2919.25, 2921.03, 2921.04, 2921.34, or 2923.161, of division (A)(1)
of R.C. § 2903.34, of division (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of R.C. § 2911.12, or
of division (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3) or (B)(4) of R.C. § 2919.22, or felonious
sexual penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States, substantially equivalent to
any section, division or offense listed in division (1) of this definition;
      (3)   An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an existing or
former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or of the United
States, committed purposely or knowingly, and involving physical harm to
persons or a risk of serious physical harm to persons;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition;
      (5)   A violation of division (C) of R.C. § 959.131.
   PERSON.
      (1)   (a)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, as used in any
section contained in Title XIII of this code that sets forth a criminal
offense, the term includes all of the following:
            1.   An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership and association.
            2.   An unborn human who is viable.
         (b)   As used in any section contained in Title XIII of this code that
does not set forth a criminal offense, the term includes an individual,
corporation, business trust, estate, partnership and association.
         (c)   As used in division (1)(a)2. of this definition, “unborn human”
means an individual organism of the species Homo sapiens from fertilization
until live birth. “Viable” means the stage of development of a human fetus at
which there is a realistic probability of maintaining and nourishing of a life
outside the womb with or without temporary artificial life-sustaining support.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (1)(a) of this definition, in no case
shall the portion of the definition of the term “person” that is set forth in
division (1)(a)2. of this definition be applied or construed in any section
contained in Title XIII of this code that sets forth a criminal offense in any
of the following manners:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (2)(a) of this
definition, in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as
prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion
with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman
implied by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise
authorized by law to consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant
woman. An abortion that violates the conditions described in the immediately
preceding sentence may be punished as a violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02,
2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13,
2903.14, 2903.21 or 2903.22, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, as applicable. An abortion that does not violate the conditions
described in the second immediately preceding sentence but that does violate
R.C. § 2919.12, 2919.13(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of
such section, as applicable. Consent is sufficient under this division if it is
of the type otherwise adequate to permit medical treatment to the pregnant
woman, even if it does not comply with R.C. § 2919.12.
         (b)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
            1.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby;
            2.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying;
            3.   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who
dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human;
            4.   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human;
            5.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in
any other manner, an injury, illness, or other psychological illness or
condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human
that she is carrying.
   PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any injury, illness, or other physiological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
   PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any tangible or intangible damage to property
that, in any degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with its use or
enjoyment. The term does not include wear and tear occasioned by normal use.
   PRIVILEGE. An immunity, license, or right conferred by law, or bestowed by
express or implied grant, or arising out of status, position, office, or
relationship, or growing out of necessity.
   PROPERTY.
      (1)   Any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, and any
interest or license in that property. The term includes but is not limited to
cable television service, other telecommunications service, telecommunications
devices, information service, computers, data, computer software, financial
instruments associated with computers, other documents associated with
computers, or copies of the documents, whether in machine or human-readable
form, trade secrets, trademarks, copyrights, patents, and property protected by
a trademark, copyright or patent. “Financial instruments associated with
computers” include but are not limited to checks, drafts, warrants, money
orders, notes of indebtedness, certificates of deposit, letters of credit,
bills of credit or debit cards, financial transaction authorization mechanisms,
marketable securities, or any computer system representations of any of them.
      (2)   As used in this definition, “trade secret” has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 1333.61, and “telecommunications service” and “information service”
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (3)   As used in this definition and in the definition of “contraband” in
this section, “cable television service”, “computer”, “computer network”,
“computer software”, “computer system”, “data”, and “telecommunications device”
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   REPEAT OFFENDER. A person who has a history of persistent criminal activity
and whose character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she will
commit another offense. It is prima facie evidence that a person is a repeat
offender if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Having been convicted of one or more offenses of violence, as
defined in R.C. § 2901.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent offense of
violence;
      (2)   Having been convicted of one or more sexually oriented offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2950.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent sexually oriented
offense;
      (3)   Having been convicted of one or more theft offenses, as defined in
R.C. § 2913.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for one or more
of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent theft offense;
      (4)   Having been convicted of one or more felony drug abuse offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2925.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent felony drug abuse
offense;
      (5)   Having been convicted of two or more felonies, and having been
imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense, he or she commits a
subsequent offense;
      (6)   Having been convicted of three or more offenses of any type or
degree other than traffic offenses, alcoholic intoxication offenses, or minor
misdemeanors, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such
offense, he or she commits a subsequent offense.
   RISK. A significant possibility, as contrasted with a remote possibility,
that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances may exist.
   SCHOOL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   SCHOOL ACTIVITY. Any activity held under the auspices of a board of
education of a city, local, exempted village, joint vocational, or cooperative
education school district; a governing authority of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314; a governing board of an educational
service center; or the governing body of a nonpublic school for which the
Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards under R.C. §
3301.07.
   SCHOOL BUILDING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   SCHOOL PREMISES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   SCHOOL SAFETY ZONE. Consists of a school, school building, school premises,
school activity, and school bus.
   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would normally
require hospitalization or prolonged psychiatric treatment;
      (2)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
      (3)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent incapacity, whether
partial or total, or that involves some temporary, substantial incapacity;
      (4)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent disfigurement, or
that involves some temporary, serious disfigurement;
      (5)   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of such duration as to
result in substantial suffering, or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.
   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any physical harm to property that does
either of the following:
      (1)   Results in substantial loss to the value of the property, or
requires a substantial amount of time, effort, or money to repair or replace;
      (2)   Temporarily prevents the use or enjoyment of the property, or
substantially interferes with its use or enjoyment for an extended period of
time.
   SUBSTANTIAL RISK. A strong possibility, as contrasted with a remote or
significant possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain
circumstances may exist.
(R.C. §§ 2901.01, 2935.36(E)) (Prior Code, §§ 606.01, 698.01)
§ 130.03 CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES.
   As used in this Title:
   (A)   Offenses include misdemeanors of the first, second, third, and fourth
degree, minor misdemeanors, and offenses not specifically classified.
   (B)   Regardless of the penalty that may be imposed, any offense
specifically classified as a misdemeanor is a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Any offense not specifically classified is a misdemeanor if
imprisonment for not more than one year may be imposed as a penalty.
   (D)   Any offense not specifically classified is a minor misdemeanor if the
only penalty that may be imposed is one of the following:
      (1)   For an offense committed prior to January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding $100;
      (2)   For an offense committed on or after January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding $150, community service under R.C. § 2929.27(D), or a financial
sanction other than a fine under R.C. § 2929.28.
(R.C. § 2901.02) (Prior Code, § 606.03)
§ 130.04 COMMON LAW OFFENSES ABROGATED.
   (A)   No conduct constitutes a criminal offense against the municipality
unless it is defined as an offense in this code.
   (B)   An offense is defined when one or more sections of this code state a
positive prohibition or enjoin a specific duty, and provide a penalty for
violation of such prohibition or failure to meet such duty.
   (C)   This section does not affect the power of a court to punish for
contempt or to employ any sanction authorized by law to enforce an order, civil
judgment or decree.
(R.C. § 2901.03) (Prior Code, § 606.04)
§ 130.05 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C) or (D) of this section,
sections of this code defining offenses or penalties shall be strictly
construed against the municipality and liberally construed in favor of the
accused.
   (B)   Rules of criminal procedure and sections of this code providing for
criminal procedure shall be construed so as to effect the fair, impartial,
speedy, and sure administration of justice.
   (C)   Any provision of a section of this code that refers to a previous
conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of a section of this code, the
Ohio Revised Code or a division of a section of this code or the Ohio Revised
Code shall be construed to also refer to a previous conviction of or plea of
guilty to a substantially equivalent offense under an existing or former law of
this municipality, state, another state, or the United States or under an
existing or former municipal ordinance.
   (D)   Any provision of this code that refers to a section, or to a division
of a section, of this code that defines or specifies a criminal offense shall
be construed to also refer to an existing or former law of this state, another
state, or the United States, to an existing or former municipal ordinance, or
to an existing or former division of any such existing or former law or
ordinance that defines or specifies, or that defined or specified, a
substantially equivalent offense.
(R.C. § 2901.04) (Prior Code, § 606.05)
§ 130.06 LIMITATION OF CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS.
   (A)   (1)    Except as provided in division (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(5),
or (A)(6) of this section or as otherwise provided in this section, a
prosecution shall be barred unless it is commenced within the following periods
after an offense is committed:
         (a)   For a felony, six years;
         (b)   For a misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor, two years;
         (c)   For a minor misdemeanor, six months.
      (2)   There is no period of limitation for the prosecution of a violation
of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02 or for the prosecution of a conspiracy to
commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a violation of R.C. §
2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (B) through (J) of this
section, a prosecution of any of the following offenses shall be barred unless
it is commenced within 20 years after the offense is committed:
         (a)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.03, 2903.04, 2905.01, 2905.32,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.21, 2909.02, 2909.22, 2909.23, 2909.24, 2909.26,
2909.27, 2909.28, 2909.29, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12, or 2917.02, a
violation of R.C. § 2903.11 or 2903.12 if the victim is a peace officer, a
violation of R.C. § 2903.13 that is a felony, or a violation of former R.C. §
2907.12.
         (b)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing a violation set forth in division (A)(3)(a) of this section.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (D) to (L) of this
section, a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 or a
conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a
violation of either section shall be barred unless it is commenced within 25
years after the offense is committed.
      (5)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (A)(5)(b) and (E)
to (I) of this section, a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2907.13 shall be
barred unless it is commenced within five years after the offense is committed.
         (b)   Prosecution that would otherwise be barred under division (A)(5)
(a) of this section may be commenced within five years after the date of the
discovery of the offense by either an aggrieved person or the aggrieved
person’s legal representative who is not a party to the offense.
         (c)   As used in division (A)(5)(b) of this section, “aggrieved
person” includes any of the following individuals with regard to a violation of
R.C. § 2907.13:
            1.   A patient who was the victim of the violation;
            2.   The spouse or surviving spouse of a patient who was the victim
of the violation;
            3.   Any child born as a result of the violation.
      (6)   A prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2151.421(A)(1) or (A)(4),
which is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, or a misdemeanor of the first
degree under circumstances specified in R.C. § 2151.99, is barred unless it is
commenced within four years after the violation is committed.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) of this section,
if the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1) or (A)(3) of this
section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an offense of which an
element is fraud or breach of fiduciary duty within one year after discovery of
the offense either by an aggrieved person or by the aggrieved person’s legal
representative who is not a party to the offense.
      (2)   If the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1) or (A)(3)
of this section has expired, prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2913.49
shall be commenced within five years after discovery of the offense either by
an aggrieved person or the aggrieved person’s legal representative who is not a
party to the offense.
   (C)   (1)   If the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1) or (A)
(3) of this section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for the
following offenses during the following specified periods of time:
         (a)   For an offense involving misconduct in office by a public
servant at any time while the accused remains a public servant, or within two
years thereafter;
         (b)   For an offense by a person who is not a public servant but whose
offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of a public servant, at
any time while that public servant remains a public servant, or within two
years thereafter.
      (2)   As used in this division:
         OFFENSE IS DIRECTLY RELATED TO THE MISCONDUCT IN OFFICE OF A PUBLIC
SERVANT. The phrase includes but is not limited to a violation of R.C. §
101.71, 101.91, 121.61 or 2921.13, 102.03(F) or (H), 2921.02(A), 2921.43(A) or
(B), or 3517.13(F) or (G), that is directly related to an offense involving
misconduct in office of a public servant, or a violation of any municipal
ordinance substantially equivalent to those Ohio Revised Code sections listed
in this division (C)(2).
         PUBLIC SERVANT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
   (D)   (1)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal
investigation of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 is
determined to match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and if
the time of the determination is later than 25 years after the offense is
committed, prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be
commenced within five years after the determination is complete.
      (2)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal investigation
of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 is determined to
match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and if the time of
the determination is within 25 years after the offense is committed,
prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be commenced
within the longer of 25 years after the offense is committed or five years
after the determination is complete.
      (3)   As used in this division, DNA RECORD has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 109.573.
   (E)   An offense is committed when every element of the offense occurs. In
the case of an offense of which an element is a continuing course of conduct,
the period of limitation does not begin to run until such course of conduct or
the accused’s accountability for it terminates, whichever occurs first.
   (F)   A prosecution is commenced on the date an indictment is returned or an
information filed, or on the date a lawful arrest without a warrant is made, or
on the date a warrant, summons, citation, or other process is issued, whichever
occurs first. A prosecution is not commenced by the return of an indictment or
the filing of an information unless reasonable diligence is exercised to issue
and execute process on the same. A prosecution is not commenced upon issuance
of a warrant, summons, citation, or other process unless reasonable diligence
is exercised to execute the same.
   (G)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the corpus
delicti remains undiscovered.
   (H)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the
accused purposely avoids prosecution. Proof that the accused departed this
municipality or conceals the accused’s identity or whereabouts is prima facie
evidence of the accused’s purpose to avoid prosecution.
   (I)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time a prosecution
against the accused based on the same conduct is pending in this state, even
though the indictment, information, or process that commenced the prosecution
is quashed or the proceedings on the indictment, information, or process are
set aside or reversed on appeal.
   (J)   The period of limitation for a violation of this Title XIII or Title
XXIX of the Ohio Revised Code that involves a physical or mental wound, injury,
disability, or condition of a nature that reasonably indicates abuse or neglect
of a child under 18 years of age or of a child with a developmental disability
or physical impairment under 21 years of age shall not begin to run until
either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The victim of the offense reaches the age of majority.
      (2)   A public children services agency, or a municipal or county peace
officer that is not the parent or guardian of the child, in the county in which
the child resides or in which the abuse or neglect is occurring or has occurred
has been notified that abuse or neglect is known, suspected, or believed to
have occurred.
   (K)   As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2935.01.
   (L)   (1)   The amendments to divisions (A) and (D) of this section that
took effect on July 16, 2015, apply to a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03
committed on and after July 16, 2015, and apply to a violation of either of
those sections committed prior to July 16, 2015, if prosecution for that
violation was not barred under this section as it existed on July 16, 2015.
      (2)   The amendment to division (A)(2) of this section that took effect
on April 4, 2023, applies to a conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or
complicity in committing a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02 if the
conspiracy, attempt, or complicity is committed on or after April 4, 2023, and
applies to a conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing a violation of either of those sections if the conspiracy, attempt,
or complicity was committed prior to April 4, 2023, and prosecution for that
conspiracy, attempt, or complicity was not barred under this section as it
existed on the day prior to April 4, 2023.
(R.C. § 2901.13) (Prior Code, § 606.06)
Statutory reference:
   Limitation for income tax violations, see R.C. § 718.12
§ 130.07 REQUIREMENTS FOR CRIMINAL LIABILITY; VOLUNTARY INTOXICATION.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, a person is not
guilty of an offense unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person’s liability is based on conduct that includes either a
voluntary act, or an omission to perform an act or duty that the person is
capable of performing;
      (2)   The person has the requisite degree of culpability for each element
as to which a culpable mental state is specified by the language defining the
offense.
   (B)   When the language defining an offense does not specify any degree of
culpability, and plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict criminal
liability for the conduct described in the section, then culpability is not
required for a person to be guilty of the offense. The fact that one division
of a section plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict liability for an
offense defined in that division does not by itself plainly indicate a purpose
to impose strict criminal liability for an offense defined in other divisions
of the section that do not specify a degree of culpability.
   (C)   (1)   When language defining an element of an offense that is related
to knowledge or intent or to which mens rea could fairly be applied neither
specifies culpability nor plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict
liability, the element of the offense is established only if a person acts
recklessly.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to offenses defined
in R.C. Title XLV.
      (3)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not relieve the prosecution of
the burden of proving the culpable mental state required by any definition
incorporated into the offense.
   (D)   Voluntary intoxication may not be taken into consideration in
determining the existence of a mental state that is an element of a criminal
offense. Voluntary intoxication does not relieve a person of a duty to act if
failure to act constitutes a criminal offense. Evidence that a person was
voluntarily intoxicated may be admissible to show whether or not the person was
physically capable of performing the act with which the person is charged.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      CULPABILITY. Means purpose, knowledge, recklessness, or negligence, as
defined in R.C. § 2901.22.
      INTOXICATION. Includes but is not limited to intoxication resulting from
the ingestion of alcohol, a drug, or alcohol and a drug.
      INVOLUNTARY ACTS. Means reflexes, convulsions, body movements during
unconsciousness or sleep, and body movements that are not otherwise a product
of the actor’s volition are involuntary acts.
      POSSESSION. Means a voluntary act if the possessor knowingly procured or
received the thing possessed, or was aware of the possessor’s control of the
thing possessed for a sufficient time to have ended possession.
(R.C. § 2901.21) (Prior Code, § 606.07)
§ 130.08 CULPABLE MENTAL STATES.
   (A)   A person acts purposely when it is the person’s specific intention to
cause a certain result, or, when the gist of the offense is a prohibition
against conduct of a certain nature, regardless of what the offender intends to
accomplish thereby, it is the offender’s specific intention to engage in
conduct of that nature.
   (B)   A person acts knowingly, regardless of purpose, when the person is
aware that the person’s conduct will probably cause a certain result or will
probably be of a certain nature. A person has knowledge of circumstances when
the person is aware that such circumstances probably exist. When knowledge of
the existence of a particular fact is an element of an offense, such knowledge
is established if a person subjectively believes that there is a high
probability of its existence and fails to make inquiry or acts with a conscious
purpose to avoid learning the fact.
   (C)   A person acts recklessly when, with heedless indifference to the
consequences, the person disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that
the person’s conduct is likely to cause a certain result or is likely to be of
a certain nature. A person is reckless with respect to circumstances when, with
heedless indifference to the consequences, the person disregards a substantial
and unjustifiable risk that such circumstances are likely to exist.
   (D)   A person acts negligently when, because of a substantial lapse from
due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that the person’s
conduct may cause a certain result or may be of a certain nature. A person is
negligent with respect to circumstances when, because of a substantial lapse
from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that such
circumstances may exist.
   (E)   When the section defining an offense provides that negligence suffices
to establish an element thereof, then recklessness, knowledge, or purpose is
also sufficient culpability for such element. When recklessness suffices to
establish an element of an offense, then knowledge or purpose is also
sufficient culpability for such element. When knowledge suffices to establish
an element of an offense, then purpose is also sufficient culpability for such
element.
(R.C. § 2901.22) (Prior Code, § 606.02)
§ 130.09 ORGANIZATIONAL CRIMINAL LIABILITY.
   (A)   An organization may be convicted of an offense under any of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   The offense is a minor misdemeanor committed by an officer, agent,
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or employment, except that if the
section defining the offense designates the officers, agents, or employees for
whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which
it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (2)   A purpose to impose organizational liability plainly appears in the
section defining the offense, and the offense is committed by an officer,
agent, or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the
scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or employment, except
that if the section defining the offense designates the officers, agents, or
employees for whose conduct the organization is accountable or the
circumstances under which it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (3)   The offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty
imposed by law on the organization.
      (4)   If, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for the
commission of the offense, its commission was authorized, requested, commanded,
tolerated, or performed by the board of directors, trustees, partners, or by a
high managerial officer, agent, or employee acting in behalf of the
organization and within the scope of such a board’s or person’s office or
employment.
   (B)   If strict liability is imposed for the commission of an offense, a
purpose to impose organizational liability shall be presumed, unless the
contrary plainly appears.
   (C)   In a prosecution of an organization for an offense other than one for
which strict liability is imposed, it is a defense that the high managerial
officer, agent, or employee having supervisory responsibility over the subject
matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent its commission. This
defense is not available if it plainly appears inconsistent with the purpose of
the section defining the offense.
   (D)   As used in this section, ORGANIZATION means a corporation for profit
or not for profit, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated nonprofit association, estate, trust, or other commercial or
legal entity. The term does not include an entity organized as or by a
governmental agency for the execution of a governmental program.
(R.C. § 2901.23) (Prior Code, § 606.08)
§ 130.10 PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY FOR ORGANIZATIONAL CONDUCT.
   (A)   An officer, agent, or employee of an organization, as defined in R.C.
§ 2901.23, may be prosecuted for an offense committed by such organization, if
he or she acts with the kind of culpability required for the commission of the
offense, and any of the following apply:
      (1)   In the name of the organization or in its behalf, he or she engages
in conduct constituting the offense, or causes another to engage in such
conduct, or tolerates such conduct when it is of a type for which he or she has
direct responsibility;
      (2)   He or she has primary responsibility to discharge a duty imposed on
the organization by law, and such duty is not discharged.
   (B)   When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of this section, he
or she is subject to the same penalty as if he or she had acted in his or her
own behalf.
(R.C. § 2901.24) (Prior Code, § 606.09)
 
§ 130.11 ATTEMPT.
   (A)   No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or knowledge is
sufficient culpability for the commission of an offense, shall engage in
conduct that, if successful, would constitute or result in the offense.
   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in retrospect,
commission of the offense that was the object of the attempt was either
factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances, if that
offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the
actor believed them to be.
   (C)   No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense, of
complicity in the commission of an offense, or of conspiracy to commit an
offense, shall be convicted of an attempt to commit the same offense in
violation of this section.
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor abandoned his or her effort to commit the offense or otherwise prevented
its commission, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary
renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt to commit an
offense. An attempt to commit aggravated murder, murder, or an offense for
which the maximum penalty is imprisonment for life is a felony of the first
degree, to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to commit a
drug abuse offense for which the penalty is determined by the amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance involved in the drug abuse offense is
an offense of the same degree as the drug abuse offense attempted would be if
that drug abuse offense had been committed and had involved an amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance that is within the next lower range
of controlled substance amounts than was involved in the attempt. An attempt to
commit any other offense is an offense of the next lesser degree than the
offense attempted. In the case of an attempt to commit an offense other than a
violation of R.C. Chapter 3734 that is not specifically classified, an attempt
is a misdemeanor of the first degree if the offense attempted is a felony, and
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the offense attempted is a misdemeanor.
In the case of an attempt to commit a violation of any provision of R.C.
Chapter 3734, other than R.C. § 3734.18, that relates to hazardous wastes, an
attempt is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to
commit a minor misdemeanor, or to engage in conspiracy, is not an offense under
this section.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
(R.C. § 2923.02) (Prior Code, § 606.21)
Statutory reference:
   Conspiracy, see R.C. § 2923.01
   Solid and hazardous wastes, see R.C. Chapter 3734
§ 130.12 COMPLICITY.
   (A)   No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for the
commission of an offense, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Solicit or procure another to commit the offense;
      (2)   Aid or abet another in committing the offense;
      (3)   Conspire with another to commit the offense in violation of R.C. §
2923.01;
      (4)   Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the offense.
   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person with
whom the accused was in complicity has been convicted as a principal offender.
   (C)   No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section unless
an offense is actually committed, but a person may be convicted of complicity
in an attempt to commit an offense in violation of R.C. § 2923.02 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against the
defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with complicity in the
commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an attempt to commit an
offense, or an offense, the court shall charge the jury in accordance with R.C.
§ 2923.03(D).
   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that,
prior to the commission of or attempt to commit the offense, the actor
terminated his or her complicity, under circumstances manifesting a complete
and voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the
commission of an offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished as if he or she
were a principal offender. A charge of complicity may be stated in terms of
this section, or in terms of the principal offense.
(R.C. § 2923.03) (Prior Code, § 606.22)
Statutory reference:
   Conspiracy, see R.C. § 2923.01
§ 130.13 PRESUMPTION OF INNOCENCE; PROOF OF OFFENSE; AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.
   (A)   Every person accused of an offense is presumed innocent until proven
guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, and the burden of proof for all elements of
the offense is upon the prosecution. The burden of going forward with the
evidence of an affirmative defense, and the burden of proof by a preponderance
of the evidence, for an affirmative defense other than self-defense, defense of
another, or defense of the accused’s residence presented as described in
division (B)(1) of this section, is upon the accused.
   (B)   (1)   A person is allowed to act in self-defense, defense of another,
or defense of that person’s residence. If, at the trial of a person who is
accused of an offense that involved the person’s use of force against another,
there is evidence presented that tends to support that the accused person used
the force in self-defense, defense of another, or defense of that person’s
residence, the prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the
accused person did not use the force in self-defense, defense of another, or
defense of that person’s residence, as the case may be.
      (2)   Subject to division (B)(3) of this section, a person is presumed to
have acted in self-defense or defense of another when using defensive force
that is intended or likely to cause death or great bodily harm to another if
the person against whom the defensive force is used is in the process of
unlawfully and without privilege to do so entering, or has unlawfully and
without privilege to do so entered, the residence or vehicle occupied by the
person using the defensive force.
      (3)   The presumption set forth in division (B)(2) of this section does
not apply if either of the following is true:
         (a)   The person against whom the defensive force is used has a right
to be in, or is a lawful resident of, the residence or vehicle.
         (b)   The person who uses the defensive force uses it while in a
residence or vehicle and the person is unlawfully, and without privilege to be,
in that residence or vehicle.
      (4)   The presumption set forth in division (B)(2) of this section is a
rebuttable presumption and may be rebutted by a preponderance of the evidence,
provided that the prosecution’s burden of proof remains proof beyond a
reasonable doubt as described in divisions (A) and (B)(1) of this section.
   (C)   As part of its charge to the jury in a criminal case, the court shall
read the definitions of “reasonable doubt” and “proof beyond a reasonable
doubt”, contained in division (E) of this section.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE. An affirmative defense is either of the following:
         (a)   A defense expressly designated as affirmative;
         (b)   A defense involving an excuse or justification peculiarly within
the knowledge of the accused, on which the accused can fairly be required to
adduce supporting evidence.
      DWELLING. Means a building or conveyance of any kind that has a roof over
it and that is designed to be occupied by people lodging in the building or
conveyance at night, regardless of whether the building or conveyance is
temporary or permanent or is mobile or immobile. As used in this division, a
building or conveyance includes but is not limited to an attached porch, and a
building or conveyance with a roof over it includes but is not limited to a
tent.
      RESIDENCE. Means a dwelling in which a person resides either temporarily
or permanently or is visiting as a guest.
      VEHICLE. Means a conveyance of any kind, whether or not motorized, that
is designed to transport people or property.
   (E)   “Reasonable doubt” is present when the jurors, after they have
carefully considered and compared all the evidence, cannot say they are firmly
convinced of the truth of the charge. It is a doubt based on reasonable and
common sense. Reasonable doubt is not mere possible doubt, because everything
relating to human affairs or depending on moral evidence is open to some
possible or imaginary doubt. “Proof beyond a reasonable doubt” is proof of such
character that an ordinary person would be willing to rely and act upon it in
the most important of the person's own affairs.
(R.C. § 2901.05)
§ 130.14 BATTERED WOMAN SYNDROME.
   (A)   The municipality hereby declares that it recognizes both of the
following, in relation to the “battered woman syndrome”: that the syndrome
currently is a matter of commonly accepted scientific knowledge, and that the
subject matter and details of the syndrome are not within the general
understanding or experience of a person who is a member of the general populace
and are not within the field of common knowledge.
   (B)   If a person is charged with an offense involving the use of force
against another and the person, as a defense to the offense charged, raises the
affirmative defense of self defense, the person may introduce expert testimony
of the “battered woman syndrome” and expert testimony that the person suffered
from that syndrome as evidence to establish the requisite belief of an imminent
danger of death or great bodily harm that is necessary, as an element of the
affirmative defense, to justify the person’s use of force in question. The
introduction of any expert testimony under this division shall be in accordance
with the Ohio Rules of Evidence.
(R.C. § 2901.06)
§ 130.15 DELINQUENCY ADJUDICATIONS DEEMED CONVICTIONS.
   (A)   If a person is alleged to have committed an offense and if the person
previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or juvenile traffic offender
for a violation of a law or ordinance, except as provided in division (B) of
this section, the adjudication as a delinquent child or as a juvenile traffic
offender is a conviction for a violation of the law for purposes of determining
the offense with which the person should be charged and, if the person is
convicted of or pleads guilty to an offense, the sentence to be imposed upon
the person relative to the conviction or guilty plea.
   (B)   A previous adjudication of a person as a delinquent child or juvenile
traffic offender for a violation of a law or ordinance is not a conviction for
a violation of the law or ordinance for purposes of determining any of the
following:
      (1)   Whether the person is a repeat violent offender, as defined in R.C.
§ 2929.01, or whether the person should be sentenced as a repeat violent
offender under R.C. § 2929.14(B)(2) and R.C. § 2941.149;
      (2)    Whether the person is a violent career criminal as defined in R.C.
§ 2923.132, whether the person has committed unlawful use of a weapon by a
violent career criminal in violation of R.C. § 2923.132 or should be sentenced
for that offense under that section, or whether the person should be sentenced
under R.C. § 2929.14(K) as a violent career criminal who had a firearm on or
about the person’s person or under the person’s control while committing a
violent felony offense and displayed or brandished the firearm, indicated that
the offender possessed a firearm, or used the firearm to facilitate the
offense.
(R.C. § 2901.08)
§ 130.16 CRIMINAL LAW JURISDICTION.
   (A)   A person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality if any of the following occur:
      (1)   The person commits an offense under the laws of this municipality,
any element of which takes place in this municipality;
      (2)   While in this municipality, the person attempts to commit, or is
guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in another jurisdiction,
which offense is an offense under both the laws of this municipality and the
other jurisdiction, or, while in this municipality, the person conspires to
commit an offense in another jurisdiction, which offense is an offense under
both the laws of this municipality and the other jurisdiction, and a
substantial overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy is undertaken in this
municipality by the person or another person involved in the conspiracy,
subsequent to the person’s entrance into the conspiracy. In any case in which a
person attempts to commit, is guilty of complicity in the commission of, or
conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction as described in this
division, the person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality for the attempt, complicity, or conspiracy, and for any resulting
offense that is committed or completed in the other jurisdiction;
      (3)   While out of this municipality, the person conspires or attempts to
commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in this
municipality;
      (4)   While out of this municipality, the person omits to perform a legal
duty imposed by the laws of this municipality, which omission affects a
legitimate interest of the municipality in protecting, governing or regulating
any person, property, thing, transaction, or activity in this municipality;
      (5)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
retains property and subsequently brings any of the unlawfully taken or
retained property into this municipality;
      (6)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
entices another person and subsequently brings the other person into this
municipality;
      (7)   The person, by means of a computer, computer system, computer
network, telecommunication, telecommunications device, telecommunications
service, or information service, causes or knowingly permits any writing, data,
image or other telecommunication to be disseminated or transmitted into this
municipality in violation of the law of this state or municipality.
   (B)   In homicide, the element referred to in division (A)(1) of this
section includes the act that causes death, the physical contact that causes
death, the death itself, or any other element that is set forth in the offense
in question. If any part of the body of a homicide victim is found in this
municipality, the death is presumed to have occurred within this municipality.
   (C)   (1)   This municipality includes the land and water within its
boundaries and the air space above that land and water, with respect to which
this municipality has either exclusive or concurrent legislative jurisdiction.
Where the boundary between this municipality and another jurisdiction is
disputed, the disputed territory is conclusively presumed to be within this
municipality for purposes of this section.
      (2)   The courts of common pleas of Adams, Athens, Belmont, Brown,
Clermont, Columbiana, Gallia, Hamilton, Jefferson, Lawrence, Meigs, Monroe,
Scioto, and Washington counties have jurisdiction beyond the north or northwest
shore of the Ohio River extending to the opposite shore line, between the
extended boundary lines of any adjacent counties or adjacent state. Each of
those courts of common pleas has concurrent jurisdiction on the Ohio River with
any adjacent court of common pleas that borders on that river and with any
court of Kentucky or of West Virginia that borders on the Ohio River and that
has jurisdiction on the Ohio River under the law of Kentucky or the law of West
Virginia, whichever is applicable, or under federal law.
   (D)   When an offense is committed under the laws of this municipality, and
it appears beyond a reasonable doubt that the offense or any element of the
offense took place either in this municipality or in another jurisdiction or
jurisdictions, but it cannot reasonably be determined in which it took place,
the offense or element is conclusively presumed to have taken place in this
municipality for purposes of this section.
   (E)   When a person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in
this municipality for an offense committed or completed outside this
municipality, the person is subject to all specifications for that offense that
would be applicable if the offense had been committed within this municipality.
   (F)   Any act, conduct, or element that is a basis of a person being subject
under this section to criminal prosecution and punishment in this municipality
need not be committed personally by the person as long as it is committed by
another person who is in complicity or conspiracy with the person.
   (G)   This section shall be liberally construed, consistent with
constitutional limitations, to allow this municipality the broadest possible
jurisdiction over offenses and persons committing offenses in, or affecting,
this municipality.
   (H)   For purposes of division (A)(2) of this section, an overt act is
substantial when it is of a character that manifests a purpose on the part of
the actor that the object of the conspiracy should be completed.
   (I)   As used in this section, COMPUTER, COMPUTER SYSTEM, COMPUTER NETWORK,
INFORMATION SERVICE, TELECOMMUNICATION, TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE,
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE, DATA and WRITING have the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 2913.01.
(R.C. § 2901.11) (Prior Code, § 606.055)
Statutory reference:
   State criminal law jurisdiction, see R.C. § 2901.11
§ 130.17 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED OR FORFEITED PROPERTY HELD BY POLICE
DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Safekeeping of property in custody.
      (1)   (a)   Any property that has been lost, abandoned, stolen, seized
pursuant to a search warrant, or otherwise lawfully seized or forfeited and
that is in the custody of the Police Department shall be kept safely by the
Police Department, pending the time it no longer is needed as evidence or for
another lawful purpose, and shall be disposed of pursuant to this section or
R.C. §§ 2981.12 and 2981.13.
         (b)   This section does not apply to the custody and disposal of any
of the following:
            1.   Vehicles subject to forfeiture under R.C. Title 45, except as
provided in division (B)(1)(f) of this section;
            2.   Abandoned junk motor vehicles or other property of negligible
value;
            3.   Property held by a department of rehabilitation and correction
institution that is unclaimed, that does not have an identified owner, that the
owner agrees to dispose of, or that is identified by the department as having
little value;
            4.   Animals taken, and devices used in unlawfully taking animals,
under R.C. § 1531.20;
            5.   Controlled substances sold by a peace officer in the
performance of the officer’s official duties under R.C. § 3719.141;
            6.   Property recovered by a township law enforcement agency under
R.C. §§ 505.105 to 505.109;
            7.   Property held and disposed of under an ordinance of the
municipality or under R.C. §§ 737.29 to 737.33, except that if the municipality
has received notice of a citizens’ reward program as provided in division (B)
(5) of this section and disposes of property under an ordinance shall pay 25%
of any moneys acquired from any sale or auction to the citizens’ reward
program.
      (2)   (a)   The Police Department shall adopt and comply with a written
internal control policy that does all of the following:
            1.   Provides for keeping detailed records as to the amount of
property acquired by the Police Department and the date property was acquired;
            2.   Provides for keeping detailed records of the disposition of
the property, which shall include but not be limited to both of the following:
               a.   The manner in which it was disposed, the date of
disposition, detailed financial records concerning any property sold, and the
name of any person who received the property. The record shall not identify or
enable identification of the individual officer who seized any item of
property.
               b.   An itemized list of the specific expenditures made with
amounts that are gained from the sale of the property and that are retained by
the agency, including the specific amount expended on each expenditure, except
that the policy shall not provide for or permit the identification of any
specific expenditure that is made in an ongoing investigation.
            3.   Complies with R.C. § 2981.13 if the Police Department has a
Law Enforcement Trust Fund or similar fund created under that section.
         (b)   The records kept under the internal control policy shall be open
to public inspection during the Police Department’s regular business hours. The
policy adopted under this section is a public record open for inspection under
R.C. § 149.43.
      (3)   (a)   The Police Department, with custody of property to be
disposed of under this section or R.C. § 2981.12 or 2981.13, shall make a
reasonable effort to locate persons entitled to possession of the property, to
notify them of when and where it may be claimed, and to return the property to
them at the earliest possible time. In the absence of evidence identifying
persons entitled to possession, it is sufficient notice to advertise using at
least one of the following methods:
            1.   In the print or digital edition of a newspaper of general
circulation in the county;
            2.   On the official public notice web site established under R.C.
§ 125.182;
            3.   On the web site and social media account of the county.
         (b)   The notices shall briefly describe the nature of the property in
custody and inviting persons to view and establish their right to it.
      (4)   As used in this section:
         CITIZENS’ REWARD PROGRAM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 9.92.
         LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Includes correctional institutions.
         TOWNSHIP LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Means an organized police department
of a township, a township police district, a joint police district, or the
office of a township constable.
(R.C. § 2981.11)
   (B)   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property.
      (1)   Unclaimed or forfeited property in the custody of the Police
Department, other than property described in division (A)(1)(b) of this
section, shall be disposed of by order of any court of record that has
territorial jurisdiction over the municipality, as follows:
         (a)   Drugs shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 3719.11 or placed
in the custody of the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States for
disposal or use for medical or scientific purposes under applicable federal
law.
         (b)   Firearms and dangerous ordnance suitable for police work may be
given to a law enforcement agency for that purpose. Firearms suitable for
sporting use or as museum pieces or collectors’ items may be sold at public
auction pursuant to division (B)(2) of this section. The Police Department may
sell other firearms and dangerous ordnance to a federally licensed firearms
dealer in a manner that the court considers proper. The Police Department shall
destroy any firearms or dangerous ordnance not given to a law enforcement
agency or sold or shall send them to the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation for destruction by the Bureau.
         (c)   Obscene materials shall be destroyed.
         (d)   Beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol seized from a person who
does not hold a permit issued under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or otherwise
forfeited to the state for an offense under R.C. § 4301.45 or R.C. § 4301.53
shall be sold by the Division of Liquor Control if the Division determines that
it is fit for sale or shall be placed in the custody of the Investigations Unit
in the Ohio Department of Public Safety and be used for training relating to
law enforcement activities. The Ohio Department of Public Safety, with the
assistance of the Division of Liquor Control, shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 to provide for the distribution to state or local law
enforcement agencies upon their request. If any tax imposed under R.C. Title 43
has not been paid in relation to the beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol, any
moneys acquired from the sale shall first be used to pay the tax. All other
money collected under this division (B)(1)(d) shall be paid into the State
Treasury. Any beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol that the Division
determines to be unfit for sale shall be destroyed.
         (e)   Money received by an inmate of a correctional institution from
an unauthorized source or in an unauthorized manner shall be returned to the
sender, if known, or deposited in the Inmates’ Industrial and Entertainment
Fund of the institution if the sender is not known.
         (f)   1.   Any mobile instrumentality forfeited under R.C. Chapter
2981 may be given to the law enforcement agency that initially seized the
mobile instrumentality for use in performing its duties, if the agency wants
the mobile instrumentality. The agency shall take the mobile instrumentality
subject to any security interest or lien on the mobile instrumentality.
            2.   Vehicles and vehicle parts forfeited under R.C. §§ 4549.61 to
4549.63 may be given to a law enforcement agency for use in performing its
duties. Those parts may be incorporated into any other official vehicle. Parts
that do not bear vehicle identification numbers or derivatives of them may be
sold or disposed of as provided by rules of the Director of Public Safety.
Parts from which a vehicle identification number or derivative of it has been
removed, defaced, covered, altered, or destroyed and that are not suitable for
police work or incorporation into an official vehicle shall be destroyed and
sold as junk or scrap.
         (g)   Computers, computer networks, computer systems, and computer
software suitable for police work may be given to a law enforcement agency for
that purpose or disposed of under division (B)(2) of this section.
         (h)   Money seized in connection with a violation of R.C. § 2905.32,
2907.21, or 2907.22 shall be deposited in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund
created by R.C. § 5101.87.
      (2)   Unclaimed or forfeited property that is not described in division
(B)(1) of this section or division (A)(1)(b) of this section, with court
approval, may be used by the law enforcement agency in possession of it. If it
is not used by the agency, it may be sold without appraisal at a public auction
to the highest bidder for cash or disposed of in another manner that the court
considers proper.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (B)(1) and (B)(5) of this section
and after compliance with division (B)(4) of this section when applicable, any
moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of pursuant to this section
shall be placed in the General Revenue Fund of the state, or the General Fund
of the municipality.
      (4)   If the property was in the possession of the Police Department in
relation to a delinquent child proceeding in a juvenile court, 10% of any
moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of under this section shall
be applied to one or more community addiction services providers, as defined in
R.C. § 5119.01. A juvenile court shall not specify a services provider, except
as provided in this division, unless the services provider is in the same
county as the court or in a contiguous county. If no services provider is
located in any of those counties, the juvenile court may specify a services
provider anywhere in Ohio. The remaining 90% of the proceeds or cash shall be
applied as provided in division (B)(3) of this section.
      (5)   (a)   If the Board of County Commissioners recognizes a citizens’
reward program under R.C. § 9.92, the Board shall notify the Police Department
of the recognition by filing a copy of its resolution conferring that
recognition with the Police Department. When the Board recognizes a citizens’
reward program and the county includes a part, but not all, of the territory of
the municipality, the Board shall so notify the Police Department of the
recognition of the citizens’ reward program only if the county contains the
highest percentage of the municipality’s population.
         (b)   Upon being so notified, the Police Department shall pay 25% of
any forfeited proceeds or cash derived from each sale of property disposed of
pursuant to this section to the citizens’ reward program for use exclusively to
pay rewards. No part of the funds may be used to pay expenses associated with
the program. If a citizens’ reward program that operates in more than one
county or in another state in addition to this state receives funds under this
section, the funds shall be used to pay rewards only for tips and information
to law enforcement agencies concerning offenses committed in the county from
which the funds were received.
      (6)   Any property forfeited under R.C. Chapter 2981 not be used to pay
any fine imposed upon a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to an
underlying criminal offense or a different offense arising out of the same
facts and circumstances.
      (7)   Any moneys acquired from the sale of personal effects, tools, or
other property seized because the personal effects, tools, or other property
were used in the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2905.32, 2907.21, or
2907.22 or derived from the proceeds of the commission of a violation of R.C. §
2905.32, 2907.21, or 2907.22 and disposed of pursuant to this division (B)
shall be placed in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund created by R.C. §
5101.87.
(R.C. § 2981.12)
   (C)   Disposition of contraband, proceeds, or instrumentalities. Except as
otherwise provided in R.C. § 2981.13, property ordered forfeited as contraband,
proceeds, or an instrumentality pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2981 shall be disposed
of, used, or sold pursuant to division (B) of this section or R.C. § 2981.12.
If the property is to be sold under division (B) of this section or R.C. §
2981.12, the prosecutor shall cause notice of the proposed sale to be given in
accordance with law.
(R.C. § 2981.13(A))
(Prior Code, § 606.24)
Statutory reference:
   Forfeiture of property generally, see R.C. Chapter 2981
§ 130.18 IMPOSING SENTENCE FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   (A)   (1)   Unless a mandatory jail term is required to be imposed by R.C. §
1547.99(G), 4510.14(B), or 4511.19(G), or any other provision of the Ohio
Revised Code, or any municipal ordinance, a court that imposes a sentence under
this chapter upon an offender for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor has
discretion to determine the most effective way to achieve the purposes and
principles of sentencing set forth in §
130.99(B).
      (2)   Unless a specific sanction is required to be imposed or is
precluded from being imposed by the section setting forth an offense or the
penalty for an offense or by any provision of §
130.99 or
133.99 of this code or R.C. §§ 2929.23 through 2929.28, a court that imposes a
sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor may impose on the offender any
sanction or combination of sanctions under §
130.99(C) through (G). The court shall not impose a sentence that imposes an
unnecessary burden on local government resources.
   (B)   (1)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, the
court shall consider all of the following factors:
         (a)   The nature and circumstances of the offense or offenses;
         (b)   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender has a history of persistent criminal
activity and that the offender’s character and condition reveal a substantial
risk that the offender will commit another offense;
         (c)   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender’s history, character, and condition
reveal a substantial risk that the offender will be a danger to others and that
the offender’s conduct has been characterized by a pattern of repetitive,
compulsive, or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences;
         (d)   Whether the victim’s youth, age, disability, or other factor
made the victim particularly vulnerable to the offense or made the impact of
the offense more serious;
         (e)   Whether the offender is likely to commit future crimes in
general, in addition to the circumstances described in divisions (B)(1)(b) and
(B)(1)(c) of this section;
         (f)   Whether the offender has an emotional, mental, or physical
condition that is traceable to the offender’s service in the armed forces of
the United States and that was a contributing factor in the offender’s
commission of the offense or offenses;
         (g)   The offender’s military service record.
      (2)    In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, if the
offender enters an Alford plea, the sentencing court shall not consider whether
the offender showed genuine remorse for the offense.
      (3)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, in
addition to complying with division (B)(1) of this section, the court may
consider any other factors that are relevant to achieving the purposes and
principles of sentencing set forth in §
130.99(B).
   (C)   Before imposing a jail term as a sentence for a misdemeanor, a court
shall consider the appropriateness of imposing a community control sanction or
a combination of community control sanctions under §
130.99(D), (E), (F), and (G). A court may impose the longest jail term
authorized under §
130.99(C) only upon offenders who commit the worst forms of the offense or upon
offenders whose conduct and response to prior sanctions for prior offenses
demonstrate that the imposition of the longest jail term is necessary to deter
the offender from committing a future criminal offense.
   (D)   (1)   A sentencing court shall consider any relevant oral and written
statement made by the victim, the victim’s representative, the victim’s
attorney, if applicable, the defendant, the defense attorney, and the
prosecuting authority regarding sentencing for a misdemeanor. This division
does not create any rights to notice other than those rights authorized by R.C.
Chapter 2930.
      (2)   At the time of sentencing for a misdemeanor or as soon as possible
after sentencing, the court shall notify the victim of the offense of the
victim’s right to file an application for an award of reparations pursuant to
R.C. §§ 2743.51 through 2743.72.
(R.C. § 2929.22) (Prior Code, § 698.03)
§ 130.19 MULTIPLE SENTENCES.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, R.C. § 2929.14(C),
or R.C. § 2971.03(D) or (E), a prison term, jail term, or sentence of
imprisonment shall be served concurrently with any other prison term, jail
term, or sentence of imprisonment imposed by a court of this municipality, this
state, another state, or the United States. Except as provided in division (B)
(2) of this section, a jail term or sentence of imprisonment for misdemeanor
shall be served concurrently with a prison term or sentence of imprisonment for
felony served in a state or federal correctional institution.
   (B)   (1)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment for a misdemeanor shall
be served consecutively to any other prison term, jail term, or sentence of
imprisonment when the trial court specifies that it is to be served
consecutively or when it is imposed for a misdemeanor violation of R.C. §
2907.322, 2921.34 or 2923.131. When consecutive sentences are imposed for
misdemeanors under this division, the term to be served is the aggregate of the
consecutive terms imposed, except that the aggregate term to be served shall
not exceed 18 months.
      (2)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment imposed for a misdemeanor
violation of R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.14, 4510.16, 4510.21, or 4511.19, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be served consecutively to
a prison term that is imposed for a felony violation of R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.08
or 4511.19 or a felony violation of R.C. § 2903.04 involving the operation of a
vehicle by the offender and that is served in a state correctional institution
when the trial court specifies that it is to be served consecutively. When
consecutive jail terms or sentences of imprisonment and prison terms are
imposed for one or more misdemeanors and one or more felonies under this
division, the term to be served is the aggregate of the consecutive terms
imposed, and the offender shall serve all terms imposed for a felony before
serving any term imposed for a misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2929.41) (Prior Code, § 698.05)
§ 130.20 APPREHENSION, DETENTION, OR ARREST OF PERSON ON BOND.
   (A)   No person, other than a law enforcement officer, shall apprehend,
detain, or arrest a principal on bond, wherever issued, unless that person
meets all of the following criteria:
      (1)   The person is any of the following:
         (a)   Qualified, licensed, and appointed as a surety bail bond agent
under R.C. §§ 3905.83 through 3905.95;
         (b)   Licensed as a surety bail bond agent by the state where the bond
was written;
         (c)   Licensed as a private investigator under R.C. Chapter 4749;
         (d)   Licensed as a private investigator by the state where the bond
was written;
         (e)   An off-duty peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 2921.51.
      (2)   The person, prior to apprehending, detaining, or arresting the
principal, has entered into a written contract with the surety or with a
licensed surety bail bond agent appointed by the surety, which contract sets
forth the name of the principal who is to be apprehended, detained, or
arrested. For purposes of this division (A)(2), SURETY has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 3905.83.
      (3)   The person, prior to apprehending, detaining, or arresting the
principal, has notified the local law enforcement agency having jurisdiction
over the area in which such activities will be performed and has provided any
form or identification or other information requested by the law enforcement
agency.
   (B)   No person shall represent the person’s self to be a bail enforcement
agent or bounty hunter, or claim any similar title, in this municipality.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal bail bond agent
practices.
      (1)   A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of division (A) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of division (B) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.27)
 
§ 130.21 SELF DEFENSE: LIMITATIONS ON DUTY TO RETREAT PRIOR TO USING FORCE.
   (A)   As used in this section, RESIDENCE has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2901.05.
   (B)   For purposes of any section of this code that sets forth a criminal
offense, a person has no duty to retreat before using force in self-defense,
defense of another, or defense of that person’s residence if that person is in
a place in which the person lawfully has a right to be.
   (C)   A trier of fact shall not consider the possibility of retreat as a
factor in determining whether or not a person who used force in self-defense,
defense of another, or defense of that person’s residence reasonably believed
that the force was necessary to prevent injury, loss, or risk to life or
safety.
(R.C. § 2901.09) (Prior Code, § 606.30)
§ 130.99 PENALTY FOR TITLE XIII.
   (A)   Generally. Except where otherwise specifically classified within the
body of the section of a chapter of this title, a violation of such section
shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more
than $500, imprisonment of not more than six months, or both.
(R.C. § 715.67)
   (B)   Considerations in misdemeanor sentencing.
      (1)   A court that sentences an offender for a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, or of any
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised Code, shall be guided
by the overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing. The overriding purposes
of misdemeanor sentencing are to protect the public from future crime by the
offender and others and to punish the offender. To achieve those purposes, the
sentencing court shall consider the impact of the offense upon the victim and
the need for changing the offender’s behavior, rehabilitating the defender, and
making restitution to the victim of the offense, the public, or the victim and
the public.
      (2)   A sentence imposed for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation
of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a violation of a municipal ordinance
that is subject to division (B)(1) of this section shall be reasonably
calculated to achieve the two overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing set
forth in division (B)(1) of this section, commensurate with and not demeaning
to the seriousness of the offender’s conduct and its impact upon the victim,
and consistent with sentences imposed for similar offenses committed by similar
offenders.
      (3)   A court that imposes a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
or minor misdemeanor violation of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a
violation of a municipal ordinance that is subject to division (B)(1) of this
section shall not base the sentence upon the race, ethnic background, gender,
or religion of the offender.
      (4)   Divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section shall not apply to any
offense that is disposed of by a traffic violations bureau of any court
pursuant to Traffic Rule 13 and shall not apply to any violation of any
provision of the Ohio Revised Code that is a minor misdemeanor and that is
disposed of without a court appearance. Divisions (B)(1) through (B)(3) of this
section do not affect any penalties established by the municipality for a
violation of its ordinances that are not substantially equivalent to a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised
Code.
(R.C. § 2929.21)
     (C)   Misdemeanor jail terms.
      (1)   Except as provided in §
130.18 or
133.99 of this code or R.C. § 2929.22 or 2929.23 or division (C)(5) of this
section and unless another term is required or authorized pursuant to law, if
the sentencing court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
elects or is required to impose a jail term on the offender pursuant to this
chapter, the court shall impose a definite jail term that shall be one of the
following:
         (a)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than 180 days;
         (b)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than 90 days;
         (c)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than 60 days;
         (d)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than 30 days.
      (2)   (a)   A court that sentences an offender to a jail term under
division (C) of this section may permit the offender to serve the sentence in
intermittent confinement or may authorize a limited release of the offender as
provided in division (E)(2) of this section. The court retains jurisdiction
over every offender sentenced to jail to modify the jail sentence imposed at
any time, but the court shall not reduce any mandatory jail term.
         (b)   1.   If a prosecutor, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01, has filed a
notice with the court that the prosecutor wants to be notified about a
particular case and if the court is considering modifying the jail sentence of
the offender in that case, the court shall notify the prosecutor that the court
is considering modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case. The
prosecutor may request a hearing regarding the court’s consideration of
modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, and, if the
prosecutor requests a hearing, the court shall notify the eligible offender of
the hearing.
            2.   If the prosecutor requests a hearing regarding the court’s
consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, the
court shall hold the hearing before considering whether or not to release the
offender from the offender’s jail sentence.
      (3)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under division (C)
of this section and the court assigns the offender to a county jail that has
established a county jail industry program pursuant to R.C. § 5147.30, the
court shall specify, as part of the sentence, whether the offender may be
considered for participation in the program. During the offender’s term in the
county jail, the court retains jurisdiction to modify its specification
regarding the offender’s participation in the county jail industry program.
      (4)   If a person sentenced to a jail term pursuant to division (C) of
this section, the court may impose as part of the sentence pursuant to R.C. §
2929.28 a reimbursement sanction, and, if the local detention facility in which
the term is to be served is covered by a policy adopted pursuant to R.C. §
307.93, 341.14, 341.19, 341.21, 341.23, 753.02, 753.04, 753.16, 2301.56, or
2947.19 and R.C. § 2929.37, both of the following apply:
         (a)   The court shall specify both of the following as part of the
sentence:
            1.   If the person is presented with an itemized bill pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.37 for payment of the costs of confinement, the person is required
to pay the bill in accordance with that section.
            2.   If the person does not dispute the bill described in division
(C)(4)(a)1. of this section and does not pay the bill by the times specified in
R.C. § 2929.37, the clerk of the court may issue a certificate of judgment
against the person as described in that section.
         (b)   The sentence automatically includes any certificate of judgment
issued as described in division (C)(4)(a)2. of this section.
      (5)   (a)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241, or 2907.25, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and to a specification of the
type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 and if the court imposes a jail term on the
offender for the misdemeanor violation, the court may impose upon the offender
an additional definite jail term as follows:
            1.   Subject to division (C)(5)(a)2. of this section, an additional
definite jail term of not more than 60 days;
            2.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one or more misdemeanor or felony violations of R.C. § 2907.22,
2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241, or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and also was convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 regarding one or more
of those violations, an additional definite jail term of not more than 120
days.
         (b)   In lieu of imposing an additional definite jail term under
division (C)(5)(a) of this section, the court may directly impose on the
offender a sanction that requires the offender to wear a real-time processing,
continual tracking electronic monitoring device during the period of time
specified by the court. The period of time specified by the court shall equal
the duration of an additional jail term that the court could have imposed upon
the offender under division (C)(5)(a) of this section. A sanction imposed under
this division shall commence on the date specified by the court, provided that
the sanction shall not commence until after the offender has served the jail
term imposed for the misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2907.23, 2907.24,
2907.241, or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and
any residential sanction imposed for the violation under division (E) of this
section or R.C. § 2929.26. A sanction imposed under this division shall be
considered to be a community control sanction for purposes of division (D) of
this section or R.C. § 2929.25, and all provisions of this code and the Ohio
Revised Code that pertain to community control sanctions shall apply to a
sanction imposed under this division, except to the extent that they would by
their nature be clearly inapplicable. The offender shall pay all costs
associated with a sanction imposed under this division, including the cost of
the use of the monitoring device.
      (6)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor
violation of R.C. § 2903.13 and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1423 that charges that the
victim of the violation was a woman whom the offender knew was pregnant at the
time of the violation, the court shall impose on the offender a mandatory jail
term that is a definite term of at least 30 days.
      (7)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under this division
(C), the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender and the jail
term. Upon motion of either party or upon the court’s own motion, the court, in
the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may substitute
one or more community control sanctions under division (E) or (F) of this
section for any jail days that are not mandatory jail days.
(R.C. § 2929.24)
   (D)   Misdemeanor community control sanctions.
      (1)   (a)   Except as provided in §§
130.18 and
133.99 of this code or R.C. §§ 2929.22 and 2929.23 or when a jail term is
required by law, in sentencing an offender for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, the sentencing court may do either of the following:
            1.   Directly impose a sentence that consists of one or more
community control sanctions authorized by divisions (E), (F), or (G) of this
section. The court may impose any other conditions of release under a community
control sanction that the court considers appropriate. If the court imposes a
jail term upon the offender, the court may impose any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions in addition to the jail
term.
            2.   Impose a jail term under division (C) of this section from the
range of jail terms authorized under that division for the offense, suspend all
or a portion of the jail term imposed, and place the offender under a community
control sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
divisions (E), (F), or (G) of this section.
         (b)   The duration of all community control sanctions imposed upon an
offender and in effect for an offender at any time shall not exceed five years.
         (c)   At sentencing, if a court directly imposes a community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (D)
(1)(a)1. of this section, the court shall state the duration of the community
control sanctions imposed and shall notify the offender that if any of the
conditions of the community control sanctions are violated the court may do any
of the following:
            1.   Impose a longer time under the same community control sanction
if the total time under all of the offender’s community control sanctions does
not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (D)(1)(b) of this section;
            2.   Impose a more restrictive community control sanction under
division (E), (F), or (G) of this section, but the court is not required to
impose any particular sanction or sanctions;
            3.   Impose a definite jail term from the range of jail terms
authorized for the offense under division (C) of this section.
      (2)   If a court sentences an offender to any community control sanction
or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (D)(1)(a)1.
of this section, the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender
and the period of community control for the duration of the period of community
control. Upon the motion of either party or on the court’s own motion, the
court, in the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may
modify the community control sanctions or conditions of release previously
imposed, substitute a community control sanction or condition of release for
another community control sanction or condition of release previously imposed,
or impose an additional community control sanction or condition of release.
      (3)   (a)   If a court sentences an offender to any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
division (E), (F), or (G) of this section, the court shall place the offender
under the general control and supervision of the court or of a department of
probation in the jurisdiction that serves the court for purposes of reporting
to the court a violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. If
the offender resides in another jurisdiction and a department of probation has
been established to serve the municipal court or county court in that
jurisdiction, the sentencing court may request the municipal court or the
county court to receive the offender into the general control and supervision
of that department of probation for purposes of reporting to the sentencing
court a violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. The
sentencing court retains jurisdiction over any offender whom it sentences for
the duration of the sanction or sanctions imposed.
         (b)   The sentencing court shall require as a condition of any
community control sanction that the offender abide by the law and not leave the
state without the permission of the court or the offender’s probation officer.
In the interests of doing justice, rehabilitating the offender, and ensuring
the offender’s good behavior, the court may impose additional requirements on
the offender. The offender’s compliance with the additional requirements also
shall be a condition of the community control sanction imposed upon the
offender.
      (4)   (a)   If the court imposing sentence upon an offender sentences the
offender to any community control sanction or combination of community control
sanctions authorized under division (E), (F), or (G) of this section, and the
offender violates any of the conditions of the sanctions, the public or private
person or entity that supervises or administers the program or activity that
comprises the sanction shall report the violation directly to the sentencing
court or to the department of probation or probation officer with general
control and supervision over the offender. If the public or private person or
entity reports the violation to the department of probation or probation
officer, the department or officer shall report the violation to the sentencing
court.
         (b)   Except as provided in division (D)(4)(c) of this section, if an
offender violates any condition of a community control sanction, the sentencing
court may impose upon the violator one or more of the following penalties:
            1.   A longer time under the same community control sanction if the
total time under all of the community control sanctions imposed on the violator
does not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (D)(1)(b) of this
section;
            2.   A more restrictive community control sanction;
            3.   A combination of community control sanctions, including a jail
term.
         (c)   If an offender was acting pursuant to R.C. § 2925.11(B)(2)(b),
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a related provision
under R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14, or R.C. § 2925.141, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and in so doing violated the conditions of a
community control sanction based on a minor drug possession offense, as defined
in R.C. § 2925.11, or violated R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. §
2925.141, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the sentencing
court shall not impose any of the penalties described in division (D)(4)(b) of
this section based on the violation.
         (d)   If the court imposes a jail term upon a violator pursuant to
division (D)(4)(b) of this section, the total time spent in jail for the
misdemeanor offense and the violation of a condition of the community control
sanction shall not exceed the maximum jail term available for the offense for
which the sanction that was violated was imposed. The court may reduce the
longer period of time that the violator is required to spend under the longer
sanction or the more restrictive sanction imposed under division (D)(4)(b) of
this section by all or part of the time the violator successfully spent under
the sanction that was initially imposed.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if an offender, for
a significant period of time, fulfills the conditions of a community control
sanction imposed pursuant to division (E), (F), or (G) of this section in an
exemplary manner, the court may reduce the period of time under the community
control sanction or impose a less restrictive community control sanction.
Fulfilling the conditions of a community control sanction does not relieve the
offender of a duty to make restitution under division (G) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.25)
   (E)   Community residential sanction.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any community residential sanction or combination of
community residential sanctions under this division (E). Community residential
sanctions include but are not limited to the following:
         (a)   A term of up to 180 days in a halfway house or a term in a
halfway house not to exceed the longest jail term available for the offense,
whichever is shorter, if the political subdivision that would have
responsibility for paying the costs of confining the offender in a jail has
entered into a contract with the halfway house for use of the facility for
misdemeanor offenders;
         (b)   If the offender is an eligible offender, as defined in R.C. §
307.932, a term in a community alternative sentencing center or district
community alternative sentencing center established and operated in accordance
with that section, in the circumstances specified in that section, with one of
the conditions of the sanction being that the offender successfully complete
the portion of the sentence to be served in the center.
      (2)   A sentence to a community residential sanction under division (E)
(1)(b) of this section shall be in accordance with R.C. § 307.932. In all other
cases, the court that sentences an offender to a community residential sanction
under this division (E) may do either or both of the following:
         (a)   Permit the offender to serve the offender’s sentence in
intermittent confinement, overnight, on weekends or at any other time or times
that will allow the offender to continue at the offender’s occupation or care
for the offender’s family;
         (b)   Authorize the offender to be released so that the offender may
seek or maintain employment, receive education or training, receive treatment,
perform community service, or otherwise fulfill an obligation imposed by law or
by the court. A release pursuant to this division shall be only for the
duration of time that is needed to fulfill the purpose of the release and for
travel that reasonably is necessary to fulfill the purposes of release.
      (3)   The court may order that a reasonable portion of the income earned
by the offender upon a release pursuant to division (E)(2) of this section be
applied to any financial sanction imposed under division (G) of this section.
      (4)   No court shall sentence any person to a prison term for a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor or to a jail term for a minor misdemeanor.
      (5)   If a court sentences a person who has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a misdemeanor to a community residential sanction as described in
division (E)(1) of this section, at the time of reception and at other times
the person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community
alternative sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing
center, or other place at which the offender will serve the residential
sanction determines to be appropriate, the person in charge of the operation of
the halfway house, community alternative sentencing center, district community
alternative sentencing center, or other place may cause the convicted offender
to be examined and tested for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis, including
but not limited to hepatitis A, B, and C, and other contagious diseases. The
person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community alternative
sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing center, or other
place at which the offender will serve the residential sanction may cause a
convicted offender in the halfway house, community alternative sentencing
center, district community alternative sentencing center, or other place who
refuses to be tested or treated for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis,
including but not limited to hepatitis A, B, and C, or another contagious
disease to be tested and treated involuntarily.
      (6)   The municipality may enter into a contract with a halfway house for
use of the halfway house to house misdemeanor offenders under a sanction
imposed under division (E)(1)(a) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.26)
   (F)   Nonresidential sanction where jail term is not mandatory.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any nonresidential sanction or combination of
nonresidential sanctions authorized under this division. Nonresidential
sanctions include but are not limited to the following:
         (a)   A term of day reporting;
         (b)   A term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous
alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol
monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring
without house arrest, or a term of house arrest without electronic monitoring
or continuous alcohol monitoring;
         (c)   A term of community service of up to 500 hours for misdemeanor
of the first degree or 200 hours for a misdemeanor of the second, third, or
fourth degree;
         (d)   A term in a drug treatment program with a level of security for
the offender as determined necessary by the court;
         (e)   A term of intensive probation supervision;
         (f)   A term of basic probation supervision;
         (g)   A term of monitored time;
         (h)   A term of drug and alcohol use monitoring, including random drug
testing;
         (i)   A curfew term;
         (j)   A requirement that the offender obtain employment;
         (k)   A requirement that the offender obtain education or training;
         (l)   Provided the court obtains the prior approval of the victim, a
requirement that the offender participate in victim-offender mediation;
         (m)   If authorized by law, suspension of the offender’s privilege to
operate a motor vehicle, immobilization or forfeiture of the offender’s motor
vehicle, a requirement that the offender obtain a valid motor vehicle
operator’s license, or any other related sanction;
         (n)   A requirement that the offender obtain counseling if the offense
is a violation of R.C. § 2919.25 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance or a violation of R.C. § 2903.13 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance involving a person who was a family or household member at
the time of the violation, if the offender committed the offense in the
vicinity of one or more children who are not victims of the offense, and if the
offender or the victim of the offense is a parent, guardian, custodian, or
person in loco parentis of one or more of those children. This division does
not limit the court in requiring that the offender obtain counseling for any
offense or in any circumstance not specified in this division.
      (2)   If the court imposes a term of community service pursuant to
division (F)(1)(c) of this section, the offender may request that the court
modify the sentence to authorize the offender to make a reasonable
contribution, as determined by the court, to the general fund of the county,
municipality, or other local entity that provides funding to the court. The
court may grant the request if the offender demonstrates a change in
circumstances from the date the court imposes the sentence or that the
modification would otherwise be in the interests of justice. If the court
grants the request, the offender shall make a reasonable contribution to the
court, and the clerk of the court shall deposit that contribution into the
general fund of the county, municipality, or other local entity that provides
funding to the court. If more than one entity provides funding to the court,
the clerk shall deposit a percentage of the reasonable contribution equal to
the percentage of funding the entity provides to the court in that entity’s
general fund.
      (3)   In addition to the sanctions authorized under division (F)(1) of
this section, the court imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, upon an offender who is not required to serve a mandatory
jail term may impose any other sanction that is intended to discourage the
offender or other persons from committing a similar offense if the sanction is
reasonably related to the overriding purposes and principles of misdemeanor
sentencing.
      (4)   The court imposing a sentence for a minor misdemeanor may impose a
term of community service in lieu of all or part of a fine. The term of
community service imposed for a minor misdemeanor shall not exceed 30 hours.
After imposing a term of community service, the court may modify the sentence
to authorize a reasonable contribution, as determined by the court, to the
appropriate general fund as provided in division (F)(2) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.27)
   (G)   Financial sanctions.
      (1)   In addition to imposing court costs pursuant to R.C. § 2947.23, the
court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor, including a minor
misdemeanor, may sentence the offender to any financial sanction or combination
of financial sanctions authorized under this division (G) and, if the offender
is being sentenced for a criminal offense as defined in R.C. § 2930.01, shall
sentence the offender to make restitution pursuant to this division (G) and
R.C. § 2929.281. If the court, in its discretion or as required by this
division (G), imposes one or more financial sanctions, the financial sanctions
that may be imposed pursuant to this division (G) include, but are not limited
to, the following:
         (a)   Restitution.
            1.   Unless the misdemeanor offense could be disposed of by the
traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic Rule 13, restitution
by the offender to the victim of the offender’s crime or the victim’s estate,
in an amount based on the victim’s economic loss. The court may not impose
restitution as a sanction pursuant to this division if the offense could be
disposed of by the traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic
Rule 13. If the court requires restitution, the court shall order that the
restitution be made to the victim in open court or to the adult probation
department that serves the jurisdiction or the clerk of the court on behalf of
the victim.
            2.   The court shall determine the amount of restitution to be paid
by the offender. The victim, victim’s representative, victim’s attorney, if
applicable, the prosecutor or the prosecutor’s designee, and the offender may
provide information relevant to the determination of the amount of restitution.
The amount the court orders as restitution shall not exceed the amount of the
economic loss suffered by the victim as a direct and proximate result of the
commission of the offense. If the court imposes restitution for the cost of
accounting or auditing done to determine the extent of economic loss, the court
may order restitution for any amount of the victim’s costs of accounting or
auditing provided that the amount of restitution is reasonable and does not
exceed the value of property or services stolen or damaged as a result of the
offense. If the court decides to or is required to impose restitution, the
court shall hold an evidentiary hearing on restitution if the offender, victim,
victim’s representative, victim’s attorney, if applicable, or victim’s estate
disputes the amount of restitution. The court shall determine the amount of
full restitution by a preponderance of the evidence.
            3.   All restitution payments shall be credited against any
recovery of economic loss in a civil action brought by the victim or the
victim’s estate against the offender. No person may introduce evidence of an
award of restitution under this division (G) in a civil action for purposes of
imposing liability against an insurer under R.C. § 3937.18.
            4.   The court may order that the offender pay a surcharge, of not
more than 5% of the amount of the restitution otherwise ordered, to the entity
responsible for collecting and processing restitution payments.
            5.   The victim, victim’s attorney, if applicable, or the attorney
for the victim’s estate may request that the prosecutor in the case file a
motion, or the offender may file a motion, for modification of the payment
terms of any restitution ordered. If the court grants the motion, it may modify
the payment terms as it determines appropriate but shall not reduce the amount
of restitution ordered, except as provided in R.C. § 2929.281(A).
         (b)   Fines. A fine of the type described in divisions (G)(1)(b)1. and
(G)(1)(b)2. of this section payable to the appropriate entity as required by
law:
            1.   A fine in the following amount:
               a.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than
$1,000;
               b.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $750;
               c.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $500;
               d.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $250;
               e.   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $150.
            2.   A state fine or cost as defined in R.C. § 2949.111.
         (c)   Reimbursement.
            1.   Reimbursement by the offender of any or all of the costs of
sanctions incurred by the government, including but not limited to the
following:
               a.   All or part of the costs of implementing any community
control sanction, including a supervision fee under R.C. § 2951.021 and the
costs of global positioning system device monitoring;
               b.   All or part of the costs of confinement in a jail or other
residential facility, including but not limited to a per diem fee for room and
board, the costs of medical and dental treatment, and the costs of repairing
property damaged by the offender while confined;
               c.   All or part of the cost of purchasing and using an
immobilizing or disabling device, including a certified ignition interlock
device, or a remote alcohol monitoring device that a court orders an offender
to use under R.C. § 4510.13.
            2.   The amount of reimbursement under division (G)(1)(c)1. of this
section shall not exceed the total amount of reimbursement the offender is able
to pay and shall not exceed the actual cost of the sanctions. The court may
collect any amount of reimbursement the offender is required to pay under that
division. If the court does not order reimbursement under that division,
confinement costs may be assessed pursuant to a repayment policy adopted under
R.C. § 2929.37. In addition, the offender may be required to pay the fees
specified in R.C. § 2929.38 in accordance with that section.   
      (2)   (a)   If the court determines a hearing is necessary, the court may
hold a hearing to determine whether the offender is able to pay the financial
sanction imposed pursuant to this division (G) or court costs or is likely in
the future to be able to pay the sanction or costs.
         (b)   If the court determines that the offender is indigent and unable
to pay the financial sanction or court costs, the court shall consider imposing
and may impose a term of community service under division (F)(1) of this
section in lieu of imposing a financial sanction or court costs. If the court
does not determine that the offender is indigent, the court may impose a term
of community service under division (F)(1) of this section in lieu of or in
addition to imposing a financial sanction under this division (G) and in
addition to imposing court costs. The court may order community service for a
minor misdemeanor pursuant to division (F)(4) of this section in lieu of or in
addition to imposing a financial sanction under this section and in addition to
imposing court costs. If a person fails to pay a financial sanction or court
costs, the court may order community service in lieu of the financial sanction
or court costs.
      (3)   (a)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the
offender pursuant to division (G)(1)(c) of this section to pay the costs
incurred by a county pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (E), (F),
or (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) of this section to the county
treasurer. The county treasurer shall deposit the reimbursements in the
county’s General Fund. The county shall use the amounts deposited in the fund
to pay the costs incurred by the county pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (E), (F), or (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) of this
section.
         (b)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the offender
pursuant to division (G)(1)(c) of this section to pay the costs incurred by a
municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (E), (F),
or (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) of this section to the
treasurer of the municipal corporation. The treasurer shall deposit the
reimbursements in the municipal corporation’s General Fund. The municipal
corporation shall use the amounts deposited in the fund to pay the costs
incurred by the municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (E), (F), or (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) of this
section.
         (c)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed pursuant to
division (G)(1)(c) of this section for the costs incurred by a private provider
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E), (F), or (G) of this section
to the provider.
      (4)   (a)   In addition to any other fine that is or may be imposed under
this section, the court imposing sentence upon an offender for misdemeanor
domestic violence or menacing by stalking may impose a fine of not less than
$70 nor more than $500, which shall, except as provided in divisions (G)(4)(b)
and (G)(4)(c) of this section, be transmitted to the Treasurer of Ohio to be
credited to the address confidentiality program fund created by R.C. § 111.48.
         (b)   A court that imposes a fine under division (G)(4)(a) of this
section may retain up to 25% of amounts collected in satisfaction of the fine
to cover administrative costs.
         (c)   A court that imposes a fine under division (G)(4)(a) of this
section may assign up to 25% of amounts collected in satisfaction of the fine
to reimburse the prosecuting attorney for costs associated with prosecution of
the offense.
      (5)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (G)(5), a
financial sanction imposed under division (G)(1) of this section is a judgment
in favor of the state or the political subdivision that operates the court that
imposed the financial sanction, and the offender subject to the financial
sanction is the judgment debtor. A financial sanction of reimbursement imposed
pursuant to division (G)(1)(c)1.a. of this section upon an offender is a
judgment in favor of the entity administering the community control sanction,
and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the judgment debtor. A
financial sanction of reimbursement imposed pursuant to division (G)(1)(c)1.b.
of this section upon an offender confined in a jail or other residential
facility is a judgment in favor of the entity operating the jail or other
residential facility, and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the
judgment debtor. A financial sanction of restitution imposed pursuant to
division (G)(1)(a) of this section is an order in favor of the victim of the
offender’s criminal act that can be collected through a certificate of judgment
as described in division (G)(5)(b)1. of this section, through execution as
described in division (G)(5)(b)2. of this section or through an order as
described in division (G)(5)(b)3. of this section and the offender shall be
considered for purposes of the collection as a judgment debtor.
         (b)   Once a financial sanction is imposed as a judgment or order
under this division, the victim, private provider, state, or political
subdivision may do any of the following:
            1.   Obtain from the clerk of the court in which the judgment was
entered, at no charge, a certificate of judgment that shall be in the same
manner and form as a certificate of judgment issued in a civil action;
            2.   Obtain execution of the judgment or order through any
available procedure, including any of the procedures identified in R.C. §
2929.18(D)(1) and (D)(2) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
            3.   Obtain an order for the assignment of wages of the judgment
debtor under R.C. § 1321.33 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (6)   The civil remedies authorized under division (G)(5) of this section
for the collection of the financial sanction supplement, but do not preclude,
enforcement of the criminal sentence.
      (7)   Each court imposing a financial sanction upon an offender under
this division (G) may designate the clerk of the court or another person to
collect the financial sanction. The clerk, or another person authorized by law
or the court to collect the financial sanction may do the following:
         (a)   Enter into contracts with one or more public agencies or private
vendors for the collection of amounts due under the sanction. Before entering
into a contract for the collection of amounts due from an offender pursuant to
any financial sanction imposed pursuant to this division (G), a court shall
comply with R.C. §§ 307.86 through 307.92.
         (b)    Permit payment of all or any portion of the sanction in
installments, by financial transaction device if the court is a county court or
a municipal court operated by a county, or by any other reasonable method, in
any time, and on any terms that the court considers just. If the court is a
county court or a municipal court operated by a county, the acceptance of
payments by any financial transaction device shall be governed by the policy
adopted by the board of county commissioners of the county pursuant to R.C. §
301.28. If the court is a municipal court not operated by a county, the clerk
may pay any fee associated with processing an electronic transfer out of public
money or may charge the fee to the offender.
         (c)   To defray administrative costs, charge a reasonable fee to an
offender who elects a payment plan rather than a lump sum payment of any
financial sanction.
      (8)   No financial sanction imposed under this division (G) shall
preclude a victim from bringing a civil action against the offender.
      (9)   If the court imposes restitution, fines, fees, or incarceration
costs on a business or corporation, it is the duty of the person authorized to
make disbursements from assets of the business or corporation to pay the
restitution, fines, fees, or incarceration costs from those assets.
(R.C. § 2929.28)
   (H)   Organizational penalties.
      (1)   Regardless of the other penalties provided in this section, an
organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
130.09 shall be fined by the court as follows:
         (a)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than $5,000;
         (b)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $4,000;
         (c)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $3,000;
         (d)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $2,000;
         (e)   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $1,000;
         (f)   For a misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more than
$2,000;
         (g)   For a minor misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more
than $1,000.
      (2)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the section defining the offense or penalty plainly indicates a
purpose to impose the penalty provided for violation upon organizations, then
such penalty shall be imposed in lieu of the penalty provided in this section.
      (3)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the penalty provided includes a higher fine than that provided
in this section, then the penalty imposed shall be pursuant to the penalty
provided for violation of the section defining the offense.
      (4)   This section does not prevent the imposition of available civil
sanctions against an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
130.09, either in addition to or in lieu of a fine imposed pursuant to this
section.
(R.C. § 2929.31) (Prior Code, §§ 698.02, 698.04)
Cross-reference:
   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators; registration,
see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Citation issuance and limitations on arrest for minor misdemeanors, see R.C.
§ 2935.26
   Crime Victim’s Reparations Fund, see R.C. § 2929.32
   Habitual sex offender and sexual predator registration, see R.C. Chapter
2950
   Reimbursement for costs of confinement, see R.C. §§ 2929.36 et seq.
   Reports to health care licensing boards of criminal offenses, see R.C. §
2929.42
   Restitution, see R.C. § 2929.281
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
131.01   Definitions
   
131.02   Arson; determining property value or amount of physical harm
   
131.03   Criminal damaging or endangering; vehicular vandalism
   
131.04   Criminal mischief
   
131.05   Damaging or endangering aircraft or airport operations
   
131.06   Criminal trespass; aggravated trespass
   
131.07   Tampering with coin machines
   
131.08   Theft
   
131.09   Unauthorized use of a vehicle
   
131.10   Unauthorized use of property, including telecommunication property and
computers; possession of municipal property
   
131.11   Passing bad checks
   
131.12   Misuse of credit cards
   
131.13   Making or using slugs
   
131.14   Prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud
   
131.15   Tampering with records
   
131.16   Securing writings by deception
   
131.17   Defrauding creditors
   
131.18   Receiving stolen property
   
131.19   Value of stolen property
   
131.20   Degree of offense when certain property involved
   
131.21   Injuring vines, bushes, trees, or crops
   
131.22   Detention and arrest of shoplifters and those committing motion
picture piracy; protection of institutional property
   
131.23   Insurance fraud; workers’ compensation fraud; Medicaid fraud
   
131.24   Injury to property by hunters
   
131.25   Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental
services; evidence of lack of capacity to consent
   
131.26   Forgery of identification cards
   
131.27   Criminal simulation
   
131.28   Personating an officer
   
131.29   Trademark counterfeiting
   
131.30   Diminishing or interfering with forfeitable property
   
131.31   Recording credit card, telephone or Social Security numbers
   
131.32   Prosecutions for theft of utilities
   
131.33   Motion picture piracy
   
131.34   Railroad vandalism; criminal trespass; interference with operation of
train; grade crossing device vandalism
   
131.35   Desecration
   
131.36   Hours of operation for parks; use restrictions
Statutory reference:
   Cable television service devices, unauthorized sale or possession, felony,
see R.C. § 2913.041
   Deceptive acts or practices in connection with consumer transactions, see
O.A.C. Chapter 109:4-3
   Disrupting public services, felony, see R.C. § 2909.04
   E-mail advertisements, civil offenses and felony forgery offense, see R.C. §
2307.64
   E-mail spam, civil offenses and felony offenses, see R.C. § 2913.421
   Food stamps, illegal use, see R.C. § 2913.46
   Telecommunications: fraud and unlawful use of a device, felony offenses, see
R.C. §§ 2913.05 and 2913.06
   Terrorism involving agricultural products or equipment, see R.C. § 901.511
§ 131.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTIVE DUTY SERVICE MEMBER. Any member of the armed forces of the United
States performing active duty under Title 10 of the United States Code.
   ANHYDROUS AMMONIA. A compound formed by the combination of two gaseous
elements, nitrogen and hydrogen, in the manner described below. Anhydrous
ammonia is one part nitrogen to three parts hydrogen (NH3). Anhydrous ammonia
by weight is fourteen parts nitrogen to three parts hydrogen, which is
approximately 82% nitrogen to 18% hydrogen.
   ASSISTANCE DOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
   CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE. Any services provided by or through the facilities
of any cable television system or other similar closed circuit coaxial cable
communications system, or any microwave or similar transmission service used in
connection with any cable television system or other similar closed circuit
coaxial cable communications system.
   COIN MACHINE. Any mechanical or electronic device designed to do both of the
following:
      (1)   Receive a coin or bill, or token made for that purpose;
      (2)   In return for the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill, or token,
automatically dispense property, provide a service, or grant a license.
   COMPUTER. An electronic device that performs logical, arithmetic, and memory
functions by the manipulation of electronic or magnetic impulses. The term
includes but is not limited to all input, output, processing, storage, computer
program, or communication facilities that are connected, or related, in a
computer system or network to an electronic device of that nature.
   COMPUTER CONTAMINANT. Means a computer program that is designed to modify,
damage, destroy, disable, deny or degrade access to, allow unauthorized access
to, functionally impair, record, or transmit information within a computer,
computer system, or computer network without the express or implied consent of
the owner or other person authorized to give consent and that is of a type or
kind described in divisions (1) through (4) of this definition or of a type or
kind similar to a type or kind described in divisions (1) through (4) of this
definition:
      (1)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “viruses” and
“worms” that are self- replicating or self-propagating and that are designed to
contaminate other computer programs, compromise computer security, consume
computer resources, modify, destroy, record, or transmit data, or disrupt the
normal operation of the computer, computer system, or computer network;
      (2)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “Trojans” or “Trojan
horses” that are not self- replicating or self-propagating and that are
designed to compromise computer security, consume computer resources, modify,
destroy, record, or transmit data, or disrupt the normal operation of the
computer, computer system, or computer network;
      (3)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “zombies” that are
designed to use a computer without the knowledge and consent of the owner, or
other person authorized to give consent, and that are designed to send large
quantities of data to a targeted computer network for the purpose of degrading
the targeted computer’s or network’s performance, or denying access through the
network to the targeted computer or network, resulting in what is commonly
known as “denial of service” or “distributed denial of service” attacks;
      (4)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “trap doors”, “back
doors”, or “root kits” that are designed to bypass standard authentication
software and that are designed to allow access or use of a computer without the
knowledge or consent of the owner, or other person authorized to give consent.
   COMPUTER HACKING.
      (1)   The term means any of the following:
         (a)   Gaining access or attempting to gain access to all or part of a
computer, computer system, or a computer network without express or implied
authorization with the intent to defraud or with intent to commit a crime;
         (b)   Misusing computer or network services including but not limited
to mail transfer programs, file transfer programs, proxy servers, and web
servers by performing functions not authorized by the owner of the computer,
computer system, or computer network or other person authorized to give
consent. As used in this division, “misuse of computer and network services”
includes but is not limited to the unauthorized use of any of the following:
            1.   Mail transfer programs to send mail to persons other than the
authorized users of that computer or computer network;
            2.   File transfer program services or proxy servers to access
other computers, computer systems, or computer networks;
            3.   Web servers to redirect users to other web pages or web
servers.
         (c)   1.   Subject to division (1)(c)2. of this definition, using a
group of computer programs commonly known as “port scanners” or “probes” to
intentionally access any computer, computer system, or computer network without
the permission of the owner of the computer, computer system, or computer
network or other person authorized to give consent. The group of computer
programs referred to in this division includes but is not limited to those
computer programs that use a computer network to access a computer, computer
system, or another computer network to determine any of the following: the
presence or types of computers or computer systems on a network; the computer
network’s facilities and capabilities; the availability of computer or network
services; the presence or versions of computer software including but not
limited to operating systems, computer services, or computer contaminants; the
presence of a known computer software deficiency that can be used to gain
unauthorized access to a computer, computer system, or computer network; or any
other information about a computer, computer system, or computer network not
necessary for the normal and lawful operation of the computer initiating the
access.
            2.   The group of computer programs referred to in division (1)
(c)1. of this definition does not include standard computer software used for
the normal operation, administration, management, and test of a computer,
computer system, or computer network including but not limited to domain name
services, mail transfer services, and other operating system services, computer
programs commonly called “ping”, “tcpdump”, and “traceroute” and other network
monitoring and management computer software, and computer programs commonly
knows as “nslookup” and “whois” and other systems administration computer
software.
         (d)   The intentional use of a computer, computer system, or a
computer network in a manner that exceeds any right or permission granted by
the owner of the computer, computer system, or computer network or other person
authorized to give consent.
      (2)   The term does not include the introduction of a computer
contaminant, as defined in this section, into a computer, computer system,
computer program, or computer network.
   COMPUTER NETWORK. A set of related and remotely-connected computers and
communication facilities that includes more than one computer system that has
the capability to transmit among the connected computers and communication
facilities through the use of computer facilities.
   COMPUTER PROGRAM. An ordered set of data representing coded instructions or
statements that, when executed by a computer, causes the computer to process
data.
   COMPUTER SERVICES. Includes but is not limited to the use of a computer
system, computer network, computer program, data that is prepared for computer
use, or data that is contained within a computer system or computer network.
   COMPUTER SOFTWARE. Computer programs, procedures, and other documentation
associated with the operation of a computer system.
   COMPUTER SYSTEM. A computer and related devices, whether connected or
unconnected, including but not limited to data input, output, and storage
devices, data communications links, and computer programs and data that make
the system capable of performing specified special purpose data processing
tasks.
   COUNTERFEIT TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. A telecommunications device that,
alone or with another telecommunications device, has been altered, constructed,
manufactured, or programmed to acquire, intercept, receive, or otherwise
facilitate the use of a telecommunications service or information service
without the authority or consent of the provider of the telecommunications
service or information service. The phrase includes but is not limited to a
clone telephone, clone microchip, tumbler telephone, or tumbler microchip; a
wireless scanning device capable of acquiring, intercepting, receiving, or
otherwise facilitating the use of telecommunications service or information
service without immediate detection; or a device, equipment, hardware, or
software designed for, or capable of, altering or changing the electronic
serial number in a wireless telephone.
   CREATE A SUBSTANTIAL RISK OF SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO ANY PERSON. Includes
the creation of a substantial risk of serious physical harm to any emergency
personnel.
   CREDIT CARD. Includes but is not limited to a card, code, device, or other
means of access to a customer’s account for the purpose of obtaining money,
property, labor, or services on credit, or for initiating an electronic fund
transfer at a point-of-sale terminal, an automated teller machine, or a cash
dispensing machine. It also includes a county procurement card issued under
R.C. § 301.29.
   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
   DATA. A representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts, or
instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner and
that are intended for use in a computer, computer system, or computer network.
   DECEPTION. To knowingly deceive another or cause another to be deceived by
any false or misleading representation, by withholding information, by
preventing another from acquiring information, or by any other conduct, act, or
omission that creates, confirms, or perpetuates a false impression in another,
including a false impression as to law, value, state of mind, or other
objective or subjective fact.
   DEFRAUD. To knowingly obtain, by deception, some benefit for oneself or
another, or to knowingly cause, by deception, some detriment to another.
   DEPRIVE. To do any of the following:
      (1)   To withhold property of another permanently, or for a period that
appropriates a substantial portion of its value or use, or with purpose to
restore it only upon payment of a reward or other consideration;
      (2)   To dispose of property so as to make it unlikely that the owner
will recover it;
      (3)   To accept, use, or appropriate money, property, or services, with
purpose not to give proper consideration in return for the money, property, or
services, and without reasonable justification or excuse for not giving proper
consideration.
   DISABLED ADULT. A person who is 18 years of age or older and has some
impairment of body or mind that makes the person unable to work at any
substantially remunerative employment that the person otherwise would be able
to perform and that will, with reasonable probability, continue for a period of
at least 12 months without any present indication of recovery from the
impairment, or who is 18 years of age or older and has been certified as
permanently and totally disabled by an agency of this state or the United
States that has the function of so classifying persons.
   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   ELDERLY PERSON. A person who is 65 years of age or older.
   ELECTRONIC FUND TRANSFER. Has the same meaning as in 92 Stat. 3728, 15
U.S.C. § 1693a, as amended.
   EMERGENCY PERSONNEL. Means any of the following persons:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01;
      (2)   A member of a fire department or other firefighting agency of a
municipal corporation, township, township fire district, joint fire district,
other political subdivision, or combination of political subdivisions;
      (3)   A member of a private fire company, as defined in R.C. § 9.60, or a
volunteer firefighter;
      (4)    A member of a joint ambulance district or joint emergency medical
services district;
      (5)   An emergency medical technician-basic, emergency medical
technician-intermediate, emergency medical technician-paramedic, ambulance
operator, or other member of an emergency medical service that is owned or
operated by a political subdivision or a private entity;
      (6)   The State Fire Marshal, the Chief Deputy State Fire Marshal, or an
assistant state fire marshal;
      (7)   A fire prevention officer of a political subdivision or an arson,
fire, or similar investigator of a political subdivision.
   FEDERALLY-LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5502.63.
   FIREARM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
   FORGE. To fabricate or create, in whole or in part and by any means, any
spurious writing, or to make, execute, alter, complete, reproduce, or otherwise
purport to authenticate any writing, when the writing in fact is not
authenticated by that conduct.
   GAIN ACCESS. To approach, instruct, communicate with, store data in,
retrieve data from, or otherwise make use of any resources of a computer,
computer system, or computer network, or any cable service or cable system both
as defined in R.C. § 2913.04.
   INFORMATION SERVICE.
      (1)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, the offering of a
capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing,
retrieving, utilizing, or making available information via telecommunications,
including but not limited to electronic publishing.
      (2)   The term does not include any use of a capability of a type
described in division (1) of this definition for the management, control, or
operation of a telecommunications system or the management of a
telecommunications service.
   INTERNET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 341.42.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Means any house, building, outbuilding, watercraft,
aircraft, railroad car, truck, trailer, tent, or other structure, vehicle, or
shelter, or any portion thereof, to which any of the following applies:
      (1)   It is maintained as a permanent or temporary dwelling, even though
it is temporarily unoccupied and whether nor not any person is actually
present;
      (2)   At the time, it is occupied as the permanent or temporary
habitation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (3)   At the time, it is specially adapted for the overnight
accommodation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (4)   At the time, any person is present or likely to be present in it.
   OWNER. Unless the context requires a different meaning, any person, other
than the actor, who is the owner of, who has possession or control of, or who
has any license or interest in property or services, even though the ownership,
possession, control, license, or interest is unlawful.
   POLICE DOG OR HORSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.321.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.
   RENTED PROPERTY. Personal property in which the right of possession and use
of the property is for a short and possibly indeterminate term in return for
consideration; the rentee generally controls the duration of possession of the
property within any applicable minimum or maximum term; and the amount of
consideration is generally determined by the duration of possession of the
property.
   SERVICES. Includes labor, personal services, professional services, rental
services, public utility services including wireless service as defined in R.C.
§ 128.01(F)(1), common carrier services, and food, drink, transportation,
entertainment, and cable television services and, for purposes of R.C. §
2913.04 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, includes cable
services as defined in that section.
   SLUG. An object that, by virtue of its size, shape, composition, or other
quality, is capable of being inserted or deposited in a coin machine as an
improper substitute for a genuine coin, bill, or token made for that purpose.
   STATE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.
   TELECOMMUNICATION. The origination, emission, dissemination, transmission,
or reception of data, images, signals, sounds, or other intelligence or
equivalence or intelligence of any nature over any communications system by any
method, including but not limited to a fiber optic, electronic, magnetic,
optical, digital or analog method.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Any instrument, equipment, machine, or other
device that facilitates telecommunication, including but not limited to a
computer, computer network, computer chip, computer circuit, scanner,
telephone, cellular telephone, pager, personal communications device,
transponder, receiver, radio, modem, or device that enables the use of a modem.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The providing, allowing, facilitating, or
generating of any form of telecommunication through the use of a
telecommunications device over a telecommunications system.
   THEFT OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)    A violation of R.C. § 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12, 2911.13,
2911.31, 2911.32, 2913.02, 2913.03, 2913.04, 2913.041, 2913.08, 2913.11,
2913.21, 2913.31, 2913.32, 2913.33, 2913.34, 2913.40, 2913.42, 2913.43,
2913.44, 2913.45, 2913.47, 2913.48, former R.C. § 2913.47 or 2913.48, or R.C. §
2913.51, 2915.05, or 2921.41;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
section listed in division (1) of this definition, or a violation of R.C. §
2913.41, 2913.81 or 2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or the United States involving robbery, burglary,
breaking and entering, theft, embezzlement, wrongful conversion, forgery,
counterfeiting, deceit, or fraud;
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing any offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   UTTER. To issue, publish, transfer, use, put or send into circulation,
deliver, or display.
   WRITING. Any computer software, document, letter, memorandum, note, paper,
plate, data, film, or other thing having in or upon it any written, type-
written, or printed matter, and any token, stamp, seal, credit card, badge,
trademark, label, or other symbol of value, right, privilege, license, or
identification.
(R.C. §§ 2909.01, 2913.01) (Prior Code, § 642.01)
§ 131.02 ARSON; DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE OR AMOUNT OF PHYSICAL HARM.
   (A)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of another without the other person’s consent;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of the offender or another, with purpose to defraud;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to the
statehouse or a courthouse, school building, or other building or structure
that is owned or controlled by the state, any political subdivision, or any
department, agency, or instrumentality of the state or a political subdivision,
and that is used for public purposes;
      (4)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
property of another without the other person’s consent or to any property of
the offender or another with purpose to defraud;
      (5)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush- covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision without the consent of
the other person, the state, or the political subdivision;
      (6)   With purpose to defraud, cause, or create a substantial risk of,
physical harm to any park, preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over
land, forest, timberland, greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is
owned or controlled by the offender, another person, the state, or a political
subdivision.
   (B)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure that is not an occupied structure and that is in or on any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision.
   (C)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B)(1)
or (B)(2) of this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the
other person.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B)(3) of
this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the other person, the
state, or the political subdivision.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of arson.
      (2)   A violation of division (A)(1) or (B)(1) of this section is one of
the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(2)(b) of this
section, a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         (b)   If the value of the property or the amount of the physical harm
involved is $1,000 or more, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (3)   A violation of division (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(5), (A)(6), (B)
(2) or (B)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2909.03)
   (E)   Determining property value or amount of physical harm.
      (1)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or amount of physical harm involved in a violation of division (A)(1)
or (B)(1) of this section:
         (a)   If the property is an heirloom, memento, collector’s item,
antique, museum piece, manuscript, document, record, or other thing that is
either irreplaceable or is replaceable only on the expenditure of substantial
time, effort, or money, the value of the property or the amount of physical
harm involved is the amount that would compensate the owner for its loss.
         (b)   If the property is not covered under division (B)(1)(a) of this
section, and the physical harm is such that the property can be restored
substantially to its former condition, the amount of physical harm involved is
the reasonable cost of restoring the property.
         (c)   If the property is not covered under division (B)(1)(a) of this
section, and the physical harm is such that the property cannot be restored
substantially to its former condition, the value of the property, in the case
of personal property, is the cost of replacing the property with new property
of like kind and quality, and in the case of real property or real property
fixtures, is the difference in the fair market value of the property
immediately before and immediately after the offense.
      (2)   As used in this section, FAIR MARKET VALUE has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2913.61.
      (3)   Prima facie evidence of the value of property, as provided in R.C.
§ 2913.61(D), may be used to establish the value of property pursuant to this
section.
(R.C. § 2909.11(B) - (D))
(Prior Code, §§ 642.09, 642.25)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated arson, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.02
   Arson offender registration, see R.C. §§ 2909.13, 2909.14 and 2909.15
   Convicted arsonist to make restitution to public agency, see R.C. § 2929.71
§ 131.03 CRIMINAL DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING; VEHICULAR VANDALISM.
   (A)   Criminal damaging or endangering.
      (1)   No person shall cause or create a substantial risk of physical harm
to any property of another without the other person’s consent:
         (a)   Knowingly, by any means; or
         (b)   Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood, poison gas,
poison, radioactive material, caustic or corrosive material, or other
inherently dangerous agency or substance.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of criminal damaging
or endangering, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If violation of this
division (A) creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging
or endangering is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the property involved
in a violation of this division (A) is an aircraft, an aircraft engine,
propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other equipment or implement used or
intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or endangering
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the property
involved in a violation of this division (A) is an aircraft, an aircraft
engine, propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other equipment or implement
used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the
violation creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or if the
property involved in a violation of this division (A) is an occupied aircraft,
criminal damaging or endangering is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2909.06)
   (B)   Vehicular vandalism.
      (1)   As used in this division (B):
         ALLEY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
         HIGHWAY. Means any highway as defined in R.C. § 4511.01 or any lane,
road, street, alley, bridge, or overpass.
         STREET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
         VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
         VESSEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1546.01.
         WATERS IN THIS STATE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1546.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any
object at, onto, or in the path of any of the following:
         (a)   Any vehicle on a highway;
         (b)   Any boat or vessel on any of the waters in this state.
      (3)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of vehicular
vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division (B)(3), vehicular
vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of this
division (B) creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or the
violation of this division (B) causes serious physical harm to property,
vehicular vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
If the violation of this division (B) causes physical harm to any person or
serious physical harm to any person, vehicular vandalism is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.09) (Prior Code, § 642.10)
Statutory reference:
   Disrupting public services, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.04
   Vandalism, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.05
§ 131.04 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with the either of the following:
         (a)   The property of another;
         (b)   One’s own residential real property with the purpose to decrease
the value of or enjoyment of the residential real property, if both of the
following apply:
            1.   The residential real property is subject to a mortgage.
            2.   The person has been served with a summons and complaint in a
pending residential mortgage loan foreclosure action relating to that real
property. As used in this division, “pending” includes the time between
judgment entry and confirmation of sale.
      (2)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of property of
another, employ a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator, or other device
releasing a substance that is harmful or offensive to persons exposed, or that
tends to cause public alarm;
      (3)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with a bench mark, triangulation
station, boundary marker, or other survey station, monument, or marker;
      (4)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with any safety device, the property of
another, or the property of the offender when required or placed for the safety
of others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or availability for
its intended purpose;
      (5)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of the property
of another, set a fire on the land of another or place personal property that
has been set on fire on the land of another, which fire or personal property is
outside and apart from any building, other structure, or personal property that
is on that land;
      (6)   Without privilege to do so, and with intent to impair the
functioning of any computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software, or computer program, knowingly do any of the following:
         (a)   In any manner or by any means, including but not limited to
computer hacking, alter, damage, destroy, or modify a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software, or computer program or data
contained in a computer, computer system, computer network, computer software,
or computer program;
         (b)   Introduce a computer contaminant into a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software, or computer program.
      (7)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly destroy or improperly tamper
with a critical infrastructure facility.
   (B)   As used in this section:
      CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2911.21.
      IMPROPERLY TAMPER. Means to change the physical location or the physical
condition of the property.
      SAFETY DEVICE. Means any fire extinguisher, fire hose, or fire axe, or
any fire escape, emergency exit, or emergency escape equipment, or any life
line, life-saving ring, life preserver, or life boat or raft, or any alarm,
light, flare, signal, sign, or notice intended to warn of danger or emergency,
or intended for other safety purposes, or any guard railing or safety
barricade, or any traffic sign or signal, or any railroad grade crossing sign,
signal, or gate, or any first aid or survival equipment, or any other device,
apparatus, or equipment intended for protecting or preserving the safety of
persons or property.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal mischief,
and shall be punished as provided in division (C)(2), (C)(3), or (C)(4) of this
section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, if the violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
or (A)(5) of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person,
criminal mischief committed in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3),
(A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
property involved in the violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
or (A)(5) of this section is an aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller,
appliance, spare part, fuel, lubricant, hydraulic fluid, any other equipment,
implement, or material used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft, or any cargo carried or intended to be carried in an aircraft and if
the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or if the
aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief committed in
violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (A)(6) of this section or the loss to the victim resulting from the
violation is $1,000 or more, or if the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (A)(6) is used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft and the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or
if the aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Criminal mischief committed in violation of division (A)(7) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.07) (Prior Code, § 642.11)
§ 131.05 DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING AIRCRAFT OR AIRPORT OPERATIONS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      AIR GUN. Means a hand pistol or rifle that propels its projectile by
means of releasing compressed air, carbon dioxide, or other gas.
      AIRPORT OPERATIONAL SURFACE. Means any surface of land or water that is
developed, posted, or marked so as to give an observer reasonable notice that
the surface is designed and developed for the purpose of storing, parking,
taxiing, or operating aircraft, or any surface of land or water that is
actually being used for any of those purposes.
      FIREARM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
      SPRING-OPERATED GUN. Means a hand pistol or rifle that propels a
projectile not less than four or more than five millimeters in diameter by
means of a spring.
   (B)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly throw an object at, or drop an object upon, any moving
aircraft.
      (2)   Knowingly shoot with a bow and arrow, or knowingly discharge a
firearm, air gun, or spring- operated gun, at or toward any aircraft.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly or recklessly shoot with a bow and arrow, or
shall knowingly or recklessly discharge a firearm, air gun, or spring-operated
gun, upon or over any airport operational surface. This division does not apply
to the following:
      (1)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or of the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, authorized to discharge firearms
and acting within the scope of his or her duties.
      (2)   A person who, with the consent of the owner or operator of the
airport operational surface or the authorized agent of either, is lawfully
engaged in any hunting or sporting activity or is otherwise lawfully
discharging a firearm.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of endangering
aircraft, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation creates any risk
of physical harm to any person, or if the aircraft that is the subject of the
violation is occupied, endangering aircraft is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of endangering
airport operations, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person or substantial risk of serious
harm to any person, endangering airport operations is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. In addition to any other penalty or sanction
imposed for the violation, the hunting license or permit of a person who
violates division (C) of this section while hunting shall be suspended or
revoked pursuant to R.C. § 1533.68.
(R.C. § 2909.08(A) - (E)) (Prior Code, § 672.09)
§ 131.06 CRIMINAL TRESPASS; AGGRAVATED TRESPASS.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another;
      (2)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, the
use of which is lawfully restricted to certain persons, purposes, modes, or
hours, when the offender knows the offender is in violation of any such
restriction or is reckless in that regard;
      (3)   Recklessly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, as
to which notice against unauthorized access or presence is given by actual
communication to the offender, or in a manner prescribed by law, or by posting
in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential
intruders, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to restrict
access;
      (4)   Being on the land or premises of another, negligently fail or
refuse to leave upon being notified by signage posted in a conspicuous place or
otherwise being notified to do so by the owner or occupant, or the agent or
servant of either;
      (5)   Knowingly enter or remain on a critical infrastructure facility.
   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the land or
premises involved was owned, controlled, or in custody of a public agency.
   (C)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the offender was
authorized to enter or remain on the land or premises involved, when the
authorization was secured by deception.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal trespass.
Criminal trespass in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), or (A)(4) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Criminal trespass in
violation of division (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, if the person, in committing the
violation of this section, used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-
purpose vehicle, the court shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount
imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 2911.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and the offender, in committing each violation,
used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, the court,
in addition to or independent of all other penalties imposed for the violation,
may impound the certificate of registration of that snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle or the certificate of registration and license plate of that all-
purpose vehicle for not less than 60 days. In such a case, R.C. § 4519.47
applies.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, if the
offender, in committing the violation of this section, used an all-purpose
vehicle, the Clerk of the Court shall pay the fine imposed pursuant to this
section to the State Recreational Vehicle Fund created by R.C. § 4519.11.
   (F)   As used in divisions (A) through (E) of this section:
      ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE, and SNOWMOBILE. Have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4519.01.
      CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Means:
         (a)   One of the following, if completely enclosed by a fence or other
physical barrier that is obviously designed to exclude intruders, or if clearly
marked with signs that are reasonably likely to come to the attention of
potential intruders and that indicate entry is forbidden without site
authorization:
            1.   A petroleum or alumina refinery;
            2.   An electric generating facility, substation, switching
station, electrical control center, or electric transmission and distribution
lines and associated equipment;
            3.   A chemical, polymer, or rubber manufacturing facility;
            4.   A water intake structure, water treatment facility, waste
water facility, drainage facility, water management facility, or any similar
water or sewage treatment system and its water and sewage piping;
            5.   A natural gas company facility or interstate natural gas
pipeline, including a pipeline interconnection, a natural gas compressor
station and associated facilities, city gate or town border station, metering
station, above-ground piping, regulator station, valve site, delivery station,
fabricated assembly, or any other part of a natural gas storage facility
involved in the gathering, storage, transmission, or distribution of gas;
            6.   A telecommunications central switching office or remote
switching facility or an equivalent network facility that serves a similar
purpose;
            7.   Wireline or wireless telecommunications infrastructure,
including telecommunications towers and telephone poles and lines, including
fiber optic lines;
            8.   A port, trucking terminal, or other freight transportation
facility;
            9.   A gas processing plant, including a plant used in the
processing, treatment, or fractionation of natural gas or natural gas liquids;
            10.   A transmission facility used by a federally licensed radio or
television station;
            11.   A steel-making facility that uses an electric arc furnace to
make steel;
            12.   A facility identified and regulated by the United States
Department of Homeland Security’s Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards
Program under 6 C.F.R. part 27;
            13.   A dam that is regulated by the state or federal government;
            14.   A crude oil or refined products storage and distribution
facility, including valve sites, pipeline interconnections, pump station,
metering station, below- or above-ground pipeline, or piping and truck loading
or off-loading facility;
            15.   A video service network and broadband infrastructure,
including associated buildings and facilities, video service headends, towers,
utility poles, and utility lines such as fiber optic lines. As used in this
division, “video service network” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
            16.   Any above-ground portion of an oil, gas, hazardous liquid or
chemical pipeline, tank, or other storage facility;
            17.   Any above-ground portion of a well, well pad, or production
operation;
            18.   A laydown area or construction site for pipe and other
equipment intended for use on an interstate or intrastate natural gas or crude
oil pipeline;
            19.   Any mining operation, including any processing equipment,
batching operation, or support facility for that mining operation.
         (b)   With respect to a video service network or broadband or wireless
telecommunications infrastructure, the above-ground portion of a facility
installed in a public right-of-way on a utility pole or in a conduit;
         (c)   Any railroad property;
         (d)   An electronic asset of any of the following:
            1.   An electric light company that is a public utility under R.C.
§ 4905.02;
            2.   An electric cooperative, as defined in R.C. § 4928.01;
            3.   A municipal electric utility, as defined in R.C. § 4928.01;
            4.   A natural gas company that is a public utility under R.C. §
4905.02;
            5.   A telephone company that is a public utility under R.C. §
4905.02;
            6.   A video service provider, including a cable operator, as those
terms are defined in R.C. § 1332.21.
      ELECTRONIC ASSET. Includes, but is not limited to, the hardware,
software, and data of a programmable electronic device; all communications,
operations, and customer data networks; and the contents of those data
networks.
      LAND or PREMISES. Includes any land, building, structure, or place
belonging to, controlled by, or in custody of another, and any separate
enclosure or room, or portion thereof.
      PRODUCTION OPERATION, WELL, and WELL PAD. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 1509.01.
(R.C. § 2911.21)
   (G)   Aggravated trespass.
      (1)   (a)   No person shall enter or remain on the land or premises of
another with purpose to commit on that land or those premises a misdemeanor,
the elements of which involve causing physical harm to another person or
causing another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
that person.
         (b)   No person shall enter or remain on a critical infrastructure
facility with purpose to destroy or tamper with the facility.
      (2)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated trespass.
Aggravated trespass in violation of division (G)(1)(a) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Aggravated trespass in violation of division
(G)(1)(b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (3)   As used in this division (G), CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 2911.21.
(R.C. § 2911.211)
   (H)   Criminal trespass on a place of public amusement.
      (1)   As used in this division (H), PLACE OF PUBLIC AMUSEMENT means a
stadium, theater, or other facility, whether licensed or not, at which a live
performance, sporting event, or other activity takes place for entertainment of
the public and to which access is made available to the public, regardless of
whether admission is charged.
      (2)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter or
remain on any restricted portion of a place of public amusement and, as a
result of that conduct, interrupt or cause the delay of the live performance,
sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement
after a printed written notice has been given as provided in division (H)(4)(a)
of this section that the general public is restricted from access to that
restricted portion of the place of public amusement. A restricted portion of a
place of public amusement may include but is not limited to a playing field, an
athletic surface, or a stage located at the place of public amusement.
      (3)   An owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent of the
owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of public amusement
may use reasonable force to restrain and remove a person from a restricted
portion of the place of public amusement if the person enters or remains on the
restricted portion of the place of public amusement and, as a result of that
conduct, interrupts or causes the delay of the live performance, sporting
event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement. This
division does not provide immunity from criminal liability for any use of force
beyond reasonable force by an owner or lessee of a place of public amusement,
an agent of either the owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a
place of public amusement.
      (4)   (a)   Notice has been given that the general public is restricted
from access to a portion of a place of public amusement if a printed written
notice of the restricted access has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at
the entrance to that portion of the place of public amusement. If a printed
written notice is posted or exhibited as described in this division regarding a
portion of a place of public amusement, in addition to that posting or
exhibition, notice that the general public is restricted from access to that
portion of the place of public amusement also may be given, but is not required
to be given, by either of the following means:
            1.   By notifying the person personally, either orally or in
writing, that access to that portion of the place of public amusement is
restricted;
            2.   By broadcasting over the public address system of the place of
public amusement an oral warning that access to that portion of the place of
public amusement is restricted.
         (b)   If notice that the general public is restricted from access to a
portion of a place of public amusement is provided by the posting or exhibition
of a printed written notice as described in division (H)(4)(a) of this section,
the municipality, in a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (H)(2)
of this section, is not required to prove that the defendant received actual
notice that the general public is restricted from access to a portion of a
place of public amusement.
      (5)   (a)   Whoever violates division (H)(2) of this section is guilty of
criminal trespass on a place of public amusement, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         (b)   In addition to any jail term, fine, or other sentence, penalty,
or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to division (H)(5)(a) of this
section, a court may require an offender who violates this section to perform
not less than 30 and not more than 120 hours of supervised community service
work.
(R.C. § 2911.23)
(Prior Code, §§ 642.12, 642.125)
Cross-reference:
   Violation of protection orders, see §
135.23
§ 131.07 TAMPERING WITH COIN MACHINES.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to commit theft or to defraud, shall knowingly
enter, force an entrance into, tamper with, or insert any part of an instrument
into any coin machine.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with coin
machines, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of this section or of any theft offense as
defined in R.C. § 2913.01, tampering with coin machines is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2911.32) (Prior Code, § 642.13)
§ 131.08 THEFT.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to deprive the owner of property or services,
shall knowingly obtain or exert control over either the property or services in
any of the following ways:
      (1)   Without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give
consent;
      (2)   Beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent;
      (3)   By deception;
      (4)   By threat;
      (5)   By intimidation.
   (B)    (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of theft. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, a violation of this section is misdemeanor
theft, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the elements set forth in R.C. §
2913.02(B) for felony theft, grand theft, or aggravated theft are met, then a
violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (2)   In addition to the penalties described in division (B)(1) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by causing a motor vehicle to
leave the premises of an establishment at which gasoline is offered for retail
sale without the offender making full payment for gasoline that was dispensed
into the fuel tank of the motor vehicle or into another container, the court
may do one of the following:
         (a)   Unless division (B)(2)(b) of this section applies, suspend for
not more than six months the offenders driver’s license, probationary driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or
nonresident operating privilege;
         (b)   If the offender’s driver’s license, probationary driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or
nonresident operating privilege has previously been suspended pursuant to
division (B)(2)(a) of this section, or any other substantially equivalent state
or local law, impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s license,
permit, or privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7), provided
that the suspension shall be at least six months;
         (c)   The court, in lieu of suspending the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, probationary driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege pursuant to division (B)
(2)(a) or (B)(2)(b) of this section, instead may require the offender to
perform community service for a number of hours determined by the court.
      (3)   In addition to the penalties described in division (B)(1) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by stealing rented property or
rental services, the court may order that the offender make restitution
pursuant to R.C. § 2929.18 or R.C. § 2929.28. Restitution may include, but is
not limited to, the cost of repairing or replacing the stolen property, or the
cost of repairing the stolen property and any loss of revenue resulting from
deprivation of the property due to theft of rental services that is less than
or equal to the actual value of the property at the time it was rented.
Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental services shall
be determined pursuant to the provisions of R.C. § 2913.72.
   (C)   The sentencing court that suspends an offender’s license, permit, or
nonresident operating privilege under division (B)(2) of this section may grant
the offender limited driving privileges during the period of the suspension in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 4510.
(R.C. § 2913.02) (Prior Code, § 642.02)
Statutory reference:
   Felony theft provisions, see R.C. § 2913.02(B)
§ 131.09 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF A VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorcycle, motorboat, or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of
the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorboat, or other motor- propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner
or person authorized to give consent, and either remove it from this state, or
keep possession of it for more than 48 hours.
   (C)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section:
      (1)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor, though mistaken,
reasonably believed that he or she was authorized to use or operate the
property.
      (2)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor reasonably believed
that the owner or person empowered to give consent would authorize the actor to
use or operate the property.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized use of a
vehicle.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (D)(1), a violation
of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult and if the victim
incurs a loss as a result of the violation, a violation of division (A) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.03) (Prior Code, § 642.04)
Statutory reference:
   Theft offense involving a motor vehicle, offender to pay towing and storage
fees, see R.C. § 2913.82
§ 131.10 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PROPERTY, INCLUDING TELECOMMUNICATION PROPERTY AND
COMPUTERS; POSSESSION OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly use or operate the property of another
without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (B)   No person, in any manner and by any means, including but not limited
to computer hacking, shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
or cause access to be gained to any computer, computer system, computer
network, cable service, cable system, telecommunications device,
telecommunications service, or information service without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the owner of the
computer, computer system, computer network, cable service, cable system,
telecommunications device, telecommunications service, or information service
or other person authorized to give consent.
   (C)   Except as permitted under R.C. § 5503.101, no person shall knowingly
gain access to, attempt to gain access to, cause access to be granted to, or
disseminate information gained from access to the law enforcement automated
database system created pursuant to R.C. § 5503.10 without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the chair of the Law
Enforcement Automated Data System Steering Committee.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
cause access to be granted to, or disseminate information gained from access to
the Ohio law enforcement gateway established and operated pursuant to R.C. §
109.57(C)(1) without the consent of, or beyond the scope of the express or
implied consent of, the Superintendent of the Bureau of Criminal Identification
and Investigation.
   (E)   The affirmative defenses contained in R.C. § 2913.03(C) are
affirmative defenses to a charge under this section.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of property. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (1)   If unauthorized use of property is committed for the purpose of
devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to obtain property or services,
unauthorized use of property is whichever of the following is applicable:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided below, unauthorized use of property
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   If the value of the property or services or the loss to the
victim is $1,000 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, unauthorized use of property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of computer, cable, or telecommunication property, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (H)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the law enforcement automated database system, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (I)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the Ohio law enforcement gateway, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
   (J)   As used in this section:
      CABLE OPERATOR. Means any person or group of persons that does either of
the following:
         (a)   Provides cable service over a cable system and directly through
one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system;
         (b)   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of a cable system.
      CABLE SERVICE. Means any of the following:
         (a)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
of information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers
generally;
         (b)   Subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the
selection or use of video programming or of information that a cable operator
makes available to all subscribers generally, both as described in division (a)
of this definition;
         (c)   Any cable television service.
      CABLE SYSTEM. Means any facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video
programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community.
The term does not include any of the following:
         (a)   Any facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations;
         (b)   Any facility that serves subscribers without using any public
right-of-way;
         (c)   Any facility of a common carrier that, under 47 U.S.C. § 522(7)
(c), is excluded from the term “cable system” as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7);
         (d)   Any open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. § 573;
         (e)   Any facility of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility system.
(R.C. § 2913.04)
   (K)   Possession of municipal property.
      (1)   No person shall, without being authorized, have in his or her
control or possession any equipment, tools, implements or other property
belonging to the municipality.
(R.C. § 5589.12)
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (K) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
(Prior Code, §§ 642.05, 642.23)
Statutory reference:
   Telecommunications: fraud and unlawful use of a device, felony offenses, see
R.C. §§ 2913.05 and 2913.06
§ 131.11 PASSING BAD CHECKS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      CHECK. Includes any form of debit from a demand deposit account,
including but not limited to any of the following:
         (a)   A check, bill of exchange, draft, order of withdrawal, or
similar negotiable or non-negotiable instrument;
         (b)   An electronic check, electronic transaction, debit card
transaction, check card transaction, substitute check, web check, or any form
of automated clearing house transaction.
      ISSUE A CHECK. Means causing any form of debit from a demand deposit
account.
   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall issue or transfer or cause
to be issued or transferred a check or other negotiable instrument, knowing
that it will be dishonored or knowing that a person has ordered or will order
stop payment on the check or other negotiable instrument.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a check
or other negotiable instrument is presumed to know that it will be dishonored
if either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The drawer has no account with the drawee at the time of issue or
the stated date, whichever is later.
      (2)   The check or other negotiable instrument was properly refused
payment for insufficient funds upon presentment within 30 days after issue or
the stated date, whichever is later, and the liability of the drawer, indorser,
or any party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by payment or
satisfaction within ten days after receiving notice of dishonor.
   (D)   In determining the value of the payment for purposes of division (E)
of this section, the court may aggregate all checks and other negotiable
instruments that the offender issued or transferred or caused to be issued or
transferred in violation of division (B) of this section within a period of 180
consecutive days.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of passing bad checks. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, passing bad checks is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the check or checks or other negotiable instrument or
instruments are issued or transferred to a single vendor or single other person
for the payment of $1,000 or more, or if the check or checks or other
negotiable instrument or instruments are issued or transferred to multiple
vendors or persons for the payment of $1,500 or more, passing bad checks is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.11) (Prior Code, § 642.14)
§ 131.12 MISUSE OF CREDIT CARDS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Practice deception for the purpose of procuring the issuance of a
credit card, when a credit card is issued in actual reliance thereon;
      (2)   Knowingly buy or sell a credit card from or to a person other than
the issuer;
      (3)   As an officer, employee, or appointee of a political subdivision or
as a public servant as defined under R.C. § 2921.01, knowingly misuse a credit
card account held by a political subdivision.
   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Obtain control over a credit card as security for a debt;
      (2)   Obtain property or services by the use of a credit card, in one or
more transactions, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the card
has expired or been revoked, or was obtained, is retained, or is being used in
violation of law;
      (3)   Furnish property or services upon presentation of a credit card,
knowing that the card is being used in violation of law;
      (4)   Represent or cause to be represented to the issuer of a credit card
that property or services have been furnished, knowing that the representation
is false.
   (C)   No person, with purpose to violate this section, shall receive,
possess, control, or dispose of a credit card.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misuse of credit cards.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this section, a
violation of division (A), (B)(1), or (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (D)(3) of
this section, a violation of division (B)(2), (B)(3), or (B)(4) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the cumulative retail value of the
property and services involved in one or more violations of division (B)(2),
(B)(3), or (B)(4) of this section which violations involve one or more credit
card accounts and occur within a period of 90 consecutive days commencing on
the date of the first violation, is $1,000 or more, misuse of credit cards is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, and if the offense involves a violation of division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of
this section, misuse of credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.21) (Prior Code, § 642.15)
§ 131.13 MAKING OR USING SLUGS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Insert or deposit a slug in a coin machine, with purpose to
defraud;
      (2)   Make, possess, or dispose of a slug, with purpose of enabling
another to defraud by inserting or depositing it in a coin machine.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or using slugs, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2913.33) (Prior Code, § 642.16)
§ 131.14 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF PURPOSE TO DEFRAUD.
   In a prosecution of a person for a theft offense that alleges that the
person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she was facilitating a
fraud, hired or rented an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, kept
or operated any of the same that has been hired or rented, or engaged
accommodations at a hotel, motel, inn, campground, or other hostelry, it is
prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud if the person did any of the
following:
   (A)   Used deception to induce the rental agency to furnish the person with
the aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat, camper, trailer,
horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, or used deception to induce the
hostelry to furnish the person with accommodations;
   (B)   Hired or rented any aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, or
engaged accommodations, knowing that he or she is without sufficient means to
pay the hire or rental;
   (C)   Absconded without paying the hire or rental;
   (D)   Knowingly failed to pay the hire or rental as required by the contract
of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure;
   (E)   Knowingly failed to return hired or rented property as required by the
contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure.
(R.C. § 2913.41) (Prior Code, § 642.17)
§ 131.15 TAMPERING WITH RECORDS.
   (A)   No person, knowing that he or she has no privilege to do so, and with
purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is facilitating a fraud, shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Falsify, destroy, remove, conceal, alter, deface, or mutilate any
writing, computer software, data, or record;
      (2)   Utter any writing or record, knowing it to have been tampered with
as provided in division (A)(1) of this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with records.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section, if the
offense does not involve data or computer software, tampering with records is
whichever of the following is applicable:
         (a)   If division (B)(1)(b) of this section does not apply, it is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   If the writing or record is a will unrevoked at the time of the
offense, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section, if the
offense involves a violation of division (A) of this section involving data or
computer software, tampering with records is whichever of the following is
applicable:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2)(b) of this
section, it is a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         (b)   If the value of the data or computer software involved in the
offense or the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more or if the offense is
committed for the purpose of devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to
obtain property or services and the value of the property or services or the
loss to the victim is $7,500 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the writing, data, computer software, or record is kept by or
belongs to a local, state, or federal governmental entity, it is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.42) (Prior Code, § 642.18)
§ 131.16 SECURING WRITINGS BY DECEPTION.
   (A)   No person, by deception, shall cause another to execute any writing
that disposes of or encumbers property, or by which a pecuniary obligation is
incurred.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of securing writings by
deception. Except as otherwise provided in this division, securing writings by
deception is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property or
the obligation involved is $1,000 or more, securing writings by deception is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate to state law. If the victim of the
offense is an elderly person, disabled adult, active duty service member, or
spouse of an active duty service member, securing writings by deception is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.43) (Prior Code, § 642.19)
§ 131.17 DEFRAUDING CREDITORS.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud one or more of his or her
creditors, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Remove, conceal, destroy, encumber, convey, or otherwise deal with
any of his or her property;
      (2)   Misrepresent or refuse to disclose to a fiduciary appointed to
administer or manage his or her affairs or estate, the existence, amount, or
location of any of his or her property, or any other information regarding the
property which he or she is legally required to furnish to the fiduciary.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding creditors.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, defrauding creditors is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property involved is
$1,000 or more, defrauding creditors is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.45) (Prior Code, § 642.21)
§ 131.18 RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall receive, retain, or dispose of property of another
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the property has been
obtained through commission of a theft offense.
   (B)   It is not a defense to a charge of receiving stolen property in
violation of this section that the property was obtained by means other than
through the commission of a theft offense if the property was explicitly
represented to the accused person as being obtained through the commission of a
theft offense.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of receiving stolen property.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, receiving stolen property is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If any of the following criteria are met, then
a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law:
      (1)   The value of the property involved is $1,000 or more;
      (2)   The property involved is any of the property listed in R.C. §
2913.71;
      (3)   The property involved is a firearm or dangerous ordnance, as
defined in R.C. § 2923.11;
      (4)   The property involved is a motor vehicle as defined in R.C. §
4501.01;
      (5)   The property involved is any dangerous drug, as defined in R.C. §
4729.01; or
      (6)   The property involved in violation of this section is a special
purchase article as defined in R.C. § 4737.04 or a bulk merchandise container
as defined in R.C. § 4737.012.
(R.C. § 2913.51) (Prior Code, § 642.22)
§ 131.19 VALUE OF STOLEN PROPERTY.
   (A)   If more than one item of property or services is involved in a theft
offense or in a violation of R.C. § 1716.14(A) involving a victim who is an
elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose of
determining the value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value
of all property or services involved in the offense.
   (B)   (1)   When a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of
violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or
complicity in violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A), R.C. § 2913.02, 2913.03, or
2913.04, R.C. § 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or R.C. § 2913.31 or 2913.43 involving
a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, is committed by the
offender in the offender’s same employment, capacity, or relationship to
another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single offense. When a
series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of violations of, attempts
to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations
of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43 involving a victim who is an active duty service
member or spouse of an active duty service member, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, is committed by the
offender in the offender’s same employment, capacity, or relationship to
another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single offense. The value of
the property or services involved in the series of offenses for the purpose of
determining the value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value
of all property and services involved in all offenses in the series.
      (2)   If an offender commits a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02
that involves a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims, all of
the offenses may be tried as a single offense. If an offender is being tried
for the commission of a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation
of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A),
R.C. § 2913.02, 2913.03, or 2913.04, R.C. § 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or R.C. §
2913.31 or 2913.43, whether committed against one victim or more than one
victim, involving a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, pursuant
to a scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a
single offense. If an offender is being tried for the commission of a series of
violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or
complicity in violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, whether committed
against one victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who is an active
duty service member or spouse of an active duty service member pursuant to a
scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a single
offense. If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the value of the
property or services involved for the purpose of determining the value as
required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and
services involved in all of the offenses in the course of conduct.
      (3)   When a series of two or more offenses under R.C. § 2913.40,
2913.48, or 2921.41 is committed by the offender in the offender’s same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another, all of those offenses may be
tried as a single offense. If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the
value of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the
value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property
and services involved in all of the offenses in the series of two or more
offenses.
      (4)   In prosecuting a single offense under division (B)(1), (B)(2) or
(B)(3) of this section, it is not necessary to separately allege and prove each
offense in the series. Rather, it is sufficient to allege and prove that the
offender, within a given span of time, committed one or more theft offenses or
violations of R.C. § 2913.40, 2913.48, or 2921.41 in the offender’s same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another as described in division (B)
(1) or (B)(3) of this section, or committed one or more theft offenses that
involve a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims or a scheme or
course of conduct as described in division (B)(2) of this section. While it is
not necessary to separately allege and prove each offense in the series in
order to prosecute a single offense under division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of
this section, it remains necessary in prosecuting them as a single offense to
prove the aggregate value of the property or services in order to meet the
requisite statutory offense level sought by the prosecution.
   (C)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   The value of an heirloom, memento, collector’s item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record, or other thing that has intrinsic
worth to its owner and that either is irreplaceable or is replaceable only on
the expenditure of substantial time, effort, or money, is the amount which
would compensate the owner for its loss.
      (2)   The value of personal effects and household goods, and of
materials, supplies, equipment, and fixtures used in the profession, business,
trade, occupation, or avocation of its owner, which property is not covered
under division (C)(1) of this section, and which retains substantial utility
for its purpose regardless of its age or condition, is the cost of replacing
such property with new property of like kind and quality.
      (3)   The value of any real or personal property that is not covered
under division (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section, and the value of services, is
the fair market value of the property or services. As used in this section,
FAIR MARKET VALUE is the money consideration which a buyer would give and a
seller would accept for property or services, assuming that the buyer is
willing to buy and the seller is willing to sell, that both are fully informed
as to all facts material to the transaction, and that neither is under any
compulsion to act.
   (D)   Without limitation on the evidence which may be used to establish the
value of property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   When the property involved is personal property held for sale at
wholesale or retail, the price at which the property was held for sale is prima
facie evidence of its value.
      (2)   When the property involved is a security or commodity traded on an
exchange, the closing price or, if there is no closing price, the asked price,
given in the latest marked quotation prior to the offense, is prima facie
evidence of the value of the security or commodity.
      (3)   When the property involved is livestock, poultry, or raw
agricultural products for which a local market price is available, the latest
local market price prior to the offense is prima facie evidence of the value of
the livestock, poultry, or products.
      (4)   When the property involved is a negotiable instrument, the face
value is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (5)   When the property involved is a warehouse receipt, bill of lading,
pawn ticket, claim check, or other instrument entitling the holder or bearer to
receive property, the face value or, if there is no face value, the value of
the property covered by the instrument less any payment necessary to receive
the property, is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (6)   When the property involved is a ticket of admission, ticket for
transportation, coupon, token, or other instrument entitling the holder or
bearer to receive property or services, the face value or, if there is no face
value, the value of the property or services which may be received by the
instrument is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (7)   When the services involved are gas, electricity, water, telephone,
transportation, shipping, or other services for which the rate is established
by law, the duly established rate is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
      (8)   When the services involved are services for which the rate is not
established by law, and the offender has been notified prior to the offense of
the rate for the services, either in writing, or orally, or by posting in a
manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential offenders,
the rate contained in the notice is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
(R.C. § 2913.61(B) - (E)) (Prior Code, § 642.24)
§ 131.20 DEGREE OF OFFENSE WHEN CERTAIN PROPERTY INVOLVED.
   Regardless of the value of the property involved, and regardless of whether
the offender previously has been convicted of a theft offense, a violation of §
131.08 or §
131.18 is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the property
involved is any of the following:
   (A)   A credit card;
   (B)   A printed form for a check or other negotiable instrument, that on its
face identifies the drawer or maker for whose use it is designed or identifies
the account on which it is to be drawn, and that has not been executed by the
drawer or maker or on which the amount is blank;
   (C)   A motor vehicle identification license plate as prescribed by R.C. §
4503.22, a temporary motor vehicle license registration as prescribed by R.C. §
4503.182, or any comparable temporary motor vehicle license registration as
prescribed by the applicable law of another state or the United States;
   (D)   A blank form for a certificate of title or a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate to a motor vehicle, as prescribed by R.C. § 4505.07;
   (E)   A blank form for any license listed in R.C. § 4507.01.
(R.C. § 2913.71) (Prior Code, § 642.03)
§ 131.21 INJURING VINES, BUSHES, TREES, OR CROPS.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly cut down,
destroy, girdle, or otherwise injure a vine, bush, shrub, sapling, tree, or
crop standing or growing on the land of another or upon public land.
   (B)   In addition to the penalty provided in division (C) of this section,
whoever violates this section is liable in treble damages for the injury
caused.
(R.C. § 901.51)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 901.99(A))
(Prior Code, § 642.06)
§ 131.22 DETENTION AND ARREST OF SHOPLIFTERS AND THOSE COMMITTING MOTION
PICTURE PIRACY; PROTECTION OF INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ARCHIVAL INSTITUTION. Means any public or private building, structure, or
shelter in which are stored historical documents, devices, records,
manuscripts, or items of public interest, which historical materials are stored
to preserve the materials or the information in the materials, to disseminate
the information contained in the materials, or to make the materials available
for public inspection or for inspection by certain persons who have a
particular interest in, use for, or knowledge concerning the materials.
      AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2913.07.
      FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.07.
      MUSEUM. Means any public or private nonprofit institution that is
permanently organized for primarily educational or aesthetic purposes, owns or
borrows objects or items of public interest, and cares for and exhibits to the
public the objects or items.
      PRETRIAL DIVERSION PROGRAM. Means a rehabilitative, educational program
designed to reduce recidivism and promote personal responsibility that is at
least four hours in length and that has been approved by any court in this
state.
   (B)   A merchant, or an employee or agent of a merchant, who has probable
cause to believe that things offered for sale by a mercantile establishment
have been unlawfully taken by a person, may, for the purposes set forth in
division (D) below, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable
length of time within the mercantile establishment or its immediate vicinity.
   (C)   Any officer, employee, or agent of a library, museum, or archival
institution may, for the purposes set forth in division (D) below or for the
purpose of conducting a reasonable investigation of a belief that the person
has acted in a manner described in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) below, detain a
person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time within, or in the
immediate vicinity of, the library, museum, or archival institution, if the
officer, employee, or agent has probable cause to believe that the person has:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly moved, defaced, damaged,
destroyed, or otherwise improperly tampered with property owned by or in the
custody of the library, museum, or archival institution; or
      (2)   With purpose to deprive the library, museum, or archival
institution of property owned by it or in its custody, knowingly obtained or
exerted control over the property without the consent of the owner or person
authorized to give consent, beyond the scope of the express or implied consent
of the owner or person authorized to give consent, by deception, or by threat.
   (D)   An officer, agent, or employee of a library, museum, or archival
institution pursuant to division (C) above or a merchant or an employee or
agent of a merchant pursuant to division (B) above may detain another person
for any of the following purposes:
      (1)   To recover the property that is the subject of the unlawful taking,
criminal mischief, or theft;
      (2)   To cause an arrest to be made by a peace officer;
      (3)   To obtain a warrant of arrest;
      (4)   To offer the person, if the person is suspected of the unlawful
taking, criminal mischief, or theft and notwithstanding any other provision of
this Code or the Ohio Revised Code, an opportunity to complete a pretrial
diversion program and to inform the person of the other legal remedies
available to the library, museum, archival institution, or merchant.
   (E)   The owner or lessee of a facility in which a motion picture is being
shown, or the owner’s or lessee’s employee or agent, who has probable cause to
believe that a person is or has been operating an audiovisual recording
function of a device in violation of R.C. § 2917.07 may, for the purpose of
causing an arrest to be made by a peace officer or of obtaining an arrest
warrant, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of
time within the facility or its immediate vicinity.
   (F)   The officer, agent, or employee of the library, museum, or archival
institution, the merchant or an employee or agent of a merchant, or the owner,
lessee, employee, or agent of the facility acting under divisions (B), (C) or
(E) above shall not search the person detained, search or seize any property
belonging to the person detained without the person’s consent, or use undue
restraint upon the person detained.
   (G)   Any peace officer may arrest without a warrant any person that the
officer has probable cause to believe has committed any act described in
divisions (C)(1) or (C)(2) above, that the officer has probable cause to
believe has committed an unlawful taking in a mercantile establishment, or that
the officer has reasonable cause to believe has committed an act prohibited by
R.C. § 2913.07. An arrest under this division shall be made within a reasonable
time after the commission of the act or unlawful taking.
(R.C. § 2935.041) (Prior Code, § 642.23)
Statutory reference:
   Arrest without a warrant generally, see R.C. § 2935.03
   Probable cause, see R.C. § 2933.22
§ 131.23 INSURANCE FRAUD; WORKERS’ COMPENSATION FRAUD; MEDICAID FRAUD.
   (A)   Insurance fraud.
      (1)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
         (a)   Present to, or cause to be presented to, an insurer any written
or oral statement that is part of, or in support of, an application for
insurance, a claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other
benefit pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the
statement, is false or deceptive;
         (b)   Assist, aid, abet, solicit, procure, or conspire with another to
prepare or make any written or oral statement that is intended to be presented
to an insurer as part of, or in support of, an application for insurance, a
claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement,
is false or deceptive.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of insurance fraud.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, insurance fraud is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the amount of the claim that is false or deceptive is
$1,000 or more, insurance fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   This division (A) shall not be construed to abrogate, waive, or
modify R.C. § 2317.02(A).
      (4)   As used in this division (A):
         DATA. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01 and additionally
includes any other representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts,
or instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner.
         DECEPTIVE. Means that a statement, in whole or in part, would cause
another to be deceived because it contains a misleading representation,
withholds information, prevents the acquisition of information, or by any other
conduct, act, or omission creates, confirms, or perpetuates a false impression,
including but not limited to a false impression as to law, value, state of
mind, or other objective or subjective fact.
         INSURER. Means any person that is authorized to engage in the business
of insurance in this state under R.C. Title 39, the Ohio Fair Plan Underwriting
Association created under R.C. § 3929.43, any health insuring corporation, and
any legal entity that is self-insured and provides benefits to its employees or
members.
         POLICY. Means a policy, certificate, contract, or plan that is issued
by an insurer.
         STATEMENT. Includes but is not limited to any notice, letter, or
memorandum; proof of loss; bill of lading; receipt for payment; invoice,
account, or other financial statement; estimate of property damage; bill for
services; diagnosis or prognosis; prescription; hospital, medical, or dental
chart or other record; x-ray, photograph, videotape, or movie film; test
result; other evidence of loss, injury, or expense; computer-generated
document; and data in any form.
(R.C. § 2913.47)
   (B)   Workers’ compensation fraud.
      (1)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud shall do any of the following:
         (a)   Receive workers’ compensation benefits to which the person is
not entitled;
         (b)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false or
misleading statement with the purpose to secure payment for goods or services
rendered under R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131 or to secure workers’
compensation benefits;
         (c)   Alter, falsify, destroy, conceal, or remove any record or
document that is necessary to fully establish the validity of any claim filed
with, or necessary to establish the nature and validity of all goods and
services for which reimbursement or payment was received or is requested from
the Bureau of Workers’ Compensation, or a self-insuring employer under R.C.
Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131;
         (d)   Enter into an agreement or conspiracy to defraud the Bureau of
Workers’ Compensation or a self-insuring employer by making or presenting or
causing to be made or presented a false claim for workers’ compensation
benefits;
         (e)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false
statement concerning manual codes, classification or employees, payroll, paid
compensation, or number of personnel, when information of that nature is
necessary to determine the actual workers’ compensation premium or assessment
owed to the Bureau by an employer;
         (f)   Alter, forge, or create a workers’ compensation certificate or
falsely show current or correct workers’ compensation coverage;
         (g)   Fail to secure or maintain workers’ compensation coverage as
required by R.C. Chapter 4123 with the intent to defraud the Bureau of Workers’
Compensation.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of workers’
compensation fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, workers’
compensation fraud is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of
premiums and assessments unpaid pursuant to actions described in divisions (B)
(1)(e), (B)(1)(f), or (B)(1)(g) of this section, or goods, services, property,
or money stolen is $1,000 or more, workers’ compensation fraud is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Upon application of the governmental body that conducted the
investigation and prosecution of a violation of this division (B), the court
shall order the person who is convicted of the violation to pay the
governmental body its costs of investigating and prosecuting the case. These
costs are in addition to any other costs or penalty provided under federal,
state or local law.
      (4)   The remedies and penalties provided in this division (B) are not
exclusive remedies and penalties and do not preclude the use of any other
criminal or civil remedy or penalty for any act that is in violation of this
division (B).
      (5)   As used in this division (B):
         CLAIM. Means any attempt to cause the Bureau of Workers’ Compensation,
an independent third party with whom the administrator or an employer contracts
under R.C. § 4121.44, or a self-insuring employer to make payment or
reimbursement for workers’ compensation benefits.
         EMPLOYEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4123.01.
         EMPLOYER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4123.01.
         EMPLOYMENT. Means participating in any trade, occupation, business,
service, or profession for substantial gainful remuneration.
         FALSE. Means wholly or partially untrue or deceptive.
         GOODS. Includes but is not limited to medical supplies, appliances,
rehabilitative equipment, and any other apparatus or furnishing provided or
used in the care, treatment, or rehabilitation of a claimant for workers’
compensation benefits.
         RECORDS. Means any medical, professional, financial, or business
record relating to the treatment or care of any person, to goods or services
provided to any person, or to rates paid for goods or services provided to any
person, or any record that the administrator of workers’ compensation requires
pursuant to rule.
         REMUNERATION. Includes but is not limited to wages, commissions,
rebates, and any other reward or consideration.
         SELF-INSURING EMPLOYER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4123.01.
         SERVICES. Includes but is not limited to any service provided by any
health care provider to a claimant for workers’ compensation benefits and any
and all services provided by the Bureau as part of workers’ compensation
insurance coverage.
         STATEMENT. Includes but is not limited to any oral, written,
electronic, electronic impulse, or magnetic communication notice, letter,
memorandum, receipt for payment, invoice, account, financial statement, or bill
for services; a diagnosis, prognosis, prescription, hospital, medical, or
dental chart or other record; and a computer generated document.
         WORKERS’ COMPENSATION BENEFITS. Means any compensation or benefits
payable under R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131.
(R.C. § 2913.48)
   (C)   Medicaid fraud.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a false or
misleading statement or representation for use in obtaining reimbursement from
the Medicaid program.
      (2)   No person, with purpose to commit fraud or knowing that the person
is facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
         (a)   Contrary to the terms of the person’s provider agreement,
charge, solicit, accept or receive for goods or services that the person
provides under the Medicaid program any property, money or other consideration
in addition to the amount of reimbursement under the Medicaid program and the
person’s provider agreement for the goods or services and any cost-sharing
expenses authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid Director
regarding the Medicaid program.
         (b)   Solicit, offer or receive any remuneration, other than any cost-
sharing expenses authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid
Director regarding the Medicaid program, in cash or in kind, including but not
limited to a kickback or rebate, in connection with the furnishing of goods or
services for which whole or partial reimbursement is or may be made under the
Medicaid program.
      (3)   No person, having submitted a claim for or provided goods or
services under the Medicaid program, shall do either of the following for a
period of at least six years after a reimbursement pursuant to that claim, or a
reimbursement for those goods or services, is received under the Medicaid
program:
         (a)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to fully disclose the nature of all goods or services for
which the claim was submitted, or for which reimbursement was received, by the
person; or
         (b)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to disclose fully all income and expenditures upon which
rates of reimbursements were based for the person.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (C) is guilty of Medicaid fraud.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, Medicaid fraud is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the value of the property, services or funds obtained
in violation of this section is $1,000 or more, Medicaid fraud is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (5)   Upon application of the governmental agency, office or other entity
that conducted the investigation and prosecution in a case under this section,
the court shall order any person who is convicted of a violation of this
section for receiving any reimbursement for furnishing goods or services under
the Medicaid program to which the person is not entitled to pay to the
applicant its cost of investigating and prosecuting the case. The costs of
investigation and prosecution that a defendant is ordered to pay pursuant to
this division shall be in addition to any other penalties for the receipt of
that reimbursement that are provided in this section, R.C. § 2913.40 or
5164.35, or any other provision of law.
      (6)   The provisions of this section are not intended to be exclusive
remedies and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this section.
      (7)   As used in this division (C):
         PROVIDER. Means any person who has signed a provider agreement with
the Department of Medicaid to provide goods or services pursuant to the
Medicaid program or any person who has signed an agreement with a party to such
a provider agreement under which the person agrees to provide goods or services
that are reimbursable under the Medicaid program.
         PROVIDER AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
         RECIPIENT. Means any individual who receives goods or services from a
provider under the Medicaid program.
         RECORDS. Means any medical, professional, financial or business
records relating to the treatment or care of any recipient, to goods or
services provided to any recipient, or to rates paid for goods or services
provided to any recipient, and any records that are required by the rules of
the Medicaid Director to be kept for the Medicaid program.
         STATEMENT or REPRESENTATION. Means any oral, written, electronic,
electronic impulse or magnetic communication that is used to identify an item
of goods or a service for which reimbursement may be made under the Medicaid
program or that states income and expense and is or may be used to determine a
rate of reimbursement under the Medicaid program.
(R.C. § 2913.40)
   (D)   Medicaid eligibility fraud.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following in an application
for enrollment in the Medicaid program or in a document that requires a
disclosure of assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for the
Medicaid program:
         (a)   Make or cause to be made a false or misleading statement;
         (b)   Conceal an interest in property;
         (c)   1.   Except as provided in division (D)(1)(c)2. of this section,
fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during the period
beginning 36 months before submission of the application or document and ending
on the date the application or document was submitted;
            2.   Fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during
the period beginning 60 months before submission of the application or document
and ending on the date the application or document was submitted and that was
made to an irrevocable trust a portion of which is not distributable to the
applicant for or recipient of Medicaid or to a revocable trust.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates this division (D) is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation
of this division (D) is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the
Medicaid services paid as a result of the violation is $1,000 or more, a
violation of this division (D) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
         (b)   In addition to imposing a sentence under division (D)(2)(a) of
this section, the court shall order that a person who is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud make restitution in the full amount of any Medicaid services
paid on behalf of an applicant for or recipient of Medicaid for which the
applicant or recipient was not eligible, plus interest at the rate applicable
to judgments on unreimbursed amounts from the date on which the Medicaid
services were paid to the date on which restitution is made.
         (c)   The remedies and penalties provided in this division (D) are not
exclusive and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this division (D).
      (3)   This division (D) does not apply to a person who fully disclosed in
an application for Medicaid or in a document that requires a disclosure of
assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for Medicaid all of the
interests in property of the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, all
transfers of property by the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, and the
circumstances of all those transfers.
      (4)   Any amounts of Medicaid services recovered as restitution under
this division (D) and any interest on those amounts shall be credited to the
General Revenue Fund, and any applicable federal share shall be returned to the
appropriate agency or department of the United States.
      (5)   As used in this division (D):
         MEDICAID SERVICES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
         PROPERTY. Means any real or personal property or other asset in which
a person has any legal title or interest.
(R.C. § 2913.401)
(Prior Code, §§ 642.29, 642.30, 642.31)
§ 131.24 INJURY TO PROPERTY BY HUNTERS.
   (A)   No person in the act of hunting, pursuing, taking, or killing a wild
animal shall act in a negligent, careless, or reckless manner so as to injure
property.
(R.C. § 1533.171(A))
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 1533.99(C))
Statutory reference:
   Violation, license revocation, see R.C. § 1533.171(B) through (E)
§ 131.25 EVIDENCE OF INTENT TO COMMIT THEFT OF RENTED PROPERTY OR RENTAL
SERVICES; EVIDENCE OF LACK OF CAPACITY TO CONSENT.
   (A)   Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental
services.
      (1)   As used in this division (A):
         RENTER. Means a person who owns rented property.
         RENTEE. Means a person who pays consideration to a renter for the use
of rented property.
      (2)   Each of the following shall be considered evidence of intent to
commit theft of rented property or rental services:
         (a)   At the time of entering into the rental contract, the rentee
presented the renter with identification that was materially false, fictitious,
or not current with respect to name, address, place of employment, or other
relevant information.
         (b)   After receiving a notice demanding the return of the rented
property as provided in division (A)(3) of this section, the rentee neither
returned the rented property nor made arrangements acceptable with the renter
to return the rented property.
      (3)   To establish that a rentee has an intent to commit theft of rented
property or rental services under division (A)(2)(b) above, a renter may issue
a notice to a rentee demanding the return of the rented property. The renter
shall mail the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
rentee at the address the rentee gave when the rental contract was executed, or
to the rentee at the last address the rentee or the rentee’s agent furnished in
writing to the renter.
      (4)   A demand for the return of the rented property is not a
prerequisite for the prosecution of a rentee for theft of rented property or
rental services. The evidence specified in division (A)(2) above does not
constitute the only evidence that may be considered as evidence of intent to
commit theft of rented property or rental services.
(R.C. § 2913.72)
   (B)   Evidence of lack of capacity to consent.
      (1)   In a prosecution for any alleged violation of §
131.08 through
131.20,
131.23,
131.25 through
131.29, or
132.11, if the lack of consent of the victim is an element of the provision
that allegedly was violated, evidence that, at the time of the alleged
violation, the victim lacked the capacity to give consent is admissible to show
that the victim did not give consent.
      (2)   As used in this section, LACKS THE CAPACITY TO CONSENT means being
impaired for any reason to the extent that the person lacks sufficient
understanding or capacity to make and carry out reasonable decisions concerning
the person or the person’s resources.
(R.C. § 2913.73)
(Prior Code, § 642.035)
§ 131.26 FORGERY OF IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Forge an identification card.
      (2)   Sell or otherwise distribute a card that purports to be an
identification card, knowing it was forged.
   (B)   As used in this section, IDENTIFICATION CARD means a card that
includes personal information or characteristics of an individual, a purpose of
which is to establish the identity of the bearer described on the card, whether
the words “identity”, “identification”, “identification card”, or other similar
words appear on the card.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of forging
identification cards or selling or distributing forged identification cards.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, forging identification cards or
selling or distributing forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (A) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, forging identification cards or selling or distributing
forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the first degree and, in
addition, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine not less than $250.
      (2)    If the victim of a violation of this section is an elderly person,
R.C. § 2913.31(C)(2)(b) applies and the offense shall be prosecuted under R.C.
§ 2913.31.
(R.C. § 2913.31(B), (C)(2)) (Prior Code, § 642.145)
Statutory reference:
   Forgery, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2913.31(A) and (C)(1)
   Forgery of originating address or other routing information in connection
with the transmission of an electronic mail advertisement, felony provisions,
see R.C. § 2307.64
§ 131.27 CRIMINAL SIMULATION.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud, or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Make or alter any object so that it appears to have value because
of antiquity, rarity, curiosity, source, or authorship, which it does not in
fact possess.
      (2)   Practice deception in making, retouching, editing, or reproducing
any photograph, movie film, video tape, phonograph record, or recording tape.
      (3)   Falsely or fraudulently make, simulate, forge, alter, or
counterfeit any wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor
Control Commission under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, falsely or fraudulently
cause to be made, simulated, forged, altered, or counterfeited any wrapper,
label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under
R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, or use more than once any wrapper, label, stamp,
cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under R.C. Chapters
4301 and 4303.
      (4)   Offer, or possess with the purpose to offer, any object that the
person knows to have been simulated as provided in divisions (A)(1), (A)(2) or
(A)(3) of this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal simulation. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, criminal simulation is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more, criminal
simulation is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.32) (Prior Code, § 642.146)
§ 131.28 PERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is
facilitating a fraud, or with purpose to induce another to purchase property or
services, shall personate a law enforcement officer, or an inspector,
investigator, or agent of any governmental agency.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of personating an officer, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2913.44) (Prior Code, § 642.20)
Cross-reference:
   Impersonating an officer (non-fraud offense), see §
132.12
§ 131.29 TRADEMARK COUNTERFEITING.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Attach, affix, or otherwise use a counterfeit mark in connection
with the manufacture of goods or services, whether or not the goods or services
are intended for sale or resale.
      (2)   Possess, sell, or offer for sale tools, machines, instruments,
materials, articles, or other items of personal property with the knowledge
that they are designed for the production or reproduction of counterfeit marks.
      (3)   Purchase or otherwise acquire goods, and keep or otherwise have the
goods in the person’s possession, with the knowledge that a counterfeit mark is
attached to, affixed to, or otherwise used in connection with the goods and
with the intent to sell or otherwise dispose of the goods.
      (4)   Sell, offer for sale, or otherwise dispose of goods with the
knowledge that a counterfeit mark is attached to, affixed to, or otherwise used
in connection with the goods.
      (5)   Sell, offer for sale, or otherwise provide services with the
knowledge that a counterfeit mark is used in connection with that sale, offer
for sale, or other provision of the services.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of trademark counterfeiting.
      (1)   A violation of division (A)(1) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)    Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of
division (A)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
circumstances of the violation indicate that the tools, machines, instruments,
materials, articles, or other items of personal property involved in the
violation were intended for use in the commission of a felony, a violation of
division (A)(2) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of
division (A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the cumulative sales price of the goods or services to which or in
connection with which the counterfeit mark is attached, affixed or otherwise
used in the offense is $1,000 or more, a violation of division (A)(3), (A)(4)
or (A)(5) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   A defendant may assert as an affirmative defense to a charge of a
violation of this section defenses, affirmative defenses, and limitations on
remedies that would be available in a civil, criminal or administrative action
or proceeding under the Lanham Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 1051 through 1127, as
amended, the Trademark Counterfeiting Act of 1984, being 18 U.S.C. § 2320, as
amended, R.C. Chapter 1329 or another section of the Ohio Revised Code, or
common law.
   (D)   (1)   Law enforcement officers may seize pursuant to Criminal Rule 41,
R.C. Chapter 2933, or R.C. Chapter 2981 either of the following:
         (a)   Goods to which or in connection with which a person attached,
affixed, otherwise used, or intended to attach, affix or otherwise use a
counterfeit mark in violation of this section.
         (b)   Tools, machines, instruments, materials, articles, vehicles or
other items of personal property that are possessed, sold, offered for sale, or
used in a violation of this section or in an attempt to commit or complicity in
the commission of a violation of this section.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. Chapter 2981, if a
person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section, an
attempt to violate this section, or complicity in a violation of this section,
the court involved shall declare that the goods described in division (D)(1)(a)
of this section and the personal property described in division (D)(1)(b) of
this section are contraband and are forfeited. Prior to the court’s entry of
judgment under Criminal Rule 32, the owner of a registered trademark or service
mark that is the subject to the counterfeit mark may recommend a manner in
which the forfeited goods and forfeited personal property should be disposed
of. If that owner makes a timely recommendation of a manner of disposition, the
court is not bound by the recommendation. If that owner makes a timely
recommendation of a manner of disposition, the court may include in its entry
of judgment an order that requires appropriate persons to dispose of the
forfeited goods and forfeited personal property in the recommended manner. If
the owner fails to make a timely recommendation of a manner of disposition or
if that owner makes a timely recommendation of a manner of disposition but the
court determines to not follow the recommendation, the court shall include in
its entry of judgement an order that requires the law enforcement agency that
employs the law enforcement officer who seized the forfeited goods or the
forfeited personal property to destroy them or cause their destruction.
   (E)   This section does not affect the rights of an owner of a trademark or
service mark, or the enforcement in a civil action or in administrative
proceedings of the rights of an owner or a trademark or service mark under the
Lanham Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 1051 through 1127, as amended, the Trademark
Counterfeiting Act of 1984, being 18 U.S.C. § 2320, as amended, R.C. Chapter
1329, or another section of the Ohio Revised Code, or common law.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      COUNTERFEIT MARK.
         (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this definition, the term
means a spurious trademark or a spurious service mark that satisfies both of
the following:
            1.   It is identical with or substantially indistinguishable from a
mark that is registered on the principal register in the United States Patent
and Trademark Office for the same goods or services as the goods or services to
which or in connection with which the spurious trademark or spurious service
mark is attached, affixed, or otherwise used, or from a mark that is registered
with the Secretary of State pursuant to R.C. §§ 1329.54 through 1329.67 for the
same goods or services as the goods or services to which or in connection with
which the spurious trademark or spurious service mark is attached, affixed, or
otherwise used, and the owner of the registration uses that registered
trademark, whether or not the offender knows that the mark is registered in a
manner described in this division (a)1.
            2.   Its use is likely to cause confusion or mistake or to deceive
other persons.
         (b)   The term does not include a mark or other designation that is
attached to, affixed to, or otherwise used in connection with goods or services
if the holder of the right to use the mark or other designation authorizes the
manufacturer, producer, or vendor of those goods or services to attach, affix,
or otherwise use the mark or other designation in connection with those goods
or services at the time of their manufacture, production or sale.
      CUMULATIVE SALES PRICE. Means the product of the lowest single unit sales
price charged or sought to be charged by an offender for goods to which or in
connection with which a counterfeit mark is attached, affixed, or otherwise
used or of the lowest single service transaction price charged or sought to be
charged by an offender for services in connection with which a counterfeit mark
is used, multiplied by the total number of those goods or services, whether or
not units of goods are sold or are in an offender’s possession, custody or
control.
      REGISTERED TRADEMARK OR SERVICE MARK. Means a trademark or service mark
that is registered in a manner described in division (a) of the definition of
“counterfeit mark”.
      SERVICE MARK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1329.54.
      TRADEMARK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1329.54.
(R.C. § 2913.34)
§ 131.30 DIMINISHING OR INTERFERING WITH FORFEITABLE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall destroy, damage, remove, or transfer property that is
subject to forfeiture or otherwise take any action in regard to property that
is subject to forfeiture with purpose to do any of the following:
      (1)   Prevent or impair the state’s or political subdivision’s lawful
authority to take the property into its custody or control under R.C. Chapter
2981 or to continue holding the property under its lawful custody or control;
      (2)   Impair or defeat the court’s continuing jurisdiction over the
person and property;
      (3)   Devalue property that the person knows, or has reasonable cause to
believe, is subject to forfeiture proceedings under R.C. Chapter 2981.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with or
diminishing forfeitable property. Except as otherwise provided in this division
(B), interference with or diminishing forfeitable property is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the property is $1,000 or more, interference
with or diminishing forfeitable property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2981.07) (Prior Code, § 642.205)
§ 131.31 RECORDING CREDIT CARD, TELEPHONE OR SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS.
   (A)   No person shall record or cause to be recorded either of the
following:
      (1)   A credit card account number of the other party to a transaction,
when a check, bill of exchange or other draft is presented for payment; or
      (2)   The telephone number or Social Security account number of the other
party to a transaction, when payment is made by credit card charge agreement,
check, bill of exchange or other draft.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a transaction, if all
of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number is recorded for a legitimate business purpose, including
collection purposes.
      (2)   The other party to the transaction consents to the recording of the
credit card account number, Social Security account number or telephone number.
      (3)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number that is recorded during the course of the transaction is not
disclosed to any third party for any purposes other than collection purposes
and is not used to market goods or services unrelated to the goods or services
purchased in the transaction.
   (C)   Nothing in this section prohibits the recording of the number of a
credit card account when given in lieu of a deposit to secure payment in the
event of default, loss, damage or other occurrence, or requires a person to
accept a check presented for payment, if the other party to the transaction
refuses to consent to the recording of the number of the party’s Social
Security account or license to operate a motor vehicle.
(R.C. § 1349.17)
   (D)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1349.99(A))
(Prior Code, § 642.155)
§ 131.32 PROSECUTIONS FOR THEFT OF UTILITIES.
   (A)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in R.C. § 2913.01,
that involves alleged tampering with a gas, electric, steam or water meter,
conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the utility,
proof that a meter, conduit or attachment of a utility has been tampered with
is prima facie evidence that the person who is obligated to pay for the service
rendered through the meter, conduit or attachment, and who is in possession or
control of the meter, conduit or attachment at the time the tampering occurred
has caused the tampering with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (B)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in R.C. § 2913.01,
that involves the alleged reconnection of a gas, electric, steam or water
meter, conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the
utility, proof that a meter, conduit or attachment disconnected by a utility
has been reconnected without the consent of the utility is prima facie evidence
that the person in possession or control of the meter, conduit or attachment at
the time of the reconnection has reconnected the meter, conduit or attachment
with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (C)   As used in this section:
      TAMPER. Means to interfere with, damage or bypass a utility meter,
conduit or attachment with the intent to impede the correct registration of a
meter or the proper functions of a conduit or attachment so as to reduce the
amount of utility service that is registered on the meter.
      UTILITY. Means any electric light company, gas company, natural gas
company, pipe-line company, water-works company or heating or cooling company,
as defined in R.C. § 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), its lessees,
trustees or receivers, or any similar utility owned or operated by a political
subdivision.
(R.C. § 4933.18)
   (D)   Each electric light company, gas company, natural gas company,
pipeline company, waterworks company or heating or cooling company, as defined
by R.C. § 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), or its lessees, trustees or
receivers, and each similar utility owned or operated by a political
subdivision, shall notify its customers, on an annual basis, that tampering
with or bypassing a meter constitutes a theft offense that could result in the
imposition of criminal sanctions.
(R.C. § 4933.19)
(Prior Code, § 642.26)
§ 131.33 MOTION PICTURE PIRACY.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION. Means the capability of a device to
record or transmit a motion picture or any part of a motion picture by means of
any technology existing on, or developed after, March 9, 2004.
      FACILITY. Means a movie theater.
   (B)   No person, without the written consent of the owner or lessee of the
facility and of the licensor of the motion picture, shall knowingly operate an
audiovisual recording function of a device in a facility in which the motion
picture is being shown.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of motion
picture piracy, a misdemeanor of the first degree on the first offense and a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
   (D)   This section does not prohibit or restrict a lawfully authorized
investigative, law enforcement, protective, or intelligence gathering employee
or agent of the government of this state or a political subdivision of this
state, or of the federal government, when acting in an official capacity, from
operating an audiovisual recording function of a device in any facility in
which a motion picture is being shown.
   (E)   Division (B) of this section does not limit or affect the application
of any other prohibition in this code or the Ohio Revised Code. Any act that is
a violation of both division (B) of this section and another provision of this
code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, under the
other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, or under both this
section and the other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
(R.C. § 2913.07) (Prior Code, § 642.32)
§ 131.34 RAILROAD VANDALISM; CRIMINAL TRESPASS; INTERFERENCE WITH OPERATION OF
TRAIN; GRADE CROSSING DEVICE VANDALISM.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any object
at, onto, or in the path of, any railroad rail, railroad track, locomotive,
engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company while such vehicle
is on a railroad track.
   (B)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall climb upon or into any
locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company when
it is on a railroad track.
   (C)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall disrupt, delay, or
prevent the operation of any train or other vehicle of a railroad company while
such vehicle is on a railroad track.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of railroad
vandalism. Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of criminal
trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other railroad vehicle.
Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of interference with
the operation of a train. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
railroad vandalism; criminal trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or
other railroad vehicle; and interference with the operation of a train each is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of division (A), (B), or
(C) of this section causes serious physical harm to property or creates a
substantial risk of physical harm to any person, causes physical harm to any
person, or causes serious physical harm to any person, the violation is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.10)
   (E)   No person shall knowingly deface, damage, obstruct, remove, or
otherwise impair the operation of any railroad grade crossing warning signal or
other protective device, including any gate, bell, light, crossbuck, stop sign,
yield sign, advance warning sign, or advance pavement marking.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of railroad
grade crossing device vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the violation of division (E) of this section causes serious physical harm
to property or creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person,
causes physical harm to any person, or causes serious physical harm to any
person, railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.101)
(Prior Code, § 642.33)
§ 131.35 DESECRATION.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall purposely deface, damage,
pollute, or otherwise physically mistreat any of the following:
      (1)   Any public monument;
      (2)   Any historical or commemorative marker, or any structure, Indian
mound or earthwork, cemetery, thing, or site of great historical or
archaeological interest;
      (3)   A place of worship, its furnishings, or religious artifacts or
sacred texts within the place of worship or within the grounds upon which the
place of worship is located;
      (4)   A work of art or museum piece;
      (5)   Any other object of reverence or sacred devotion.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of desecration. A violation of
division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the second degree. A violation of division (A)(3) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   As used in this section, “cemetery” means any place of burial and
includes burial sites that contain American Indian burial objects placed with
or containing American Indian human remains.
(R.C. § 2927.11) (Prior Code, § 642.07)
§ 131.36 HOURS OF OPERATION FOR PARKS; USE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided below, no person shall enter or remain in
Southgate Park, Boettler Park, Green Youth Sports Complex, Kreighbaum Park,
East Liberty Park, Springhill Sports Complex, and the Green Skate Plaza, or
buildings owned and operated by the city on these properties between the hours
of 9:00 p.m. or one-half hour after sunset, whichever is earlier, and sunrise,
unless a permit for use during such hours has been issued by the Director of
Public Service or his or her designee, or unless the hours of operation have
been extended or reduced by the Director or his or her designee and
notification of such change is conspicuously posted in the park that is
affected by the change of hours.
      (2)   No person shall enter or remain in Greensburg Park or the John
Torok Community/Senior Center between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
unless a permit for use during such hours has been issued by the Director of
Public Service or his or her designee, or unless the hours of operation have
been extended or reduced by the Director of Public Services or his or her
designee, and notification of such change is conspicuously posted in the park
that is affected by the change of hours.
   (B)   No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle, snowmobile, or motor
vehicle in or on any public park, except on roadways specifically provided for
vehicular traffic except as authorized by the city.
   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of criminal
trespass, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Prior Code, § 642.126) (Ord. 01-21, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 06-03, passed 4-
11-2006)
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Section
   
132.01   Riot
   
132.02   Failure to disperse
   
132.03   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot
   
132.04   Disorderly conduct
   
132.05   Disturbing a lawful meeting
   
132.06   Misconduct at an emergency
   
132.07   Telecommunications harassment
   
132.08   Inducing panic
   
132.09   Making false alarms
   
132.10   Inciting to violence
   
132.11   Unlawful display of law enforcement emblem
   
132.12   Impersonating a peace officer
   
132.13   Safety of crowds attending live entertainment performances
   
132.14   Misconduct involving a public transportation system
   
132.15   Impeding public passage of an emergency service responder
   
132.16   Permitting loud noises in places of refreshment or entertainment
   
132.17   Operation of radios or other sound-producing devices or instruments in
motor vehicles
   
132.18   Noise nuisance
Cross-reference:
   Personating an officer (fraud offense), see §
131.28
Statutory reference:
   Misuse of “Block Parent” or “McGruff House” symbol, see R.C. § 2917.46
§ 132.01 RIOT.
   (A)   No person shall participate with four or more others in a course of
disorderly conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance:
      (1)   With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a
misdemeanor, other than disorderly conduct;
      (2)   With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee into
taking or refraining from official action, or with purpose to hinder, impede,
or obstruct a function of government;
      (3)   With purpose to hinder, impede, or obstruct the orderly process of
administration or instruction at an educational institution, or to interfere
with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at the institution.
   (B)   No person shall participate with four or more others with purpose to
do an act with unlawful force or violence, even though the act might otherwise
be lawful.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 2917.03)
   (D)   For the purposes of prosecuting violations of this section, the
prosecution is not required to allege or prove that the offender expressly
agreed with four or more others to commit any act that constitutes a violation
this section prior to or while committing those acts.
(R.C. § 2917.031)
(Prior Code, § 648.01)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated riot, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2917.02
§ 132.02 FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
   (A)   Where five or more persons are participating in a course of disorderly
conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, and there are other persons in the vicinity whose presence creates
the likelihood of physical harm to persons or property or of serious public
inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm, a law enforcement officer or other public
official may order the participants and the other persons to disperse. No
person shall knowingly fail to obey the order.
   (B)   Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are peaceably
assembled for a lawful purpose.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disperse.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3) of this section,
failure to disperse is a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   Failure to disperse is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the
failure to obey the order described in division (A) of this section creates the
likelihood of physical harm to persons or is committed at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
(R.C. § 2917.04) (Prior Code, § 648.02)
§ 132.03 JUSTIFIABLE USE OF FORCE TO SUPPRESS RIOT.
   A law enforcement officer or firefighter engaged in suppressing a riot or in
protecting persons or property during a riot:
   (A)   Is justified in using force, other than deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters;
   (B)   Is justified in using force, including deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters whose conduct is creating a substantial risk of
serious physical harm to persons.
(R.C. § 2917.05) (Prior Code, § 648.03)
§ 132.04 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm to
another, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or property,
or in violent or turbulent behavior;
      (2)   Making unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse utterance,
gesture, or display, or communicating unwarranted and grossly abusive language
to any person;
      (3)   Insulting, taunting, or challenging another, under circumstances in
which that conduct is likely to provoke a violent response;
      (4)   Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a public street,
road, highway, or right-of- way, or to, from, within, or upon public or private
property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, and by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender;
      (5)   Creating a condition that is physically offensive to persons or
that presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender.
   (B)   No person while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   In a public place or in the presence of two or more persons, engage
in conduct likely to be offensive or to cause inconvenience, annoyance, or
alarm to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which conduct the offender, if he
or she were not intoxicated, should know is likely to have such effect on
others;
      (2)   Engage in conduct or create a condition that presents a risk of
physical harm to himself, herself or another, or to the property of another.
   (C)   Violation of any statute or ordinance of which an element is operating
a motor vehicle, locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse is not a violation of division
(B) of this section.
   (D)   If a person appears to an ordinary observer to be intoxicated, it is
probable cause to believe that the person is voluntarily intoxicated for
purposes of division (B) of this section.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disorderly conduct.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (E)(2) and (E)(3) of this
section, disorderly conduct is a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if any of
the following applies:
         (a)   The offender persists in disorderly conduct after reasonable
warning or request to desist.
         (b)   The offense is committed in the vicinity of a school or in a
school safety zone.
         (c)   The offense is committed in the presence of any law enforcement
officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services
person, or other authorized person who is engaged in the person’s duties at the
scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
         (d)   The offense is committed in the presence of any emergency
facility person who is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility.
      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to three or more violations of division (B) of this section, R.C. § 2917.11(B),
or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation
of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2925.01.
      EMERGENCY FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency medical
services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
(R.C. § 2917.11) (Prior Code, § 648.04)
§ 132.05 DISTURBING A LAWFUL MEETING.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting,
procession, or gathering, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Do any act which obstructs or interferes with the due conduct of
the meeting, procession, or gathering.
      (2)   Make any utterance, gesture, or display which outrages the
sensibilities of the group.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful
meeting. Except as otherwise provided in this division, disturbing a lawful
meeting is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Disturbing a lawful meeting is a
misdemeanor of the first degree if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The violation is committed with the intent to disturb or disquiet
any assemblage of people met for religious worship at a tax-exempt place of
worship, regardless of whether the conduct is within the place at which the
assemblage is held or is on the property on which that place is located and
disturbs the order and solemnity of the assemblage.
      (2)   The violation is committed with the intent to prevent, disrupt, or
interfere with a virtual meeting or gathering of people for religious worship,
through use of a computer, computer system, telecommunications device, or other
electronic device or system, or in any other manner.
   (C)   As used in this section:
      COMPUTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      COMPUTER SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      VIRTUAL MEETING OR GATHERING. A meeting or gathering by interactive video
conference or teleconference, or by a combination thereof.
(R.C. § 2917.12) (Prior Code, § 648.05)
§ 132.06 MISCONDUCT AT AN EMERGENCY.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement officer,
firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services person, or
other authorized person engaged in the person’s duties at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind;
      (2)   Hamper the lawful activities of any emergency facility person who
is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility;
      (3)   Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement officer
engaged in the law enforcement officer’s duties at the scene of or in
connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or deny
information to any news media representative in the lawful exercise of the news
media representative’s duties.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an emergency.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, misconduct at an emergency is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If violation of this section creates a risk
of physical harm to persons or property, misconduct at an emergency is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      EMERGENCY FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency medical
services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
(R.C. § 2917.13) (Prior Code, § 648.06)
§ 132.07 TELECOMMUNICATIONS HARASSMENT.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a
telecommunication, or knowingly permit a telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person’s control, to another, if the caller
does any of the following:
      (1)   Makes the telecommunication with purpose to harass, intimidate, or
abuse any person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made,
whether or not actual communication takes place between the caller and a
recipient;
      (2)   Describes, suggests, requests, or proposes that the caller, the
recipient of the telecommunication, or any other person engage in sexual
activity, and the recipient or another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made has requested, in a previous telecommunication or in
the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a telecommunication
to the recipient or to the premises to which the telecommunication is made;
      (3)   During the telecommunication, violates R.C. § 2903.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (4)   Knowingly states to the recipient of the telecommunication that the
caller intends to cause damage to or destroy public or private property, and
the recipient, any member of the recipient’s family, or any other person who
resides at the premises to which the telecommunication is made owns, leases,
resides, or works in, will at the time of the destruction or damaging be near
or in, has the responsibility of protecting, or insures the property that will
be destroyed or damaged;
      (5)   Knowingly makes the telecommunication to the recipient of the
telecommunication, to another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the recipient or another
person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a
telecommunication to those premises or to any persons at those premises;
      (6)   Knowingly makes any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal to
the recipient of the telecommunication that is threatening, intimidating,
menacing, coercive, or obscene with the intent to abuse, threaten, or harass
the recipient;
      (7)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly interrupts the
telecommunication service of any person;
      (8)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly transmits to any
person, regardless of whether the telecommunication is heard in its entirety,
any file, document, or other communication that prevents that person from using
the person’s telephone service or electronic communication device;
      (9)   Knowingly makes any false statement concerning the death, injury,
illness, disfigurement, reputation, indecent conduct, or criminal conduct of
the recipient of the telecommunication or family or household member of the
recipient with purpose to abuse, threaten, intimidate, or harass the recipient;
      (10)   Knowingly incites another person through a telecommunication or
other means to harass or participate in the harassment of a person;
      (11)   Knowingly alarms the recipient by making a telecommunication
without a lawful purpose at an hour or hours known to be inconvenient to the
recipient and in an offensive or repetitive manner.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall make or cause to be made a telecommunication or
permit a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under
the person’s control, with purpose to abuse, threaten, or harass another
person.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly post a text or audio statement or an
image on an internet web site or web page for the purpose of abusing,
threatening, or harassing another person.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of telecommunications
harassment.
      (2)   A violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(5), (A)(6), (A)
(7), (A)(8), (A)(9), (A)(10), or (A)(11) or (B) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony on each
subsequent offense, which shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(3), a violation
of division (A)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree on a
first offense and a felony on each subsequent offense, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If a violation of division (A)(4) of this section
results in economic harm of $1,000 or more, telecommunications harassment is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (D)   No cause of action may be asserted in any court of this municipality
against any provider of a telecommunications service, interactive computer
service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or against any
officer, employee, or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, for any
injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises out of the
provider’s, officer’s, employee’s, or agent’s provision of information,
facilities, or assistance in accordance with the terms of a court order that is
issued in relation to the investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation
of this section. A provider of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or an
officer, employee, or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, is
immune from any civil or criminal liability for injury, death, or loss to
person or property that allegedly arises out of the provider’s, officer’s,
employee’s, or agent’s provision of information, facilities, or assistance in
accordance with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the
investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section.
   (E)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person solely because the
person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control, including
having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or
connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that the person believes
is, or will be sent, in violation of this section.
      (2)   Division (E)(1) of this section does not create an affirmative duty
for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method
of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control to block
the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it
believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section except as otherwise
provided by law.
      (3)   Division (E)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of this section or who knowingly
advertises the availability of material of that nature.
      (4)   A provider or user of an interactive computer service, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. § 230, shall neither be treated as the publisher or speaker of any
information provided by another information content provider, as defined in 47
U.S.C. § 230, nor held civilly or criminally liable for the creation or
development of information provided by another information content provider, as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230. Nothing in this division shall be construed to
protect a person from liability to the extent that the person developed or
created any content in violation of this section.
   (F)   Divisions (A)(5) to (A)(11) and (B)(2) of this section do not apply to
a person who, while employed or contracted by a newspaper, magazine, press
association, news agency, news wire service, cable channel or cable operator,
or radio or television station, is gathering, processing, transmitting,
compiling, editing, or disseminating information for the general public within
the scope of the person’s employment in that capacity or the person’s
contractual authority in that capacity.
   (G)   As used in divisions (A) through (D) of this section:
      CABLE OPERATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
      CALLER. Means the person described in division (A) of this section who
makes or causes to be made a telecommunication or who permits a
telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under that
person’s control.
      ECONOMIC HARM. Means all direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary
harm suffered by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. The term
includes but is not limited to all of the following:
         (a)   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of
the criminal conduct;
         (b)   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
         (c)   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is
shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;
         (d)   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
      FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division
(A)(9) of this section is committed:
            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse of
the recipient;
            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the recipient, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the recipient;
            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the recipient, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
recipient.
         (b)   The natural parent of any child of whom the recipient of the
telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division (A)(9) of this
section is committed is the other natural parent or is the putative other
natural parent.
      PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has lived with
the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in
division (A)(9) of this section is committed in a common law marital
relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with the recipient, or who otherwise
has cohabited with the recipient within five years prior to the date of the
alleged commission of the act in question.
      SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
      TELECOMMUNICATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   (H)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person from making a
telecommunication to a debtor that is in compliance with the “Fair Debt
Collection Practices Act”, 15 U.S.C. § 1692, as amended, or the “Telephone
Consumer Protection Act”, 47 U.S.C. § 227, as amended.
(R.C. § 2917.21) (Prior Code, § 636.15)
§ 132.08 INDUCING PANIC.
   (A)   No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place, or otherwise
cause serious public inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false.
      (2)   Threatening to commit any offense of violence.
      (3)   Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the likelihood
that its commission will cause serious public inconvenience or alarm.
   (B)   Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to any person
conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing panic.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3), inducing panic is
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If a violation of this section results in physical harm to any
person, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of $1,000 or more,
inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the
public place involved in a violation of division (A)(1) is a school or an
institution of higher education, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. If a violation of this section pertains to a
purported, threatened or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, inducing
panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (D)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or this code may be prosecuted under this section, the
other section, or both sections.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      BIOLOGICAL AGENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2917.33.
      ECONOMIC HARM. Means any of the following:
         (a)   All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary harm suffered
by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. “Economic harm” as described
in this division includes but is not limited to all of the following:
            1.   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            2.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            3.   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is
shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;
            4.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
         (b)   All costs incurred by the state or any political subdivision as
a result of, or in making any response to, the criminal conduct that
constituted the violation of this section or R.C. § 2917.32, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, including but not limited to all
costs so incurred by any law enforcement officers, firefighters, rescue
personnel, or emergency medical services personnel of the state or the
political subdivision.
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2133.21.
      INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION. Means any of the following:
         (a)   A state university or college as defined in R.C. § 3345.12(A)
(1), community college, state community college, university branch, or
technical college;
         (b)   A private, nonprofit college, university or other post-secondary
institution located in this state that possesses a certificate of authorization
issued by the Chancellor of Higher Education pursuant to R.C. Chapter 1713;
         (c)   A post-secondary institution with a certificate of registration
issued by the State Board of Career Colleges and Schools pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 3332.
      SCHOOL. Means any school operated by a board of education or any school
for which the Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards
under R.C. § 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular
activities, or training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a
violation of this section is committed.
      WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any weapon that is designed or intended to cause death or
serious physical harm through the release, dissemination, or impact of toxic or
poisonous chemicals, or other precursors;
         (b)   Any weapon involving a disease organism or biological agent;
         (c)   Any weapon that is designed to release radiation or
radioactivity at a level dangerous to human life;
         (d)   Any of the following, except to the extent that the item or
device in question is expressly excepted from the definition of “destructive
device” pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(4) and regulations issued under that
section:
            1.   Any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas bomb, grenade, rocket
having a propellant charge of more than four ounces, missile having an
explosive or incendiary charge of more than one-quarter ounce, mine, or similar
device;
            2.   Any combination of parts either designed or intended for use
in converting any item or device into any item or device described in division
(d)1. of this definition and from which an item or device described in that
division may be readily assembled.
(R.C. § 2917.31) (Prior Code, § 648.07)
§ 132.09 MAKING FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to cause public inconvenience or alarm.
      (2)   Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be
transmitted to or within any organization, public or private, for dealing with
emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons or property.
      (3)   Report to any law enforcement agency an alleged offense or other
incident within its concern, knowing that the offense did not occur;
      (4)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to impede the operation of a critical
infrastructure facility.
   (B)   This section does not apply to any person conducting an authorized
fire or emergency drill.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making false alarms. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, making false alarms is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of
$1,000 or more, making false alarms is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If a violation of this section pertains to a purported,
threatened, or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, making false alarms
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (D)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or this code may be prosecuted under this section, the
other section, or both sections.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2911.21.
      ECONOMIC HARM and WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION. Have the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2917.31.
(R.C. § 2917.32) (Prior Code, § 648.08)
§ 132.10 INCITING TO VIOLENCE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly engage in conduct designed to urge or incite
another to commit any offense of violence when either of the following apply:
      (1)   The conduct takes place under circumstances that create a clear and
present danger that any offense of violence will be committed.
      (2)   The conduct proximately results in the commission of any offense of
violence.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inciting to violence. If
the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or incited to
commit is a misdemeanor, inciting to violence is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or
incited to commit is a felony, inciting to violence is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2917.01) (Prior Code, § 648.09)
§ 132.11 UNLAWFUL DISPLAY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT EMBLEM.
   (A)   No person who is not entitled to do so shall knowingly display on a
motor vehicle the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law
enforcement officers.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of the unlawful display of the
emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law enforcement
officers, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2913.441) (Prior Code, § 606.26)
§ 132.12 IMPERSONATING A PEACE OFFICER.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Means an employee of the United States
who serves in a position the duties of which are primarily the investigation,
apprehension, or detention of individuals suspected or convicted of offenses
under the criminal laws of the United States.
      IMPERSONATE. Means to act the part of, assume the identity of, wear the
uniform or any part of the uniform of, or display the identification of a
particular person or of a member of a class of persons with purpose to make
another person believe that the actor is that particular person or is a member
of that class of persons.
      INVESTIGATOR OF THE BUREAU OF CRIMINAL IDENTIFICATION AND INVESTIGATION.
Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.11.
      PEACE OFFICER. A Sheriff, deputy sheriff, Marshal, deputy marshal, member
of the organized police department of a municipal corporation, or township
constable, who is employed by a political subdivision of this state; a member
of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under R.C. §
3735.31(D); a member of a police force employed by a regional transit authority
under R.C. § 306.35(Y); a state university law enforcement officer appointed
under R.C. § 3345.04; a veterans’ home police officer appointed under R.C. §
5907.02; a special police officer employed by a port authority under R.C. §
4582.04 or 4582.28; an officer, agent, or employee of the state or any of its
agencies, instrumentalities, or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute,
a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and
the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within limits of that statutory
duty and authority; or a state highway patrol trooper whose primary duties are
to preserve the peace, to protect life and property, and to enforce the laws,
ordinances, or rules of the state or any of its political subdivisions.
      PRIVATE POLICE OFFICER. Means any security guard, special police officer,
private detective, or other person who is privately employed in a police
capacity.
   (B)   No person shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation, or
federal law enforcement officer.
   (C)   No person, by impersonating a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation, or
federal law enforcement officer, shall arrest or detain any person, search any
person, or search the property of any person.
   (D)   No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of an
offense, shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer, federal law
enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the municipality or the
state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation.
   (E)   No person shall commit a felony while impersonating a peace officer,
private police officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or
employee of the municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation.
   (F)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B) of this
section that the impersonation of the peace officer, private police officer,
federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the
municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation was for a lawful purpose.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the purpose of a
violation of division (D) of this section is to commit or facilitate the
commission of a felony, a violation of division (D) is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. Whoever violates division (E) of this
section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.51) (Prior Code, § 606.25)
Cross-reference:
   Personating an officer (fraud offense), see §
131.28
§ 132.13 SAFETY OF CROWDS ATTENDING LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      CONCERT. Means a musical performance of which the primary component is a
presentation by persons singing or playing musical instruments, that is
intended by its sponsors mainly, but not necessarily exclusively, for the
listening enjoyment of the audience, and that is held in a facility. The term
does not include any performance in which music is a part of the presentation
and the primary component of which is acting, dancing, a motion picture, a
demonstration of skills or talent other than singing or playing an instrument,
an athletic event, an exhibition or a speech.
      FACILITY. Means any structure that has a roof or partial roof and that
has walls that wholly surround the area on all sides, including but not limited
to a stadium, hall, arena, armory, auditorium, ballroom, exhibition hall,
convention center or music hall.
      LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCE. Means any live speech; any live musical
performance, including a concert; any live dramatic performance; any live
variety show; and any other live performance with respect to which the primary
intent of the audience can be construed to be viewing the performers. The term
does not include any form of entertainment with respect to which the person
purchasing a ticket routinely participates in amusements as well as views
performers.
      PERSON. Includes, in addition to an individual or entity specified in
R.C. § 1.59(C), any governmental entity.
      RESTRICTED ENTERTAINMENT AREA. Means any wholly or partially enclosed
area, whether indoors or outdoors, that has limited access through established
entrances or established turnstiles or similar devices.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or offer in return for a
donation, any ticket that is not numbered and that does not correspond to a
specific seat for admission to either of the following:
         (a)   A live entertainment performance that is not exempted under
division (D) of this section, that is held in a restricted entertainment area,
and for which more than 8,000 tickets are offered to the public;
         (b)   A concert that is not exempted under division (D) of this
section and for which more than 3,000 tickets are offered to the public.
      (2)   No person shall advertise any live entertainment performance as
described in division (B)(1)(a) of this section or any concert as described in
division (B)(1)(b) of this section, unless the advertisement contains the words
“Reserved Seats Only”.
   (C)   Unless exempted by division (D)(1) of this section, no person who owns
or operates any restricted entertainment area shall fail to open, maintain and
properly staff at least the number of entrances designated under division (E)
of this section for a minimum of 90 minutes prior to the scheduled start of any
live entertainment performance that is held in the restricted entertainment
area and for which more than 3,000 tickets are sold, offered for sale or
offered in return for a donation.
   (D)   (1)   A live entertainment performance, other than a concert, is
exempted from the provisions of divisions (B) and (C) of this section if both
of the following apply:
         (a)   The restricted entertainment area in which the performance is
held has at least eight entrances or, if both entrances and separate admission
turnstiles or similar devices are used, has at least eight turnstiles or
similar devices.
         (b)   The eight entrances or, if applicable, the eight turnstiles or
similar devices, are opened, maintained and properly staffed at least one hour
prior to the scheduled start of the performance.
      (2)   (a)   The officer responsible for public safety in the municipality
may, upon application of the sponsor of a concert covered by division (B) of
this section, exempt the concert from the provisions of that division if such
officer finds that the health, safety and welfare of the participants and
spectators would not be substantially affected by failure to comply with the
provisions of that division. In determining whether to grant an exemption, the
officer shall consider the following factors: the size and design of the
facility in which the concert is scheduled; the size, age and anticipated
conduct of the crowd expected to attend the concert; and the ability of the
sponsor to manage and control the expected crowd. If the sponsor of any concert
desires to obtain an exemption under this division, the sponsor shall apply to
the appropriate official on a form prescribed by that official. The official
shall issue an order that grants or denies the exemption within five days after
receipt of the application. The sponsor may appeal any order that denies an
exemption to the Court of Common Pleas of the county in which the facility is
located.
         (b)   If an official grants an exemption under division (D)(2)(a) of
this section, the official shall designate an on-duty law enforcement officer
to be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue
orders to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the participants and spectators.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (D)(2) of this section, in the case of a
concert held in a facility located on the campus of an educational institution
covered by R.C. § 3345.04, a state university law enforcement officer appointed
pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall do both of the following:
         (a)   Exercise the authority to grant exemptions provided by division
(D)(2)(a) of this section in lieu of an official designated in that division;
         (b)   If the officer grants an exemption under division (D)(3)(a) of
this section, designate an on-duty state university law enforcement officer to
be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue orders
to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the participants and spectators.
   (E)   (1)   Unless a live entertainment performance is exempted by division
(D)(1) of this section, the officer responsible for public safety within the
municipality shall designate, for purposes of division (C) of this section, the
minimum number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed at
each live entertainment performance so as to permit crowd control and reduce
congestion at the entrances. The designation shall be based on such factors as
the size and nature of the crowd expected to attend the live entertainment
performance, the length of time prior to the live entertainment performance
that crowds are expected to congregate at the entrances and the amount of
security provided at the restricted entertainment area.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (E)(1) of this section, a state university
law enforcement officer appointed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall
designate the number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed
in the case of a live entertainment performance that is held at a restricted
entertainment area located on the campus of an educational institution covered
by R.C. § 3345.04.
   (F)   No person shall enter into any contract for a live entertainment
performance that does not permit or require compliance with this section.
   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to a live entertainment performance
held in a restricted entertainment area if one admission ticket entitles the
holder to view or participate in three or more different games, rides,
activities or live entertainment performances occurring simultaneously at
different sites within the restricted entertainment area and if the initial
admittance entrance to the restricted entertainment area, for which the ticket
is required, is separate from the entrance to any specific live entertainment
performance and an additional ticket is not required for admission to the
particular live entertainment performance.
      (2)   This section does not apply to a symphony orchestra performance, a
ballet performance, horse races, dances or fairs.
   (H)   This section does not prohibit the Legislative Authority from imposing
additional requirements, not in conflict with the section, for the promotion or
holding of live entertainment performances.
   (I)   Whoever violates division (B), (C) or (F) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If any individual suffers physical harm to
the individual’s person as a result of a violation of this section, the
sentencing court shall consider this factor in favor of imposing a term of
imprisonment upon the offender.
(R.C. § 2917.40) (Prior Code, § 636.18)
§ 132.14 MISCONDUCT INVOLVING A PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM.
   (A)   As used in this section, PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM means a county
transit system operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.01 through 306.13, a
regional transit authority operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.30 through
306.71, or a regional transit commission operated in accordance with R.C. §§
306.80 through 306.90.
   (B)   No person shall evade the payment of the known fares of a public
transportation system.
   (C)   No person shall alter any transfer, pass, ticket or token of a public
transportation system with the purpose of evading the payment of fares or of
defrauding the system.
   (D)   No person shall do any of the following while in any facility or on
any vehicle of a public transportation system:
      (1)   Play sound equipment without the proper use of a private earphone;
      (2)   Smoke, eat or drink in any area where the activity is clearly
marked as being prohibited; or
      (3)   Expectorate upon a person, facility or vehicle.
   (E)   No person shall write, deface, draw or otherwise mark on any facility
or vehicle of a public transportation system.
   (F)   No person shall fail to comply with a lawful order of a public
transportation system police officer, and no person shall resist, obstruct or
abuse a public transportation police officer in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
   (G)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of
misconduct involving a public transportation system.
      (1)   A violation of division (B), (C), or (F) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (D) of this section is a minor misdemeanor
on a first offense. If a person previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of any division of this section or of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any division of this section, a
violation of division (D) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (E) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
   (H)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 75% of each fine paid to
satisfy a sentence imposed for a violation of any of the provisions of this
section shall be deposited into the treasury of the County and 25% shall be
deposited with the county transit board, regional transit authority or regional
transit commission that operates the public transportation system involved in
the violation, unless the Board of County Commissioners operates the public
transportation system, in which case 100% of each fine shall be deposited into
the treasury of the County.
(R.C. § 2917.41) (Prior Code, § 642.28)
§ 132.15 IMPEDING PUBLIC PASSAGE OF AN EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly obstruct any
highway, street, sidewalk, or any other public passage in such a manner as to
render the highway, street, sidewalk, or passage impassable without
unreasonable inconvenience or hazard if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The obstruction prevents an emergency vehicle from accessing a
highway or street, prevents an emergency service responder from responding to
an emergency, or prevents an emergency vehicle or an emergency service
responder from having access to an exit from an emergency.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a request or order from an emergency service
responder to remove or cease the obstruction, the person refuses to remove or
cease the obstruction.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not limit or affect the application
of R.C. § 2921.31 or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code. Any conduct
that is a violation of division (A) of this section and that also is a
violation of R.C. § 2921.31 or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code may
be prosecuted under this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code,
or both sections.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawfully impeding public
passage of an emergency service responder, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (D)   As used in this section, EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2903.13.
(R.C. § 2917.14)
§ 132.16 PERMITTING LOUD NOISES IN PLACES OF REFRESHMENT OR ENTERTAINMENT.
   (A)   No person, association, firm or corporation operating a restaurant,
hotel, summer garden or other place of refreshment or entertainment, nor any
person in or about such restaurant, hotel, summer garden or other place of
refreshment or entertainment shall operate, play or permit the operation or
playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound
amplifier, music of any kind, singing, loud talking, amplification of sound, or
other noises on or about the premises, in such a manner or with such volume as
to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in the same or any
other dwelling, hotel or other type of residence.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, annoying or disturbing the quiet,
comfort or repose of persons in the same or any other dwelling, hotel or other
type of residence means operating, playing or permitting the operation or
playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound
amplifier or similar device, any singing, loud talking or amplification of
sound or other noises in a manner which could be anticipated to offend a
reasonable person or an individual of common sensibilities. Between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Monday through Sunday, any such noise that can be
distinctly heard at a distance of more than 100 feet from the building or
structure in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation
of this section. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following
day, Monday through Sunday, any such noise that can be distinctly heard at a
distance of 25 feet from the building or structure in which it is located shall
be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. This section shall not
apply to a lawfully permitted parade, public assembly or other activity for
which a permit is issued by the duly constituted authority, nor shall it apply
to events sponsored by local schools.
   (C)   In order for charges to be brought under the terms of this section,
the person who reports a violation of this section shall sign an affidavit as
the complainant. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit the ability
of a law enforcement officer from issuing charges under this section, as
authorized by the Ohio Revised Code.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making loud musical noises,
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender has previously been
convicted of making loud musical noises, a violation of this section shall be a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender has previously been convicted
of two violations of making loud musical noises, a violation of this section
shall be a misdemeanor of the second degree. The penalty shall be as provided
in §
130.99.
(Prior Code, § 648.10) (Ord. 00-21, passed 11-28-2000)
§ 132.17 OPERATION OF RADIOS OR OTHER SOUND-PRODUCING DEVICES OR INSTRUMENTS IN
VEHICLES.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle within the city
shall operate or amplify the sound produced by a radio, tape player or other
sound-producing device or instrument from within the motor vehicle so that the
sound is plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the motor
vehicle.
      (2)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any law
enforcement motor vehicle equipped with any communication device necessary in
the performance of law enforcement duties or to any emergency vehicle equipped
with any communication device necessary in the performance of any emergency
procedures.
      (3)   The provisions of this section do not apply to the noise made by a
horn or other warning device required or permitted by state law.
   (B)   Plainly audible defined. As used in this section, PLAINLY AUDIBLE
means any sound produced by a radio, tape player or other mechanical or
electronic sound device, or instrument, from within the interior or exterior of
a motor vehicle, including sound produced by a portable sound-producing device
that can be clearly heard outside the vehicle by a person using his or her
normal hearing faculties, at a distance of 100 feet or more from the motor
vehicle.
   (C)   Enforcement. Any law enforcement officer who hears a sound that is
plainly audible as defined in division (B) of this section shall be entitled to
measure the sound according to the following standards:
      (1)   The primary means of detection shall be by means of the officer’s
ordinary auditory senses, so long as the officer’s hearing is not enhanced by
any mechanical device, such as a microphone or hearing aid;
      (2)   The officer must have a direct line of sight and hearing to the
motor vehicle producing the sound so that the officer can readily identify the
offending motor vehicle and the distance involved; and
      (3)   The officer need not determine the particular words or phrases
being produced or the name of any song or artist producing the sound. The
detection of a rhythmic bass reverberating type sound is sufficient to
constitute a plainly audible sound.
   (D)   Penalties. Whoever violates this section is guilty of making loud
noises from a motor vehicle, a minor misdemeanor. If the offender has been
previously convicted of making loud noises from a motor vehicle, a violation of
this section shall be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Prior Code, § 648.12) (Ord. 99-3, passed 3-9-1999)
§ 132.18 NOISE NUISANCE.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL. The sound pressure level of the all-encompassing
noise associated with a given environment, being a composite of many sounds.
For the purpose of this chapter, it is the sound pressure level exceeding 90%
of the time, based upon a measurement period of not less than ten minutes and
excluding the alleged offensive noise.
      ANIMAL. Dogs, cats, cattle, sheep, horses, geese, ducks, turkeys,
chickens, or other fowl or any other animal, domestic or wild, maintained or
kept as a pet, for work or for a product.
      DECIBEL. A unit for measuring the intensity of sound; used with a sound
level meter; also known as dBA relating to sound perceptible to the human ear
when using an A weighting measure (experts agree 85 dBA will harm hearing over
time).
      EMERGENCY. When an authorized vehicle responds to a situation requiring
immediate police, fire or medical attention.
      NIGHT TIME. The hours from 9:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. on weekdays, weekends
and holidays.
      NUISANCE. That which annoys or offends another or others, obstructs the
use of property, endangers the comfort or safety of others, essentially
interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property, and interferes
with the ambient sound level of a given property, or tends to depreciate the
value of the property of others, and/or violates the laws of decency.
      RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Single-family, duplex or multifamily dwellings,
nursing homes and similar facilities.
      SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument used for the measurement of sound and
noise levels in a specified manner and conforming to the American National
Standard Institute’s specifications for sound level meters.
      SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL (SPL). The physical intensity of sound or acoustic
power that is measured by a sound level meter. SPL is influenced by numerous
noise descriptors. Some of those descriptors utilized by a sound level meter
are frequency range, pitch, flat or un-weighted measures, A-weighting measures,
C-weighting filters, and the like. A-weighting measures emphasize the middle
frequency components similar to the response of the human ear.
   (B)   Nuisance conditions prohibited.
      (1)   No person shall cause, produce or create within the city any loud
unreasonable sounds, so as to create offensive sounds or conditions which are a
nuisance or a menace to the health, comfort, and safety of the public, which
includes, but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Frequent and habitual use of a radio, stereo, television, tape
or CD player, or other such device for playing music, musical instrument,
phonograph, loud speaker system, or other machine or device for the production
or reproduction of sound, or any other audible nuisance, which creates
unreasonably loud and disturbing noises of such a character, intensity, and
duration so as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of any reasonable
person of normal sensitivity residing in the city;
         (b)   Any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or noises by yelling,
singing, whistling, shouting, or otherwise, which annoys, disturbs, injures or
endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of any reasonable person
of normal sensitivity residing within the city; and
         (c)   Frequent and habitual use of sporting equipment, including, but
not limited to, motorcycles, dirt bikes, quad runners, snowmobiles, three/four
wheelers, dune buggies, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) and firearms, which creates
unreasonably loud and disturbing noises of such a character, intensity and
duration so as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of any reasonable person
of normal sensitivity residing in the city.
      (2)   No person shall keep or harbor within the city any animal which, by
frequent and habitual barking, howling, yelping or any other audible nuisance,
creates unreasonably loud and disturbing noises of such a character, intensity
and duration as to disturb the peace, quiet, and good order of the city.
      (3)   No person shall operate or maintain any vehicular radio, stereo, CD
player, other device for playing music, or any noise-making device or noise-
amplifying or noise-producing instrument or device in any public or private
place, by which the peace and good order of the neighborhood is disturbed, or
by which persons owning or occupying property in the neighborhood are subject
to a noise nuisance.
      (4)   No person shall operate or maintain a home, or auto, or business
burglar alarm which upon activation shall continue to sound after a law
enforcement officer has made reasonable and diligent attempt to reach the owner
or responsible person to reset the alarm. A home, auto or burglar alarm
operating and producing sound level conditions which are deemed to be a
nuisance, by which the peace and good order of the neighborhood is disturbed,
is a violation of this code.
   (C) Maximum noise level recommendations.
 
                    Daytime Nighttime
Nonresidential area 67 dBA  62 dBA
Residential area    65 dBA  55dBA
 
      (1)   It is prima facie unlawful for a person to generate or permit to be
generated sound in violation of divisions (B)(1) through (B)(4) of this
section, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. the following day in a
predominantly residential area where the sound exceeds the decibel level as
measured ten feet from the property line of the property on which the source of
the sound is located.
      (2)   The city shall be exempt from the provisions of divisions (B)(1)
through (B)(4) of this section.
   (D)   Enforcement.
      (1)   Complaints of noise nuisance shall be investigated by the law
enforcement with jurisdiction at the source of the complaint. Factors to be
considered in determining whether a violation has occurred shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
         (a)   The volume of the noise;
         (b)   The intensity of the noise;
         (c)   Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;
         (d)   Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;
         (e)   The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any;
         (f)   The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;
         (g)   The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise
emanates;
         (h)   The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the
noise emanates;
         (i)   The time of day or night the noise occurs;
         (j)   The duration of the noise;
         (k)   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant;
         (l)   Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial
activity;
         (m)   Whether a sound from a property is audible more than 80 feet
from the property line of the property; and
         (n)   Whether a sound from a vehicle on a street, highway or in the
public right-of-way is audible more than 100 feet from the vehicle.
      (2)   Upon the investigation of a noise nuisance complaint, the law
enforcement officer shall determine whether a citation is necessary.
      (3)   The law enforcement officer may use a sound level meter for that
determination. A sound level meter is not required for a citation under this
code.
   (E)   Exemptions. Exempted from these nuisance noise regulations:
      (1)   Noise of safety signals and warning devices;
      (2)   Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when
responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency;
      (3)   Noises resulting from emergency work or noise levels for which a
special permit or permits have been granted, including, but not limited to,
construction permits;
      (4)   Noises from lawfully scheduled sporting events, parades, fireworks,
festivals and concerts;
      (5)   Noises resulting from school bells and playground activity;
      (6)   Construction sounds occurring between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.;
      (7)   Refuse collection occurring between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.; and
      (8)   The city shall be exempt from these nuisance noise regulations.
   (F)   Penalties.
      (1)   Any person who is found to be in violation of this Noise Nuisance
Code shall be issued a warning and a request to desist from a law enforcement
officer. If the offender persists in creating a noise nuisance after reasonable
warning or request to desist from a law enforcement officer, creating a noise
nuisance is a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Any subsequent violation of this Noise Nuisance Code shall be
creating a noise nuisance, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and may result in
fines up to $250.
      (3)   Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense.
      (4)   In any violation of this Noise Nuisance Code involving sound
equipment, the sound equipment may be subject to seizure and forfeiture.
Disposition of the property subject to seizure and forfeiture under this Noise
Nuisance Code shall be pursuant to R.C. Ch. 2981.
   (G)   Severability. If any part of this section shall be found to be invalid
or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such findings shall
not affect the remaining portions hereof and shall remain in full force and
effect.
(Prior Code, § 648.13) (Ord. 04-20, passed 10-26-2004; Ord. 2021-07, passed 6-
8-2021)
CHAPTER 133: SEX OFFENSES
Section
   
133.01   Definitions
   
133.02   Unlawful sexual conduct with a minor
   
133.03   Sexual imposition
   
133.04   Public indecency
   
133.05   Voyeurism
   
133.06   Polygraph examinations for victims: restrictions on use
   
133.07   Procuring; engagement in sexual activity for hire
   
133.08   Soliciting; loitering to engage in
   
133.09   Prostitution
   
133.10   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles
   
133.11   Displaying matter harmful to juveniles
   
133.12   Deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles
   
133.13   Rules of evidence
   
133.14   Declaratory judgment
   
133.15   Injunction; abatement of nuisance
   
133.16   Unlawful operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct
   
133.17   Juveniles on the premises of adult entertainment establishments
prohibited
   
133.18   Sexually oriented businesses; illegal operation and activity
   
133.19   Unlawful advertising of massage
   
133.20   Nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images
   
133.21   Grooming
 
   
133.99   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators;
registration
Statutory reference:
   Assistance to victims of sexual assault, see R.C. §§ 2907.28 et seq.
   Child victim, of, see R.C. § 2945.481
   Suppression of information at trial, see R.C. § 2907.11
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 133.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   HARMFUL TO JUVENILES. That quality of any material or performance describing
or representing nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-masochistic
abuse in any form to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, appeals to
the prurient interest of juveniles in sex.
      (2)   The material or performance is patently offensive to prevailing
standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable
for juveniles.
      (3)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, lacks
serious literary, artistic, political, and scientific value for juveniles.
   LICENSED MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL. Any of the following medical professionals:
      (1)   A physician assistant licensed under R.C. Chapter 4730;
      (2)   A physician authorized under R.C. Chapter 4731 to practice medicine
and surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric medicine and
surgery;
      (3)   A massage therapist licensed under R.C. Chapter 4731.
   JUVENILE. Any unmarried person under 18 years of age.
   MATERIAL. Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print, picture,
figure, image, description, motion picture film, video cassette, laser disc,
phonograph record, cassette tape, compact disc, or other tangible thing capable
of arousing interest through sight, sound, or touch and includes an image or
text appearing on a computer monitor, television screen, liquid crystal
display, or similar display device or an image or text recorded on a computer
hard disk, computer floppy disk, compact disk, magnetic tape, or similar data
storage device.
   MENTAL HEALTH CLIENT OR PATIENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.51.
   MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.115.
   MINOR. A person under the age of 18.
   NUDITY. The showing, representation, or depiction of human male or female
genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full, opaque covering, or of
a female breast with less than a full, opaque covering of any portion thereof
below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state.
   OBSCENE. When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to ordinary
adults or, if it is designed for sexual deviates or other specially susceptible
group, judged with reference to that group, any material or performance is
“obscene” if any of the following apply:
      (1)   Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest.
      (2)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, or nudity in a way that tends
to represent human beings as mere objects of sexual appetite.
      (3)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality.
      (4)   Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological interest by
displaying or depicting human bodily functions of elimination in a way that
inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary sensibilities, without
serving any genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or artistic
purpose.
      (5)   It contains a series of displays or descriptions of sexual
activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme or
bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality, or human bodily functions of
elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal to
prurient or scatological interest, when the appeal to such an interest is
primarily for its own sake or for commercial exploitation, rather than
primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or
artistic purpose.
   PERFORMANCE. Any motion picture, preview, trailer, play, show, skit, dance,
or other exhibition performed before an audience.
   PLACE WHERE A PERSON HAS A REASONABLE EXPECTATION OF PRIVACY. A place where
a reasonable person would believe that the person could fully disrobe in
private.
   PRIVATE AREA. The genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or female breast below the
top of the areola, where nude or covered by an undergarment.
   PROSTITUTE. A male or female who promiscuously engages in sexual activity
for hire, regardless of whether the hire is paid to the prostitute or to
another.
   SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person or the
condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained.
   SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both.
   SEXUAL CONDUCT. Vaginal intercourse between a male and female; anal
intercourse, fellatio, and cunnilingus between persons regardless of sex; and,
without privilege to do so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of the
body or any instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal or anal
opening of another. Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to complete
vaginal or anal intercourse.
   SEXUAL CONTACT. Any touching of an erogenous zone of another, including
without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if the
person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually arousing or
gratifying either person.
   SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when in a
state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   SPOUSE. A person married to an offender at the time of an alleged offense,
except that such person shall not be considered the spouse when any of the
following apply:
      (1)   When the parties have entered into a written separation agreement
pursuant to R.C. § 3103.06.
      (2)   When an action is pending between the parties for annulment,
divorce, dissolution of marriage, or legal separation.
      (3)   In the case of an action for legal separation, after the effective
date of the judgment for legal separation.
(R.C. § 2907.01) (Prior Code, § 666.01)
§ 133.02 UNLAWFUL SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH A MINOR.
   (A)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in sexual
conduct with another when the offender knows the other person is 13 years of
age or older but less than 16 years of age, or the offender is reckless in that
regard.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful sexual conduct
with a minor.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2), unlawful sexual
conduct with a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3) of this section, if
the offender is less than four years older than the other person, unlawful
sexual conduct with a minor is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03 or 2907.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of former R.C. § 2907.12, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, unlawful sexual conduct with a
minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.04) (Prior Code, § 666.02)
§ 133.03 SEXUAL IMPOSITION.
   (A)   No person shall have sexual contact with another; cause another to
have sexual contact with the offender; or cause two or more other persons to
have sexual contact when the offender knows that the sexual contact is
offensive to the other person, or one of the other persons, or is reckless in
that regard.
   (B)   No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section solely
upon the victim’s testimony unsupported by other evidence.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of sexual imposition, a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section, R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, former R.C. § 2907.12, or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, R.C. § 2907.02,
2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, former R.C. § 2907.12, or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any combination of those
sections, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree and,
notwithstanding the range of jail terms prescribed in R.C. § 2929.24, the court
may impose on the offender a definite jail term of not more than one year.
(R.C. § 2907.06) (Prior Code, § 666.03)
Statutory reference:
   Gross sexual imposition, felony, see R.C. § 2907.05
   Notice to licensing board or agency upon indictment, conviction or guilty
plea of mental health professional, see R.C. §§ 2907.17 and 2907.18
§ 133.04 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (A)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following, under
circumstances in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and
affront others who are in the person’s physical proximity and who are not
members of the person’s household:
      (1)   Expose the persons’s private parts.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following, under circumstances
in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and affront another
person who is in the person’s physical proximity, who is a minor, and who is
not the spouse of the offender:
      (1)   Engage in masturbation.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (4)   Expose the person’s private parts with the purpose of personal
sexual arousal or gratification or to lure the minor into sexual activity.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public indecency and
shall be punished as provided in divisions (C)(2), (C)(3), (C)(4), and (C)(5)
of this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(2), a violation
of division (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the third degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the
offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(3), a violation
of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was likely to view
and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if any person who was
likely to view and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(4), a violation
of division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(5), a violation
of division (B)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (B)(4) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (D)   (1)   If either of the following applies, the court may determine at
the time of sentencing whether to classify the offender as a tier I sex
offender/child-victim offender for a violation of division (B)(4) of this
section:
         (a)   The offender is less than ten years older than the other person.
         (b)   The offender is ten or more years older than the other person
and the offender has not previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any
violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance.
      (2)   If the offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (B)(4) of this section, is ten or more years older than the other
person, and previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation
of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the court shall issue an order at the time of sentencing that
classifies the offender as a tier I sex offender/child-victim offender subject
to registration under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05, and 2950.06.
(R.C. § 2907.09)
   (E)   A mother is entitled to breast-feed her baby in any location of a
place of public accommodation, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, wherein the mother
otherwise is permitted.
(R.C. § 3781.55)
(Prior Code, § 666.04)
Statutory reference:
   Bail considerations for persons charged, see R.C. § 2907.41
§ 133.05 VOYEURISM.
   (A)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself
or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the
privacy of another, to spy or eavesdrop upon another.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly commit trespass or otherwise secretly or
surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, broadcast, stream, or otherwise
record another person, in a place where a person has a reasonable expectation
of privacy, for the purpose of viewing the private areas of that person.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly commit trespass or otherwise secretly or
surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, broadcast, stream, or otherwise
record a minor, in a place where a person has a reasonable expectation of
privacy, for the purpose of viewing the private areas of the minor.
   (D)   No person shall secretly or surreptitiously videotape, film,
photograph, or otherwise record another person above, under, or through the
clothing being worn by that other person for the purpose of viewing the body
of, or the undergarments worn by, that other person.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of voyeurism.
      (1)   A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (D) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (4)   A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.08) (Prior Code, § 666.05)
§ 133.06 POLYGRAPH EXAMINATIONS FOR VICTIMS: RESTRICTIONS ON USE.
   (A)   (1)   A peace officer, prosecutor, other public official, defendant,
defendant’s attorney, alleged juvenile offender, or alleged juvenile offender’s
attorney shall not ask or require a victim of an alleged sex offense to submit
to a polygraph examination as a condition for proceeding with the investigation
or prosecution of the alleged sex offense.
      (2)   The refusal of the victim of an alleged sex offense to submit to a
polygraph examination shall not prevent the investigation of the alleged sex
offense, the filing of criminal charges with respect to the alleged sex
offense, or the prosecution of the alleged perpetrator of the alleged sex
offense.
   (B)   As used in this section:
      ALLEGED JUVENILE OFFENDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2930.01.
      PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.51.
      POLYGRAPH EXAMINATION. Means any mechanical or electrical instrument or
device of any type used or allegedly used to examine, test, or question an
individual for the purpose of determining the individual’s truthfulness.
      PROSECUTION. Means the prosecution of criminal charges in a criminal
prosecution or the prosecution of a delinquent child complaint in a delinquency
proceeding.
      PROSECUTOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
      PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 117.01.
      SEX OFFENSE. Means a violation of any provision of §§
133.02 to
133.05 or R.C. §§ 2907.02 to 2907.09.
(R.C. § 2907.10) (Prior Code, § 666.06)
§ 133.07 PROCURING; ENGAGEMENT IN SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE.
   (A)   Procuring.
      (1)   No person, knowingly and for gain, shall do either of the
following:
         (a)   Entice or solicit another to patronize a prostitute or brothel;
         (b)   Procure a prostitute for another to patronize, or take or direct
another at the other’s request to any place for the purpose of patronizing a
prostitute.
      (2)   No person, having authority or responsibility over the use of
premises, shall knowingly permit the premises to be used for the purpose of
engaging in sexual activity for hire.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) of this section is
guilty of procuring. Except as otherwise provided in this division, procuring
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the prostitute who is procured,
patronized, or otherwise involved in a violation of division (A)(1)(b) of this
section is under 18 years of age at the time of the violation, regardless of
whether the offender who violates division (A)(1)(b) of this section knows the
prostitute’s age, or if a prostitute who engages in sexual activity for hire in
premises used in violation of division (A)(2) of this section is under 18 years
of age at the time of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who
violates division (A)(2) of this section knows the prostitute’s age, procuring
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.23)
   (B)   Engagement in sexual activity for hire.
      (1)   As used in this division (B):
         PERSON WITH A DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2905.32.
         SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE. An implicit or explicit agreement to provide
sexual activity in exchange for anything of value paid to the person engaging
in such sexual activity, to any person trafficking that person, or to any
person associated with either such person.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly induce, entice, or procure another to
engage in sexual activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything
of value to the other person.
      (3)   No person shall recklessly induce, entice, or procure another to
engage in sexual activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything
of value to the other person if the other person is a person with a
developmental disability and the offender knows or has reasonable cause to
believe that the other person is a person with a developmental disability.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) of this section is guilty of
engaging in prostitution, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates
division (B)(3) of this section is guilty of engaging in prostitution with a
person with a developmental disability, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. In sentencing an offender under this division for a
violation of division (B)(2) of this section, the court shall require the
offender to attend an education or treatment program aimed at preventing
persons from inducing, enticing, or procuring another to engage in sexual
activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything of value to the
other person. Notwithstanding the fine specified in R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a) for
a misdemeanor of the first degree, in sentencing an offender under this
division for a violation of division (B)(2) of this section, the court may
impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $1,500.
(R.C. § 2907.231) (Prior Code, § 666.07)
§ 133.08 SOLICITING; LOITERING TO ENGAGE IN.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly solicit another to engage in sexual activity
for hire in exchange for the person receiving anything of value from the other
person.
   (B)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in conduct in violation of division (A) of this section.
   (C)   As used in division (A) of this section, SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE
means an implicit or explicit agreement to provide sexual activity in exchange
for anything of value paid to the person engaging in such sexual activity, to
any person trafficking that person, or to any person associated with either
such person.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
soliciting. Soliciting is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of engaging
in solicitation after a positive HIV test, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.24)
   (E)   No person, with purpose to solicit another to engage in sexual
activity for hire and while in or near a public place, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Beckon to, stop or attempt to stop another;
      (2)   Engage or attempt to engage another in conversation;
      (3)   Stop or attempt to stop the operator of a vehicle or approach a
stationary vehicle;
      (4)   If the offender is the operator of or a passenger in a vehicle,
stop, attempt to stop, beckon to, attempt to beckon to, or entice another to
approach or enter the vehicle of which the offender is the operator or in which
the offender is the passenger;
      (5)   Interfere with the free passage of another.
   (F)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in conduct in violation of division (E) of this section.
   (G)   As used in division (E) of this section:
      PUBLIC PLACE. Means any of the following:
         (a)   A street, road, highway, thoroughfare, bikeway, walkway,
sidewalk, bridge, alley, alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot or
transportation facility.
         (b)   A doorway or entrance way to a building that fronts on a place
described in division (a) of this definition.
         (c)   A place not described in division (a) or (b) of this definition
that is open to the public.
      VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   (H)   (1)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of
loitering to engage in solicitation, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (F) of this section is guilty of
loitering to engage in solicitation after a positive HIV test, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.241)
(Prior Code, §§ 666.08, 666.085)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 133.09 PROSTITUTION.
   (A)   No person shall engage in sexual activity for hire.
   (B)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in sexual activity for hire.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
prostitution, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of engaging
in prostitution after a positive HIV test, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.25) (Prior Code, § 666.09)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 133.10 DISSEMINATING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (A)   No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall
recklessly do any of following:
      (1)   Directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit,
rent, or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles;
      (2)   Directly offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate,
provide, exhibit, rent, or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement
officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or
harmful to juveniles;
      (3)   While in the physical proximity of the juvenile or law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, allow any juvenile or law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile to review or peruse any material or view any live
performance that is harmful to juveniles.
   (B)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section
that involves material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles but not
obscene:
      (1)   The defendant is the parent, guardian, or spouse of the juvenile
involved.
      (2)   The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in question, was
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian who, with knowledge of its
character, consented to the material or performance being furnished or
presented to the juvenile.
      (3)   The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or his or her agent or
employee a draft card, driver’s license, birth record, marriage license, or
other official or apparently official document purporting to show that the
juvenile was 18 years of age or over or married, and the person to whom the
document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe that
the juvenile was under the age of 18 and unmarried.
   (C)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section,
involving material or a performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles,
that the material or performance was furnished or presented for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial, or other proper
purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher,
librarian, clergy, prosecutor, judge, or other proper person.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section, mistake of
age is not a defense to a charge under this section.
   (D)   (1)   A person directly sells, delivers, furnishes, disseminates,
provides, exhibits, rents, or presents or directly offers or agrees to sell,
deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present material or a
performance to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section by means of an electronic method of
remotely transmitting information if the person knows or has reason to believe
that the person receiving the information is a juvenile or the group of persons
receiving the information are juveniles.
      (2)   A person remotely transmitting information by means of a method of
mass distribution does not directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate,
provide, exhibit, rent, or present or directly offer or agree to sell, deliver,
furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present the material or
performance in question to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section if either of the following applies:
         (a)   The person has inadequate information to know or have reason to
believe that a particular recipient of the information or offer is a juvenile.
         (b)   The method of mass distribution does not provide the person the
ability to prevent a particular recipient from receiving the information.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disseminating matter
harmful to juveniles. If the material or performance involved is harmful to
juveniles except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the material or performance
involved is obscene, violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.31)
   (F)   Presumptions, notice and defense.
      (1)   An owner or manager, or agent or employee of an owner or manager,
of a bookstore, newsstand, theater, or other commercial establishment engaged
in selling material or exhibiting performances, who, in the course of business
does any of the acts prohibited by this section is presumed to have knowledge
of the character of the material or performance involved if the owner, manager,
or agent or employee of the owner or manager has actual notice of the nature of
such material or performance, whether or not the owner, manager, or agent or
employee of the owner or manager has precise knowledge of its contents.
      (2)   Without limitation on the manner in which such notice may be given,
actual notice of the character of material or a performance may be given in
writing by the chief legal officer of the municipality. Such notice, regardless
of the manner in which it is given, shall identify the sender, identify the
material or performance involved, state whether it is obscene or harmful to
juveniles, and bear the date of such notice.
      (3)   This §
133.10 does not apply to a motion picture operator or projectionist acting
within the scope of employment as an employee of the owner or manager of the
theater or other place for the showing of motion pictures to the general
public, and having no managerial responsibility or financial interest in the
operator’s or projectionist’s place of employment, other than wages.
      (4)   (a)   The provisions of §§
133.10,
133.11 and
133.12(A) do not apply to a person solely because the person provided access or
connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information
not under that person’s control, including having provided capabilities that
are incidental to providing access or connection to or from the electronic
method of remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the
creation of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or
connection.
         (b)   Division (F)(4)(a) of this section does not apply to a person
who conspires with an entity actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of §
133.10,
133.11 and
133.12 or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
         (c)   Division (F)(4)(a) of this section does not apply to a person
who provides access or connection to an electronic method of remotely
transferring information that is engaged in the violation of §
133.10,
133.11 and
133.12 and that contain content that person has selected and introduced into
the electronic method of remotely transferring information or content over
which that person exercises editorial control.
      (5)   An employer is not guilty of a violation of §
133.10,
133.11 and
133.12 based on the actions of an employee or agent of the employer unless the
employee’s or agent’s conduct is within the scope of the employee’s or agent’s
employment or agency, and the employer does either of the following:
         (a)   With knowledge of the employee’s or agent’s conduct, the
employer authorizes or ratifies the conduct.
         (b)   The employer recklessly disregards the employee’s or agent’s
conduct.
      (6)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under §
133.10 or
133.11 as the section applies to an image transmitted through the internet or
other electronic method of remotely transmitting information that the person
charged with violating the section has taken, in good faith, reasonable,
effective, and appropriate actions under the circumstances to restrict or
prevent access by juveniles to material that is harmful to juveniles, including
any method that is feasible under available technology.
(R.C. § 2907.35) (Prior Code, §§ 666.11, 666.15)
§ 133.11 DISPLAYING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (A)   No person who has custody, control, or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character or content of the material
involved, shall display at the establishment any material that is harmful to
juveniles and that is open to view by juveniles as part of the invited general
public.
   (B)   It is not a violation of division (A) of this section if the material
in question is displayed by placing it behind “blinder racks” or similar
devices that cover at least the lower two-thirds of the material, if the
material in question is wrapped or placed behind the counter, or if the
material in question otherwise is covered or located so that the portion that
is harmful to juveniles is not open to the view of juveniles.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of displaying matter harmful
to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day during which the
offender is in violation of this section constitutes a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2907.311) (Prior Code, § 666.115)
Cross-reference:
   Presumptions, notice and defense, see §
133.10(F)
§ 133.12 DECEPTION TO OBTAIN MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (A)   No person, for the purpose of enabling a juvenile to obtain any
material or gain admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles,
shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is the parent, guardian, or spouse
of the juvenile.
      (2)   Furnish the juvenile with any identification or document purporting
to show that the juvenile is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (B)   No juvenile, for the purpose of obtaining any material or gaining
admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles, shall do either of
the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is 18 years of age or over or
married.
      (2)   Exhibit any identification or document purporting to show that he
or she is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of deception to obtain matter
harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the second degree. A juvenile who
violates division (B) of this section shall be adjudged an unruly child, with
the disposition of the case as may be appropriate under R.C. Chapter 2151.
(R.C. § 2907.33) (Prior Code, § 666.14)
Cross-reference:
   Presumptions, notice and defense, see §
133.10(F)
Statutory reference:
   Juvenile Court, see R.C. Chapter 2151
§ 133.13 RULES OF EVIDENCE.
   (A)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a place is a
brothel, evidence as to the reputation of such place and as to the reputation
of the persons who inhabit or frequent it is admissible on the question of
whether such place is or is not a brothel.
   (B)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a person is a
prostitute, evidence as to the reputation of such person is admissible on the
question of whether such person is or is not a prostitute.
   (C)   In any prosecution for a violation of §§
133.07 through
133.09, proof of a prior conviction of the accused of any such offense or
substantially equivalent offense is admissible in support of the charge.
   (D)   The prohibition contained in R.C. § 2317.02(D) against testimony by a
husband or wife concerning communications between them does not apply, and the
accused’s spouse may testify concerning any such communication in any of the
following cases:
      (1)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §
133.07 and the spouse testifying was the prostitute involved in the offense or
the person who used the offender’s premises to engage in sexual activity for
hire;
      (2)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §
133.08(A) or §
133.09.
(R.C. § 2907.26) (Prior Code, § 666.10)
§ 133.14 DECLARATORY JUDGMENT.
   (A)   Without limitation on the persons otherwise entitled to bring an
action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2721, involving the
same issue, the following persons have standing to bring a declaratory judgment
action to determine whether particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles:
      (1)   The chief legal officer of the municipality if and when there is
reasonable cause to believe that R.C. § 2907.31 or R.C. § 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be
violated;
      (2)   Any person who, pursuant to R.C. § 2907.35(B) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, has received notice in writing from the chief
legal officer stating that particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles.
   (B)   Any party to an action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to division
(A) of this section is entitled, upon the party’s request, to trial on the
merits within five days after joinder of the issues, and the court shall render
judgment within five days after trial is concluded.
   (C)   An action for a declaratory judgement pursuant to division (A) of this
section shall not be brought during the pendency of any civil action or
criminal prosecution when the character of the particular materials or
performances involved is at issue in the pending case, and either of the
following applies:
      (1)   Either of the parties to the action for a declaratory judgment is a
party to the pending case;
      (2)   A judgment in the pending case will necessarily constitute res
judicata as to the character of the materials or performances involved.
   (D)   A civil action or criminal prosecution in which the character of
particular materials or performances is at issue, brought during the pendency
of an action for a declaratory judgment involving the same issue, shall be
stayed during the pendency of the action for a declaratory judgment.
   (E)   The fact that a violation of R.C. § 2907.31 or R.C. § 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, occurs prior to a judicial
determination of the character of the material or performance involved in the
violation does not relieve the offender of criminal liability for the
violation, even though prosecution may be stayed pending the judicial
determination.
(R.C. § 2907.36) (Prior Code, § 666.16)
§ 133.15 INJUNCTION; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (A)   Where it appears that R.C. § 2907.31 or R.C. § 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be
violated, the chief legal officer of the municipality may bring an action to
enjoin the violation. The defendant, upon his or her request, is entitled to
trial on the merits within five days after the joinder of the issues, and the
court shall render judgment within five days after the trial is concluded.
   (B)   Premises used or occupied for repeated violations of R.C. § 2907.31 or
R.C. § 2907.32, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2907.37) (Prior Code, § 666.17)
Statutory reference:
   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles, felony, see R.C. § 2907.31
   Pandering obscenity, felony, see R.C. § 2907.32
§ 133.16 UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF VIEWING BOOTHS DEPICTING SEXUAL CONDUCT.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. Means an entity that is open to the public and
to which either of the following applies:
         (a)   It has a substantial or significant portion of its stock in
trade of the sale, rental, or viewing of visual materials or performances
depicting sexual conduct.
         (b)   It has as a principal business purpose the sale, rental, or
viewing of visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct.
      VISUAL MATERIALS OR PERFORMANCES. Means films, videos, CD-ROM discs,
streaming video, or other motion pictures.
   (B)   No person who has custody, control, or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character of the visual material or
performance involved, shall knowingly permit the use of, or offer the use of,
viewing booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room located in the
commercial establishment for the purpose of viewing visual materials or
performances depicting sexual conduct unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The inside of each booth, stall, or partitioned room is visible
from, and at least one side of each booth, stall, or partitioned room is open
to, a continuous and contiguous main aisle or hallway that is open to the
public areas of the commercial establishment and is not obscured by any
curtain, door, or other covering or enclosure.
      (2)   No booth, stall, or partitioned room is designed, constructed,
pandered, or allowed to be used for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating
nudity or sexual activity on the part of or between patrons or members of the
public, and no booth, stall, or partitioned room has any aperture, hole, or
opening for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating nudity or sexual
activity.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that
either of the following applies to the involved visual materials or
performances:
      (1)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct are
disseminated or presented for a bona fide medical, scientific, educational,
religious, governmental, judicial, or other proper purpose and by or to a
physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher, person pursuing bona
fide studies or research, librarian, member of the clergy, prosecutor, judge,
or other person having a proper interest in the visual materials or
performances.
      (2)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct,
taken as a whole, would be found by a reasonable person to have serious
literary, artistic, political, or scientific value or are presented or
disseminated in good faith for a serious literary, artistic, political, or
scientific purpose and are not pandered for their prurient appeal.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting unlawful
operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 2907.38) (Prior Code, § 666.18)
§ 133.17 JUVENILES ON THE PREMISES OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ADULT ARCADE. Means any place to which the public is permitted or invited
in which coin-operated, slug-operated, or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other
image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and in which the images so displayed
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, or ADULT VIDEO STORE.
         (a)   Means a commercial establishment that, for any form of
consideration, has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-
trade in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues from,
devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display
space for the sale or rental of any of the following:
            1.   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or
other visual representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas;
            2.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for
use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of self or others.
         (b)   Includes a commercial establishment as defined in R.C. §
2907.38. An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do
not involve the offering for sale, rental, or viewing of materials exhibiting
or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and
still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video
store. The existence of other principal business purposes does not exempt an
establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes
is offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, such materials
that exhibit or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      ADULT CABARET. Means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle
club, or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages
are served, that regularly features any of the following:
         (a)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity;
         (b)   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities;
         (c)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. Means the sale, rental, or exhibition, for any form
of consideration, of books, films, video cassettes, magazines, periodicals, or
live performances that are characterized by an emphasis on the exposure or
display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. Means an adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, nude or seminude model studio, or sexual
encounter establishment. An establishment in which a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the
state engages in medically approved and recognized therapy, including but not
limited to massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is not an
“adult entertainment establishment”.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. Means a commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon
the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
      ADULT THEATER. Means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or live
performances that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
      DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY THEIR EMPHASIS UPON. Means the dominant
or principal character and theme of the object described by this phrase. For
instance, when the phrase refers to films “that are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas”, the films so described are
those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      NUDE OR SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO. Means any place where a person, who
regularly appears in a state of nudity or seminudity, is provided for money or
any other form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. A modeling
class or studio is not a nude or seminude model studio and is not subject to
this chapter if it is operated in any of the following ways:
         (a)   By a college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation;
         (b)   By a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs, the credits for which are transferable to a college or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
         (c)   In a structure that has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising indicating that a person appearing in a
state of nudity or seminudity is available for viewing, if in order to
participate in a class in the structure, a student must enroll at least three
days in advance of the class and if not more than one nude or seminude model is
on the premises at any one time.
      NUDITY, NUDE, or STATE OF NUDITY. Means the showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft, or cleavage with less
than a fully opaque covering; or the showing of the female breasts with less
than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple.
      REGULARLY FEATURES or REGULARLY SHOWN. Means a consistent or substantial
course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a
substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the
ongoing business of the adult entertainment establishment.
      SEMINUDE or STATE OF SEMINUDITY. Means a state of dress in which opaque
clothing covers not more than the genitals, pubic region, and nipple of the
female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or
devices.
      SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT.
         (a)   Means a business or commercial establishment that, as one of its
principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration a place where
either of the following occur:
            1.   Two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for
the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities.
            2.   Two or more persons appear nude or seminude for the purpose of
displaying their nude or seminude bodies for their receipt of consideration or
compensation in any type or form.
         (b)   An establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized therapy, including but not limited to massage
therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is not a “sexual encounter
establishment”.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Means the cleft of the buttocks, anus, male
or female genitals, or the female breast.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, or actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy;
         (b)   Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of
the activities described in division (a) of this definition.
   (B)   No person knowingly shall allow an individual, including but not
limited to a patron, customer, or employee, who is under 18 years of age on the
premises of an adult entertainment establishment.
   (C)   No individual who is under 18 years of age knowingly shall show or
give false information concerning the individual’s name or age, or other false
identification, for the purpose of gaining entrance to an adult entertainment
establishment.
   (D)   A person shall not be found guilty of a violation of division (B) of
this section if the person raises as an affirmative defense and if the jury or,
in a nonjury trial, the court finds the person has established by a
preponderance of the evidence, all of the following:
      (1)   The individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment exhibited to an operator, employee, agent, or independent
contractor of the adult entertainment establishment a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 and
4507.52 showing that the individual was then at least 18 years of age.
      (2)   The operator, employee, agent, or independent contractor made a
bona fide effort to ascertain the true age of the individual gaining entrance
to the adult entertainment establishment by checking the identification
presented, at the time of entrance, to ascertain that the description on the
identification compared with the appearance of the individual and that the
identification had not been altered in any way.
      (3)   The operator, employee, agent, or independent contractor had reason
to believe that the individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment was at least 18 years of age.
   (E)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense described in
division (D) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or the
deputy registrar who issued a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 and 4507.52 shall be permitted to
submit certified copies of the records, in the Registrar’s or deputy
registrar’s possession, of the issuance of the license or identification card
in question, in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles in the action.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
permitting a juvenile on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment,
a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day a person violates this division
constitutes a separate offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of use by a
juvenile of false information to enter an adult entertainment establishment, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if committed by
an adult.
(R.C. § 2907.39) (Prior Code, § 666.19)
§ 133.18 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES; ILLEGAL OPERATION AND ACTIVITY.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. Means a commercial establishment
that has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade or
inventory in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues
from, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display
space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of books,
magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual
representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT CABARET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. Means a commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions that are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown
to more than five individuals for any form of consideration.
      CHARACTERIZED BY. Describing the essential character or quality of an
item.
      EMPLOYEE. Means any individual who performs any service on the premises
of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis,
regardless of whether the individual is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent, or otherwise, but does not include an individual exclusively
on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery
of goods to the premises.
      NUDE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      NUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      OPERATOR. Means any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented
business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation
the business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise overall
operational control of the business premises.
      PATRON. Means any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented
business except for any of the following:
         (a)   An operator or an employee of the sexually oriented business;
         (b)   An individual who is on the premises exclusively for repair or
maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises;
         (c)   A public employee or a volunteer firefighter emergency medical
services worker acting within the scope of the public employee’s or volunteer’s
duties as a public employee or volunteer.
      PREMISES. Means the real property on which the sexually oriented business
is located and all appurtenances to the real property, including, but not
limited, to the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and
parking lots or parking garages adjacent to the real property under the
ownership, control, or supervision of the owner or operator of the sexually
oriented business.
      REGULARLY. Means consistently or repeatedly.
      SEMINUDE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      SEXUAL DEVICE. Means any three-dimensional object designed and marketed
for stimulation of the male or female human genitals or anus or female breasts
or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others, including but not
limited to dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical representations of the
human genital organs, but not including devices primarily intended for
protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy.
      SEXUAL DEVICE SHOP. Means a commercial establishment that regularly
features sexual devices, but not including any pharmacy, drug store, medical
clinic, or establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare
products or services, and not including any commercial establishment that does
not restrict access to its premises by reason of age.
      SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. Means a business or commercial enterprise that,
as one of its principal business purposes, purports to offer for any form of
consideration physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
individuals of the opposite sex when one or more of the individuals is nude or
seminude.
      SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Means an adult bookstore, adult video store,
adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, sexual device shop, or sexual
encounter center, but does not include a business solely by reason of its
showing, selling, or renting materials that may depict sex.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Includes human genitals, pubic region, and
buttocks and the human female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Means sexual intercourse, oral copulation,
masturbation, or sodomy, or excretory functions as a part of or in connection
with any of these activities.
      STATE OF NUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      STATE OF SEMINUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
   (B)   No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business
between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day, except that a sexually
oriented business that holds a liquor permit pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4303 may
remain open until the hour specified in that permit if it does not conduct,
offer, or allow sexually oriented entertainment activity in which the
performers appear nude.
   (C)   (1)   No patron who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family
shall knowingly touch any employee while that employee is nude or seminude or
touch the clothing of any employee while that employee is nude or seminude.
      (2)   No employee who regularly appears nude or seminude on the premises
of a sexually oriented business, while on the premises of that sexually
oriented business and while nude or seminude, shall knowingly touch a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or the clothing of a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or allow a patron who is not
a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who is not a
member of the employee’s immediate family to touch the employee or the clothing
of the employee.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of illegally
operating a sexually oriented business, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of illegal
sexually oriented activity in a sexually oriented business. If the offender
touches a specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing
covering a specified anatomical area, a violation of division (C) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender does not touch a
specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing covering a
specified anatomical area, a violation of division (C) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2907.40) (Prior Code, § 666.20)
Statutory reference:
   State indemnification for certain municipal liability stemming from local
adult business regulations, see R.C. § 715.55
§ 133.19 UNLAWFUL ADVERTISING OF MASSAGE.
   (A)   No person, by means of a statement, solicitation, or offer in a print
or electronic publication, sign, placard, storefront display, or other medium,
shall advertise massage, relaxation massage, any other massage technique or
method, or any related service, with the suggestion or promise of sexual
activity.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful advertising of
massage, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (C)   Nothing in this section prevents the municipality from enacting any
regulation of the advertising of massage further than and in addition to the
provisions of divisions (A) and (B) of this section.
   (D)   As used in this section, SEXUAL ACTIVITY has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2907.01.
(R.C. § 2927.17) (Prior Code, § 666.21)
§ 133.20 NONCONSENSUAL DISSEMINATION OF PRIVATE SEXUAL IMAGES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      CABLE SERVICE PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.01.
      DIRECT-TO-HOME SATELLITE SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. §
303, as amended.
      DISSEMINATE. Means to post, distribute, or publish on a computer device,
computer network, web site, or other electronic device or medium of
communication.
      IMAGE. Means a photograph, film, videotape, digital recording, or other
depiction or portrayal of a person.
      INTERACTIVE COMPUTER SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in the
“Telecommunications Act of 1996”, 47 U.S.C. § 230, as amended.
      INTERNET PROVIDER. Means a provider of internet service, including all of
the following:
         (a)   Broadband service, however defined or classified by the Federal
Communications Commission;
         (b)   Information service or telecommunications service, both as
defined in the “Telecommunications Act of 1996”, 47 U.S.C. § 153, as amended;
         (c)   Internet protocol-enabled services, as defined in R.C. §
4927.01.
      MOBILE SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153, as amended.
      SEXUAL ACT. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Sexual activity;
         (b)   Masturbation;
         (c)   An act involving a bodily substance that is performed for the
purpose of sexual arousal or gratification;
         (d)   Sado-masochistic abuse.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153,
as amended.
      VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly disseminate an image of another person if
all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person in the image is 18 years of age or older.
      (2)   The person in the image can be identified from the image itself or
from information displayed in connection with the image and the offender
supplied the identifying information.
      (3)   The person in the image is in a state of nudity or is engaged in a
sexual act.
      (4)   The image is disseminated without consent from the person in the
image.
      (5)   The image is disseminated with intent to harm the person in the
image.
   (C)   This section does not prohibit the dissemination of an image if any of
the following apply:
      (1)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of a criminal
investigation that is otherwise lawful.
      (2)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of, or in connection
with, the reporting of unlawful conduct.
      (3)   The image is part of a news report or commentary or an artistic or
expressive work, such as a performance, work of art, literary work, theatrical
work, musical work, motion picture, film, or audiovisual work.
      (4)   The image is disseminated by a law enforcement officer, or a
corrections officer or guard in a detention facility, acting within the scope
of the person’s official duties.
      (5)   The image is disseminated for another lawful public purpose.
      (6)   The person in the image is knowingly and willingly in a state of
nudity or engaged in a sexual act and is knowingly and willingly in a location
in which the person does not have a reasonable expectation of privacy.
      (7)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of medical treatment or
examination.
   (D)   The following entities are not liable for a violation of this section
solely as a result of an image or other information provided by another person:
      (1)   A provider of interactive computer service;
      (2)   A mobile service;
      (3)   A telecommunications carrier;
      (4)   An internet provider;
      (5)   A cable service provider;
      (6)   A direct-to-home satellite service;
      (7)   A video service provider.
   (E)   Any conduct that is a violation of this section and any other section
of this Code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, the
other section, or both sections.
   (F)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (F)(1)(b), (F)(1)
(c), or (F)(1)(d) of this section, whoever violates this section is guilty of
nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images, a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images is
a misdemeanor of the second degree.
         (c)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, nonconsensual dissemination of
private sexual images is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (d)   If the offender is under 18 years of age and the person in the
image is not more than five years older than the offender, the offender shall
not be prosecuted under this section.
      (2)   In addition to any other penalty or disposition authorized or
required by law, the court may order any person who is convicted of a violation
of this section or who is adjudicated delinquent by reason of a violation of
this section to criminally forfeit all of the following property to the state
under R.C. Chapter 2981:
         (a)   Any profits or proceeds and any property the person has acquired
or maintained in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines
to have been acquired or maintained as a result of the violation;
         (b)   Any interest in, securities of, claim against, or property or
contractual right of any kind affording a source of influence over any
enterprise that the person has established, operated, controlled, or conducted
in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines to have been
acquired or maintained as a result of the violation.
   (G)   A victim of a violation of this section may commence a civil cause of
action against the offender, as described in R.C. § 2307.66.
(R.C. § 2917.211) (Prior Code, § 666.22)
§ 133.21 GROOMING.
   (A)   As used in this section, PATTERN OF CONDUCT has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2903.211.
   (B)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in a pattern of
conduct with a minor who is less than 16 years of age and who is four or more
years younger than the person, when the pattern of conduct would cause a
reasonable adult person to believe that the person is communicating with the
minor with purpose to do either of the following:
      (1)   Entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity,
and when the person’s purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to
entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity with the
person or a third person;
      (2)   Prepare the minor to engage in sexual activity, and when the
person’s purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to prepare the minor
to engage in sexual activity with the person or a third person that would be a
violation of R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, or 2907.07.
   (C)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in a pattern of
conduct with a minor if the person and the minor are in any of the
relationships described in R.C. § 2907.03(A)(5) to (A)(13), when the pattern of
conduct would cause a reasonable adult person to believe that the person is
communicating with the minor with purpose to do either of the following:
      (1)   Entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity,
and when the person’s purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to
entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity with the
person or a third person;
      (2)   Prepare the minor to engage in sexual activity, and when the
person’s purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to prepare the minor
to engage in sexual activity with the person or a third person that would be a
violation of R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, or 2907.07.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of grooming.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of
division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
victim of the offense is less than 13 years of age or if the offender supplied
alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the offense, a violation of
division (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. If the victim of the offense is less than 13 years of age and if the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
this section or a sexually oriented offense or a child-victim oriented offense
or the offender supplied alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the
offense, a violation of division (B) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or a sexually
oriented offense or a child-victim oriented offense and the offender supplied
alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the offense, a violation of
division (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of
division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender supplied alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the offense, a
violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If the victim of the offense is less than 13 years of
age or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of this section or a sexually oriented offense or a child-victim
oriented offense, a violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the victim of the offense is less
than 13 years of age and if the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or a sexually oriented offense or
a child-victim oriented offense or the offender supplied alcohol or a drug of
abuse to the victim of the offense, a violation of division (C) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (E)   A prosecution for a violation of this section does not preclude a
prosecution of a violation of any other section of the this code or the Ohio
Revised Code. One or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that
can be prosecuted under this section or any other section of this code or the
Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, the other section of
this code or the Revised Code, or both sections.
(R.C. § 2907.071)
§ 133.99 SENTENCING FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED OFFENSES; SEXUAL PREDATORS;
REGISTRATION.
   (A)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, and the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim
offender relative to the offense or the offense is any offense listed in R.C. §
2901.07(D)(1) to (D)(3), the judge shall include in the offender’s sentence a
statement that the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim offender,
shall comply with the requirements of R.C. § 2950.03, and shall require the
offender to submit to a DNA specimen collection procedure pursuant to R.C. §
2901.07.
   (B)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or a
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, the judge shall include in the sentence a summary of the
offender’s duties imposed under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05, and
2950.06, and the duration of the duties. The judge shall inform the offender,
at the time of sentencing, of those duties and of their duration. If required
under R.C. § 2950.03(A)(2), the judge shall perform the duties specified in
that section or, if required under R.C. § 2950.03(A)(6), the judge shall
perform the duties specified in that division.
(R.C. § 2929.23) (Prior Code, § 666.99)
Cross-reference:
   Sentencing generally, see
Chapter 130
CHAPTER 134: GAMBLING OFFENSES
Section
   
134.01   Definitions
   
134.02   Prohibitions against gambling; exception
   
134.03   Operating a gambling house
   
134.04   Public gaming
   
134.05   Cheating
   
134.06   Regulations concerning operation of licensed bingo game
   
134.07   Records to be kept
   
134.08   Requirements for bingo game operators
   
134.09   Bingo games for amusement only
   
134.10   Prohibitions where instant bingo game is conducted
   
134.11   Raffle drawings
   
134.12   Instant bingo other than at bingo sessions
   
134.13   Restrictions on owner or lessor of location at instant bingo
   
134.14   Skill-based amusement machines; prohibited conduct
   
134.15   Electronic instant bingo; prohibited conduct
Statutory reference:
   Conducting an illegal bingo game, felony, see R.C. § 2915.07
   Licensing bingo games by Attorney General, see R.C. § 2915.08
   Licensing distributors of bingo supplies by Attorney General, see R.C. §
2915.081
   Licensing manufacturers of bingo supplies by Attorney General, see R.C. §
2915.082
§ 134.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BET. The hazarding of anything of value upon the result of an event,
undertaking, or contingency, but does not include a bona fide business risk.
   BINGO. Either of the following:
      (1)   A game with all of the following characteristics:
         (a)   The participants use bingo cards or sheets, including paper
formats and electronic representation or image formats, that are divided into
25 spaces arranged in five horizontal and five vertical rows of spaces, with
each space, except the central space, being designated by a combination of a
letter and a number and with the central space being designated as a free
space;
         (b)   The participants cover the spaces on the bingo cards or sheets
that correspond to combinations of letters and numbers that are announced by a
bingo game operator;
         (c)   A bingo game operator announces combinations of letters and
numbers that appear on objects that a bingo game operator selects by chance,
either manually or mechanically, from a receptacle that contains 75 objects at
the beginning of each game, each object marked by a different combination of a
letter and a number that corresponds to one of the 75 possible combinations of
a letter and a number that can appear on the bingo cards or sheets;
         (d)   The winner of the bingo game includes any participant who
properly announces during the interval between the announcements of letters and
numbers, as described in division (1)(c) of this definition, that a
predetermined and pre-announced pattern of spaces has been covered on a bingo
card or sheet being used by the participant.
      (2)   Instant bingo, electronic instant bingo, and raffles.
   BINGO GAME OPERATOR. Any person, except security personnel, who performs
work or labor at the site of bingo including but not limited to collecting
money from participants, handing out bingo cards or sheets or objects to cover
spaces on bingo cards or sheets, selecting from a receptacle the objects that
contain the combination of letters and numbers that appear on bingo cards or
sheets, calling out the combinations of letters and numbers, distributing
prizes, selling or redeeming instant bingo tickets or cards, selling or
redeeming electronic instant bingo tickets, credits, or vouchers, accessing an
electronic instant bingo system other than as a participant, supervising the
operation of a punch board, selling raffle tickets, selecting raffle tickets
from a receptacle and announcing the winning numbers in a raffle, and
preparing, selling, and serving food or beverages. “Bingo game operator” does
not include a person who is installing, maintaining, updating, or repairing an
electronic instant bingo system.
   BINGO SESSION. A period that includes both of the following:
      (1)   Not to exceed five continuous hours for the conduct of one or more
games described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in this section,
instant bingo, and electronic instant bingo;
      (2)   A period for the conduct of instant bingo and electronic instant
bingo for not more than two hours before and not more than two hours after the
period described in division (1) of this definition.
   BINGO SUPPLIES. Bingo cards or sheets; instant bingo tickets or cards;
electronic bingo aids; raffle tickets; punch boards; seal cards; instant bingo
ticket dispensers; electronic instant bingo systems; and devices for selecting
or displaying the combination of bingo letters and numbers or raffle tickets.
Items that are “bingo supplies” are not gambling devices if sold or otherwise
provided, and used, in accordance with this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915. For
purposes of this chapter, “bingo supplies” are not to be considered equipment
used to conduct a bingo game.
   BOOKMAKING. The business of receiving or paying off bets.
   CHAMBER OF COMMERCE. Any organization of individuals, professionals, and
businesses that has the purpose to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial, and civic interests of the community and that is, and has received
from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that currently is in
effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(6).
   CHARITABLE BINGO GAME. Any bingo game described in divisions (1) or (2) of
the definition of “bingo” in this section that is conducted by a charitable
organization that has obtained a license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08 and the
proceeds of which are used for a charitable purpose.
   CHARITABLE INSTANT BINGO ORGANIZATION. An organization that is exempt from
federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3) and
is a charitable organization as defined in this section. The term does not
include a charitable organization that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3) and that is created by a
veteran’s organization, a fraternal organization, or a sporting organization in
regards to bingo conducted or assisted by a veteran’s organization, a fraternal
organization, or a sporting organization pursuant to R.C. § 2915.13, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, “charitable
organization” means either of the following:
         (a)   An organization that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
         (b)   A volunteer rescue service organization, volunteer firefighter’s
organization, veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §§ 501(c)
(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19).
      (2)   To qualify as a charitable organization, an organization shall have
been in continuous existence as such in this state for a period of two years
immediately preceding either the making of an application for a bingo license
under R.C. § 2915.08 or the conducting of any game of chance as provided in
R.C. § 2915.02(D), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   CHARITABLE PURPOSE. Means that the net profit of bingo, other than instant
bingo or electronic instant bingo, is used by, or is given, donated, or
otherwise transferred to, any of the following:
      (1)   Any organization that is described in IRC §§ 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2),
or 509(a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization that is tax
exempt under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
      (2)   A veteran’s organization that is a post, chapter, or organization
of veterans, or an auxiliary unit or society of, or a trust or foundation for,
any such post, chapter, or organization organized in the United States or any
of its possessions, at least 75% of the members of which are veterans and
substantially all of the other members of which are individuals who are
spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, or such individuals, provided that no
part of the net earnings of such post, chapter, or organization inures to the
benefit of any private shareholder or individual, and further provided that the
net profit is used by the post, chapter, or organization for the charitable
purposes set forth in R.C. § 5739.02(B)(12), is used for awarding scholarships
to or for attendance at an institution mentioned in that division of the Ohio
Revised Code, is donated to a governmental agency, or is used for nonprofit
youth activities, the purchase of United States or Ohio flags that are donated
to schools, youth groups, or other bona fide nonprofit organizations, promotion
of patriotism, or disaster relief;
      (3)   A fraternal organization that has been in continuous existence in
this state for 15 years and that uses the net profit exclusively for religious,
charitable, scientific, literary, or educational purposes, or for the
prevention of cruelty to children or animals, if contributions for such use
would qualify as a deductible charitable contribution under IRC § 170;
      (4)   A volunteer firefighter’s organization that uses the net profit for
the purposes set forth in the definition of “volunteer firefighter’s
organization” in this section.
   COMMUNITY ACTION AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 122.66.
   CONDUCT. To back, promote, organize, manage, carry on, sponsor, or prepare
for the operation of bingo or a game of chance, a scheme of chance, or a
sweepstakes.
   DEAL. A single game of instant bingo tickets, or a single game of electronic
instant bingo tickets, all with the same serial number.
   DISTRIBUTOR. Any person who purchases or obtains bingo supplies and who does
either of the following:
      (1)   Sells, offers for sale, or otherwise provides or offers to provide
the bingo supplies to another person for use in this state;
      (2)   Modifies, converts, adds to, or removes parts from the bingo
supplies to further their promotion or sale for use in this state.
   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID.
      (1)   An electronic device used by a participant to monitor bingo cards
or sheets purchased at the time and place of a bingo session and that does all
of the following:
         (a)   It provides a means for a participant to input numbers and
letters announced by a bingo caller.
         (b)   It compares the numbers and letters entered by the participant
to the bingo faces previously stored in the memory of the device.
         (c)   It identifies a winning bingo pattern.
      (2)   The term does not include any device into which a coin, currency,
token, or an equivalent is inserted to activate play.
   ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO.
      (1)   A form of bingo that consists of an electronic or digital
representation of instant bingo in which a participant wins a prize if the
participant’s electronic instant bingo ticket contains a combination of numbers
or symbols that was designated in advance as a winning combination, and to
which all of the following apply:
         (a)   Each deal has a predetermined, finite number of winning and
losing tickets and a predetermined prize amount and deal structure, provided
that there may be multiple winning combinations in each deal and multiple
winning tickets.
         (b)   Each electronic instant bingo ticket within a deal has a unique
serial number that is not regenerated.
         (c)   Each electronic instant bingo ticket within a deal is sold for
the same price.
         (d)   After a participant purchases an electronic instant bingo
ticket, the combination of numbers or symbols on the ticket is revealed to the
participant.
         (e)   The reveal of numbers or symbols on the ticket may incorporate
an entertainment or bonus theme, provided that the reveal does not include
spinning reels that resemble a slot machine.
         (f)   The reveal theme, if any, does not require additional
consideration or award any prize other than any predetermined prize associated
with the electronic instant bingo ticket.
      (2)   The term shall not include any of the following:
         (a)   Any game, entertainment, or bonus theme that replicates or
simulates any of the following:
            1.   The gambling games of keno, blackjack, roulette, poker, craps,
other casino-style table games;
            2.   Horse racing;
            3.   Gambling games offered in this state on slot machines or video
lottery terminals. As used in this division, “video lottery terminal” has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 3770.21.
         (b)   Any device operated by dropping one or more coins or tokens into
a slot and pulling a handle or pushing a button or touchpoint on a touchscreen
to activate one to three or more rotating reels marked into horizontal segments
by varying symbols, where the predetermined prize amount depends on how and how
many of the symbols line up when the rotating reels come to a rest;
         (c)   Any device that includes a coin or token slot, tray, or hopper
and the ability to dispense coins, cash, tokens, or anything of value other
than a credit ticket voucher.
   ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO SYSTEM. Means both of the following:
      (1)   A mechanical, electronic, digital, or video device and associated
software to which all of the following apply:
         (a)   It is used by not more than one player at a time to play
electronic instant bingo on a single screen that is physically connected to the
device;
         (b)   It is located on the premises of the principal place of business
of a veteran’s or fraternal organization that holds a type II or type III bingo
license to conduct electronic instant bingo at that location issued under R.C.
§ 2915.08.
      (2)   Any associated equipment or software used to manage, monitor, or
document any aspect of electronic instant bingo.
   EXPENSES. The reasonable amount of gross profit actually expended for all of
the following:
      (1)   The purchase or lease of bingo supplies;
      (2)   The annual license fee required under R.C. § 2915.08;
      (3)   Bank fees and service charges for a bingo session or game account
described in R.C. § 2915.10;
      (4)   Audits and accounting services;
      (5)   Safes;
      (6)   Cash registers;
      (7)   Hiring security personnel;
      (8)   Advertising bingo;
      (9)   Renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session;
      (10)   Tables and chairs;
      (11)   Expenses for maintaining and operating a charitable organization’s
facilities, including but not limited to a post home, club house, lounge,
tavern, or canteen and any grounds attached to the post home, club house,
lounge, tavern, or canteen;
      (12)   Payment of real property taxes and assessments that are levied on
a premises on which bingo is conducted;
      (13)   Any other product or service directly related to the conduct of
bingo that is authorized in rules adopted by the Attorney General under R.C. §
2915.08(F)(1).
   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. Any society, order, state headquarters, or
association within this state, except a college or high school fraternity, that
is not organized for profit, that is a branch, lodge, or chapter of a national
or state organization, that exists exclusively for the common business or
sodality of its members.
   GAMBLING DEVICE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A book, totalizer, or other equipment used for recording bets;
      (2)   A ticket, token, or other device representing a chance, share, or
interest in a scheme of chance or evidencing a bet;
      (3)   A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel, slot machine,
or other apparatus designed for use in connection with a game of chance;
      (4)   Any equipment, device, apparatus, or paraphernalia specially
designed for gambling purposes;
      (5)   Bingo supplies sold or otherwise provided, or used, in violation of
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
   GAMBLING OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. Chapter 2915;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 or a violation of R.C. § 2915.06
as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or of the United States, of which gambling is an
element;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   GAME FLARE. The board or placard, or electronic representation of a board or
placard, that accompanies each deal of instant bingo or electronic instant
bingo tickets and that includes the following information for the game:
      (1)   The name of the game;
      (2)   The manufacturer’s name or distinctive logo;
      (3)   The form number;
      (4)   The ticket count;
      (5)   The prize structure, including the number of winning tickets by
denomination and the respective winning symbol or number combinations for the
winning tickets;
      (6)   The cost per play;
      (7)   The serial number of the game.
   GAME OF CHANCE. Poker, craps, roulette, or other game in which a player
gives anything of value in the hope of gain, the outcome of which is determined
largely by chance, but does not include bingo.
   GAME OF CHANCE CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. Any game of chance designed to produce
income for the person who conducts or operates the game of chance, but does not
include bingo.
   GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES. The annual gross receipts derived from the conduct of
bingo described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in this section
plus the annual net profit derived from the conduct of bingo described in
division (2) of the definition of “bingo” in this section.
   GROSS PROFIT. Gross receipts minus the amount actually expended for the
payment of prize awards.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. All money or assets, including admission fees, that a person
receives from bingo without the deduction of any amounts for prizes paid out or
for the expenses of conducting bingo. The term does not include any money
directly taken in from the sale of food or beverages by a charitable
organization conducting bingo, or by a bona fide auxiliary unit or society of a
charitable organization conducting bingo, provided all of the following apply:
      (1)   The auxiliary unit or society has been in existence as a bona fide
auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization for at least two years
prior to conducting bingo.
      (2)   The person who purchases the food or beverage receives nothing of
value except the food or beverage and items customarily received with the
purchase of that food or beverage.
      (3)   The food and beverages are sold at customary and reasonable prices.
   HISTORIC RAILROAD. All or a portion of the tracks and right-of-way of a
railroad that was owned and operated by a for profit common carrier in this
state at any time prior to January 1, 1950.
   INSTANT BINGO. A form of bingo that shall use folded or banded tickets or
paper cards with perforated break-open tabs, a face of which is covered or
otherwise hidden from view to conceal a number, letter, or symbol, or set of
numbers, letters, or symbols, some of which have been designated in advance as
prize winners, and may also include games in which some winners are determined
by the random selection of one or more bingo numbers by the use of a seal card
or bingo blower. “Instant bingo” also includes a punch board game. In all
“instant bingo” the prize amount and structure shall be predetermined. The term
does not include electronic instant bingo or any device that is activated by
the insertion of a coin, currency, token, or an equivalent, and that contains
as one of its components a video display monitor that is capable of displaying
numbers, letters, symbols, or characters in winning or losing combinations.
   INSTANT BINGO TICKET DISPENSER. A mechanical device that dispenses an
instant bingo ticket or card as the sole item of value dispensed and that has
the following characteristics:
      (1)   It is activated upon the insertion of United States currency.
      (2)   It performs no gaming functions.
      (3)   It does not contain a video display monitor or generate noise.
      (4)   It is not capable of displaying any numbers, letters, symbols, or
characters in winning or losing combinations.
      (5)   It does not simulate or display rolling or spinning reels.
      (6)   It is incapable of determining whether a dispensed bingo ticket or
card is a winning or non-winning ticket or card and requires a winning ticket
or card to be paid by a bingo game operator.
      (7)   It may provide accounting and security features to aid in
accounting for the instant bingo tickets or cards it dispenses.
      (8)   It is not part of an electronic network and is not interactive.
   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE (IRC). The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 100 Stat.
2085, 26 U.S.C. §§ 1 et seq., as now or hereafter amended.
   MANUFACTURER. Any person who assembles completed bingo supplies from raw
materials, other items, or subparts or who modifies, converts, adds to, or
removes parts from bingo supplies to further their promotion or sale.
   MERCHANDISE PRIZE. Any item of value, but shall not include any of the
following:
      (1)   Cash, gift cards, or any equivalent thereof;
      (2)   Plays on games of chance, state lottery tickets, or bingo;
      (3)   Firearms, tobacco, or alcoholic beverages; or
      (4)   A redeemable voucher that is redeemable for any of the items listed
in division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   NET PROFIT. Gross profit minus expenses.
   NET PROFIT FROM THE PROCEEDS OF THE SALE OF INSTANT BINGO OR ELECTRONIC
INSTANT BINGO. Gross profit minus the ordinary, necessary, and reasonable
expense expended for the purchase of bingo supplies for the purpose of
conducting instant bingo or electronic instant bingo, and, in the case of
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conducted by a veteran’s, fraternal,
or sporting organization, minus the payment by that organization of real
property taxes and assessments levied on a premises on which instant bingo or
electronic instant bingo is conducted.
   PARTICIPANT. Any person who plays bingo.
   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.59 and includes any firm or any
other legal entity, however organized.
   POOL NOT CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. A scheme in which a participant gives a
valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize and the total amount of
consideration wagered is distributed to a participant or participants.
   PUNCH BOARD. A form of instant bingo that uses a board containing a number
of holes or receptacles of uniform size in which are placed, mechanically and
randomly, serially numbered slips of paper that may be punched or drawn from
the hole or receptacle. A player may punch or draw the numbered slips of paper
from the holes or receptacles and obtain the prize established for the game if
the number drawn corresponds to a winning number or, if the punch board
includes the use of a seal card, a potential winning number.
   RAFFLE. A form of bingo in which the one or more prizes are won by one or
more persons who have purchased a raffle ticket. The one or more winners of the
raffle are determined by drawing a ticket stub or other detachable section from
a receptacle containing ticket stubs or detachable sections corresponding to
all tickets sold for the raffle. The term does not include the drawing of a
ticket stub or other detachable section of a ticket purchased to attend a
professional sporting event if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The ticket stub or other detachable section is used to select the
winner of a free prize given away at the professional sporting event; and
      (2)   The cost of the ticket is the same as the cost of a ticket to the
professional sporting event on days when no free prize is given away.
   REDEEMABLE VOUCHER. Any ticket, token, coupon, receipt, or other noncash
representation of value.
   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION. Any church, body of communicants, or group that is
not organized or operated for profit and that gathers in common membership for
regular worship and religious observances.
   REVOKE. To void permanently all rights and privileges of the holder of a
license issued under R.C. § 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a charitable
gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   SCHEME OF CHANCE.
      (1)   A slot machine unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3772, lottery
unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770, numbers game, pool conducted for
profit, or other scheme in which a participant gives a valuable consideration
for a chance to win a prize, but does not include bingo, a skill-based
amusement machine, or a pool not conducted for profit. “Scheme of chance”
includes the use of an electronic device to reveal the results of a game entry
if valuable consideration is paid, directly or indirectly, for a chance to win
a prize. Valuable consideration is deemed to be paid for a chance to win a
prize in the following instances:
         (a)   Less than 50% of the goods or services sold by a scheme of
chance operator in exchange for game entries are used or redeemed by
participants at any one location;
         (b)   Less than 50% of participants who purchase goods or services at
any one location do not accept, use, or redeem the goods or services sold or
purportedly sold;
         (c)   More than 50% of prizes at any one location are revealed to
participants through an electronic device simulating a game of chance or a
“casino game” as defined in R.C. § 3772.01;
         (d)   The good or service sold by a scheme of chance operator in
exchange for a game entry cannot be used or redeemed in the manner advertised;
         (e)   A participant pays more than fair market value for goods or
services offered by a scheme of chance operator in order to receive one or more
game entries;
         (f)   A participant may use the electronic device to purchase
additional game entries;
         (g)   A participant may purchase additional game entries by using
points or credits won as prizes while using the electronic device;
         (h)   A scheme of chance operator pays out in prize money more than
20% of the gross revenue received at one location; or
         (i)   A participant makes a purchase or exchange in order to obtain
any good or service that may be used to facilitate play on the electronic
device.
      (2)   As used in this division, “electronic device” means a mechanical,
video, digital, or electronic machine or device that is capable of displaying
information on a screen or other mechanism and that is owned, leased, or
otherwise possessed by any person conducting a scheme of chance, or by that
person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or contractors. “Electronic
device” does not include an electronic instant bingo system.
   SEAL CARD. A form of instant bingo that uses instant bingo tickets in
conjunction with a board or placard that contains one or more seals that, when
removed or opened, reveal predesignated winning numbers, letters, or symbols.
   SECURITY PERSONNEL. Includes any person who either is a Sheriff, deputy
sheriff, Marshal, deputy marshal, township constable, or member of an organized
police department of a municipal corporation or has successfully completed a
peace officer’s training course pursuant to R.C. §§ 109.71 through 109.79 and
who is hired to provide security for the premises on which bingo is conducted.
   SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINE.
      (1)   (a)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic device that
rewards the player or players, if at all, only with merchandise prizes or with
redeemable vouchers redeemable only for merchandise prizes, provided that with
respect to rewards for playing the game all of the following apply:
            1.   The wholesale value of a merchandise prize awarded as a result
of the single play of a machine does not exceed $10;
            2.   Redeemable vouchers awarded for any single play of a machine
are not redeemable for a merchandise prize with a wholesale value of more than
$10;
            3.   Redeemable vouchers are not redeemable for a merchandise prize
that has a wholesale value of more than $10 times the fewest number of single
plays necessary to accrue the redeemable vouchers required to obtain that
prize; and
            4.   Any redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes are distributed
at the site of the skill- based amusement machine at the time of play.
         (b)   A card for the purchase of gasoline is a redeemable voucher for
purposes of division (1) of this definition even if the skill-based amusement
machine for the play of which the card is awarded is located at a place where
gasoline may not be legally distributed to the public or the card is not
redeemable at the location of, or at the time of playing, the skill-based
amusement machine.
      (2)   A device shall not be considered a skill-based amusement machine
and shall be considered a slot machine if it pays cash or one or more of the
following apply:
         (a)   The ability of a player to succeed at the game is impacted by
the number or ratio of prior wins to prior losses of players playing the game;
         (b)   Any reward of redeemable vouchers is not based solely on the
player achieving the object of the game or the player’s score;
         (c)   The outcome of the game, or the value of the redeemable voucher
or merchandise prize awarded for winning the game, can be controlled by a
source other than any player playing the game;
         (d)   The success of any player is or may be determined by a chance
event that cannot be altered by player actions;
         (e)   The ability of any player to succeed at the game is determined
by game features not visible or known to the player;
         (f)   The ability of the player to succeed at the game is impacted by
the exercise of a skill that no reasonable player could exercise.
      (3)   All of the following apply to any machine that is operated as
described in division (1) of this definition:
         (a)   As used in this definition of “skill-based amusement machine”,
GAME and PLAY mean one event from the initial activation of the machine until
the results of play are determined without payment of additional consideration.
An individual utilizing a machine that involves a single game, play, contest,
competition, or tournament may be awarded redeemable vouchers or merchandise
prizes based on the results of play.
         (b)   Advance play for a single game, play, contest, competition, or
tournament participation may be purchased. The cost of the contest,
competition, or tournament participation may be greater than a single non-
contest, competition, or tournament play.
         (c)   To the extent that the machine is used in a contest,
competition, or tournament, that contest, competition, or tournament has a
defined starting and ending date and is open to participants in competition for
scoring and ranking results toward the awarding of redeemable vouchers or
merchandise prizes that are stated prior to the start of the contest,
competition, or tournament.
      (4)   For purposes of division (1) of this definition, the mere presence
of a device, such as a pin-setting, ball-releasing, or scoring mechanism, that
does not contribute to or affect the outcome of the play of the game does not
make the device a skill-based amusement machine.
   SLOT MACHINE.
      (1)   Either of the following:
         (a)   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player who gives the thing of value in the hope of gain;
         (b)   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player to conduct bingo or a scheme or game of chance.
      (2)   The term does not include a skill-based amusement machine, an
instant bingo ticket dispenser, or an electronic instant bingo system.
   SPORTING ORGANIZATION. A hunting, fishing, or trapping organization, other
than a college or high school fraternity or sorority, that is not organized for
profit, that is affiliated with a state or national sporting organization,
including but not limited to the League of Ohio Sportsmen, and that has been in
continuous existence in this state for a period of three years.
   SUSPEND. To interrupt temporarily all rights and privileges of the holder of
a license issued under R.C. § 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a charitable
gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   SWEEPSTAKES. Any game, contest, advertising scheme or plan, or other
promotion where consideration is not required for a person to enter to win or
become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is based upon
chance. “Sweepstakes” does not include bingo as authorized under R.C. Chapter
2915, pari-mutuel wagering as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3769, lotteries
conducted by the State Lottery Commission as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3770,
and casino gaming as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3772.
   SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE.
      (1)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic machine or device that
is owned, leased, or otherwise possessed by any person conducting a
sweepstakes, or by that person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or
contractors, that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes participant, and that
is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism. A device
is a sweepstakes terminal device if any of the following apply:
         (a)   The device uses a simulated game terminal as a representation of
the prizes associated with the results of the sweepstakes entries.
         (b)   The device utilizes software such that the simulated game
influences or determines the winning of or value of the prize.
         (c)   The device selects prizes from a predetermined finite pool of
entries.
         (d)   The device utilizes a mechanism that reveals the content of a
predetermined sweepstakes entry.
         (e)   The device predetermines the prize results and stores those
results for delivery at the time the sweepstakes entry results are revealed.
         (f)   The device utilizes software to create a game result.
         (g)   The device reveals the prize incrementally, even though the
device does not influence the awarding of the prize or the value of any prize
awarded.
         (h)   The device determines and associates the prize with an entry or
entries at the time the sweepstakes is entered.
      (2)   As used in this definition and in §
134.02:
         ENTER. The act by which a person becomes eligible to receive any prize
offered in a sweepstakes.
         ENTRY. One event from the initial activation of the sweepstakes
terminal device until all the sweepstakes prize results from that activation
are revealed.
         PRIZE. Any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit, reward, or
any other thing of value that may be transferred to a person, whether
possession of the prize is actually transferred, or placed on an account or
other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize.
         SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE FACILITY. Any location in this state where
a sweepstakes terminal device is provided to a sweepstakes participant, except
as provided in §
134.02(G) and R.C. § 2915.02(G).
   VETERAN’S ORGANIZATION. Any individual post or state headquarters of a
national veteran’s association or an auxiliary unit of any individual post of a
national veteran’s association, which post, state headquarters, or auxiliary
unit is incorporated as a nonprofit corporation and either has received a
letter from the state headquarters of the national veteran’s association
indicating that the individual post or auxiliary unit is in good standing with
the national veteran’s association or has received a letter from the national
veteran’s association indicating that the state headquarters is in good
standing with the national veteran’s association. As used in this definition,
NATIONAL VETERAN’S ASSOCIATION means any veteran’s association that has been in
continuous existence as such for a period of at least five years and either is
incorporated by an act of the United States Congress or has a national dues-
paying membership of at least 5,000 persons.
   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER’S ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteer
firefighters, as defined in R.C. § 146.01, that is organized and operated
exclusively to provide financial support for a volunteer fire department or a
volunteer fire company and that is recognized or ratified by a county,
municipal corporation, or township.
   VOLUNTEER RESCUE SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteers
organized to function as an emergency medical service organization, as defined
in R.C. § 4765.01.
   YOUTH ATHLETIC ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for profit,
that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial support to, or
to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 21 years of age or younger
by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating, or contributing to the support
of an athletic team, club, league, or association.
   YOUTH ATHLETIC PARK ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for
profit, that satisfies both of the following:
      (1)   It owns, operates, and maintains playing fields that satisfy both
of the following:
         (a)   The playing fields are used for athletic activities by one or
more organizations, not organized for profit, each of which is organized and
operated exclusively to provide financial support to, or to operate, athletic
activities for persons who are 18 years of age or younger by means of
sponsoring, organizing, operating, or contributing to the support of an
athletic team, club, league, or association.
         (b)   The playing fields are not used for any profit-making activity
at any time during the year.
      (2)   It uses the proceeds of bingo it conducts exclusively for the
operation, maintenance, and improvement of its playing fields of the type
described in division (1) of this definition.
(R.C. § 2915.01) (Prior Code, § 630.01)
§ 134.02 PROHIBITIONS AGAINST GAMBLING; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Engage in bookmaking, or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates bookmaking.
      (2)   Establish, promote, or operate or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (3)   Knowingly procure, transmit, exchange, or engage in conduct that
facilitates the procurement, transmission, or exchange of information for use
in establishing odds or determining winners in connection with bookmaking or
with any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (4)   Engage in betting or in playing any scheme or game of chance as a
substantial source of income or livelihood.
      (5)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
and either:
         (a)   Give to another person any item described in R.C. § 2915.01(VV)
(1), (VV)(2), (VV)(3), or (VV)(4) as a prize for playing or participating in a
sweepstakes; or
         (b)   Give to another person any merchandise prize, or a redeemable
voucher for a merchandise prize, the wholesale value of which is in excess of
$10 and which is awarded as a single entry for playing or participating in a
sweepstakes. Redeemable vouchers shall not be redeemable for a merchandise
prize that has a wholesale value of more than $10.
      (6)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
without first obtaining a current annual “certificate of registration” from the
Attorney General as required by R.C. § 2915.02(F).
      (7)   With purpose to violate division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
(A)(5), or (A)(6) of this section, acquire, possess, control, or operate any
gambling device.
   (B)   For purposes of division (A)(1) of this section, a person facilitates
bookmaking if the person in any way knowingly aids an illegal bookmaking
operation, including, without limitation, placing a bet with a person engaged
in or facilitating illegal bookmaking. For purposes of division (A)(2) of this
section, a person facilitates a game of chance conducted for profit or a scheme
of chance if the person in any way knowingly aids in the conduct or operation
of any such game or scheme, including, without limitation, playing any such
game or scheme.
   (C)   This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with gambling
expressly permitted by law.
   (D)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Games of chance, if all of the following apply:
         (a)   The games of chance are not craps for money or roulette for
money.
         (b)   The games of chance are conducted by a charitable organization
that is and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination
letter that is currently in effect, stating that the organization is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)
(3).
         (c)   The games of chance are conducted at festivals of the charitable
organization that are conducted not more than a total of five days a calendar
year, and are conducted on premises owned by the charitable organization for a
period of no less than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the
games of chance, on premises leased from a governmental unit, or on premises
that are leased from a veteran’s or fraternal organization and that have been
owned by the lessor veteran’s or fraternal organization for a period of no less
than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the games of chance. A
charitable organization shall not lease premises from a veteran’s or fraternal
organization to conduct a festival described in this division, if the veteran’s
or fraternal organization already has leased the premises 12 times during the
preceding year to charitable organizations for that purpose. If a charitable
organization leases premises from a veteran’s or fraternal organization to
conduct a festival described in this division, the charitable organization
shall not pay a rental rate for the premises per day of the festival that
exceeds the rental rate per bingo session that a charitable organization may
pay under R.C. § 2915.09(B)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance when it leases premises from another charitable organization to
conduct bingo games.
         (d)   All of the money or assets received from the games of chance
after deduction only of prizes paid out during the conduct of the games of
chance are used by, given, donated or otherwise transferred to any organization
that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(3).
         (e)   The games of chance are not conducted during or within ten hours
of a bingo game conducted for amusement purposes only pursuant to R.C. §
2915.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. No person shall
receive any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other
form of compensation, directly or indirectly, for operating or assisting in the
operation of any game of chance.
      (2)   Any tag fishing tournament, as defined in R.C. § 1531.01, operated
under a permit issued under R.C. § 1533.92.
      (3)   Bingo conducted by a charitable organization that holds a license
issued under R.C. § 2915.08.
   (E)   Division (D) of this section shall not be construed to authorize the
sale, lease, or other temporary or permanent transfer of the right to conduct
games of chance, as granted by that division, by any charitable organization
that is granted that right.
   (F)   Any person desiring to conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a
sweepstakes with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes
terminal device facility shall first register with the Office of the Attorney
General and obtain an annual certificate of registration by providing a filing
fee of $200 and all information as required by rule adopted under R.C. §
2915.02(H). Not later than the tenth day of each month, each sweepstakes
terminal device operator shall file a sweepstakes terminal device monthly
report with the Attorney General and provide a filing fee of $50 and all
information required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H). All information
provided to the Attorney General under this division shall be available to law
enforcement upon request.
   (G)   (1)   A person may apply to the Attorney General, on a form prescribed
by the Attorney General, for a certificate of compliance that the person is not
operating a sweepstakes terminal device facility. The form shall require the
person to include the address of the business location where sweepstakes
terminal devices will be used and to make the following certifications:
         (a)   That the person will not use more than two sweepstakes terminal
devices at the business location;
         (b)   That the retail value of sweepstakes prizes to be awarded at the
business location using sweepstakes terminal devices during a reporting period
will be less than 3% of the gross revenue received at the business location
during the reporting period;
         (c)   That no other form of gaming except lottery ticket sales as
authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770 will be conducted at the business location
or in an adjoining area of the business location;
         (d)   That any sweepstakes terminal device at the business location
will not allow any deposit of any money, coin, or token, or the use of any
credit card, debit card, prepaid card, or any other method of similar payment
to be used, directly or indirectly, to participate in a sweepstakes;
         (e)   That notification of any prize will not take place on the same
day as a participant’s sweepstakes entry; and
         (f)   That the person consents to provide any other information to the
Attorney General as required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H).
      (2)   The filing fee for a certificate of compliance is $250. The
Attorney General may charge up to an additional $250 for reasonable expenses
resulting from any investigation related to an application for a certificate of
compliance.
      (3)   A certificate of compliance is effective for one year. The
certificate holder may reapply for a certificate of compliance. A person issued
a certificate of compliance shall file semiannual reports with the Attorney
General stating the number of sweepstakes terminal devices at the business
location and that the retail value of prizes awarded at the business location
using sweepstakes terminal devices is less than 3% of the gross revenue
received at the business location.
   (H)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of gambling, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense, gambling is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
Notwithstanding this division, failing to file a sweepstakes terminal device
monthly report as required by division (F) of this section or the semiannual
report required by division (G) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2915.02(A) - (G), (K)) (Prior Code, § 630.02)
§ 134.03 OPERATING A GAMBLING HOUSE.
   (A)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control, or
supervision of premises, shall:
      (1)   Use or occupy the premises for gambling in violation of R.C. §
2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   Recklessly permit the premises to be used or occupied for gambling
in violation of R.C. § 2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of operating a
gambling house, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of a gambling offense, operating a gambling house is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   Premises used or occupied in violation of this section constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2915.03) (Prior Code, § 630.03)
§ 134.04 PUBLIC GAMING.
   (A)   No person, while at a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall,
or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall
make a bet or play any game of chance or scheme of chance.
   (B)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control, or
supervision of a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other place
of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall recklessly permit
those premises to be used or occupied in violation of division (A) of this
section.
   (C)   Divisions (A) and (B) of this section do not prohibit conduct in
connection with gambling expressly permitted by law.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, public gaming is a minor misdemeanor. If
the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense, public
gaming is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (E)   Premises used or occupied in violation of division (B) of this section
constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2915.04) (Prior Code, § 630.04)
§ 134.05 CHEATING.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome
of any of the following:
      (1)   The subject of a bet.
      (2)   A contest of knowledge, skill, or endurance that is not an athletic
or sporting event.
      (3)   A scheme or game of chance.
      (4)   Bingo.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Offer, give, solicit, or accept anything of value to corrupt the
outcome of an athletic or sporting event.
      (2)   Engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome of an athletic or
sporting event.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
cheating. Except as otherwise provided in this division, cheating is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the potential gain from the cheating is
$1,000 or more or if the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense or of any theft offense as defined in R.C. § 2913.01, cheating is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
corrupting sports. Corrupting sports is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.05) (Prior Code, § 630.05)
§ 134.06 REGULATIONS CONCERNING OPERATION OF LICENSED BINGO GAME.
   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo shall fail to do any of
the following:
      (1)   Own all of the equipment used to conduct bingo or lease that
equipment from a charitable organization that is licensed to conduct bingo, or
from the landlord of a premises where bingo is conducted, for a rental rate
that is not more than is customary and reasonable for that equipment;
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(3) of this section,
use all of the gross receipts from bingo for paying prizes, for reimbursement
of expenses for or for renting premises in which to conduct bingo, for
reimbursement of expenses for or for purchasing or leasing bingo supplies used
in conducting bingo, for reimbursement of expenses for or for hiring security
personnel, for reimbursement of expenses for or for advertising bingo, or for
reimbursement of other expenses or for other expenses listed in the definition
for “expenses” in R.C. § 2915.01, provided that the amount of the receipts so
spent is not more than is customary and reasonable for a similar purchase,
lease, hiring, advertising, or expense. If the building in which bingo is
conducted is owned by the charitable organization conducting bingo and the
bingo conducted includes a form of bingo described in division (1) of the
definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01, the charitable organization may deduct
from the total amount of the gross receipts from each session a sum equal to
the lesser of $600 or 45% of the gross receipts from the bingo described in
that division as consideration for the use of the premises;
      (3)   Use, or give, donate, or otherwise transfer, all of the net profit
derived from bingo described in R.C. § 2915.01(O)(1) for a charitable purpose
listed in its license application and described in R.C. § 2915.01(V), or
distribute all of the net profit from the proceeds of the sale of instant bingo
or electronic instant bingo as stated in its license application and in
accordance with R.C. § 2915.101, as applicable.
   (B)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall fail to do
any of the following:
      (1)   Conduct the bingo game on premises that are owned by the charitable
organization, on premises that are owned by another charitable organization and
leased from that charitable organization for a rental rate not in excess of the
lesser of $650 per bingo session or 45% of the gross receipts of the bingo
session, on premises that are leased from a person other than a charitable
organization for a rental rate that is not more than is customary and
reasonable for premises that are similar in location, size, and quality but not
in excess of $450 per bingo session, or on premises that are owned by a person
other than a charitable organization, that are leased from that person by
another charitable organization, and that are subleased from that other
charitable organization by the charitable organization for a rental rate not in
excess of $450 per bingo session. No charitable organization is required to pay
property taxes or assessments on premises that the charitable organization
leases from another person to conduct bingo sessions. If the charitable
organization leases from a person other than a charitable organization the
premises on which it conducts bingo sessions, the lessor of the premises shall
provide only the premises to the organization and shall not provide the
organization with bingo game operators, security personnel, concessions or
concession operators, bingo supplies, or any other type of service. A
charitable organization shall not lease or sublease premises that it owns or
leases to more than three other charitable organizations per calendar week for
conducting bingo sessions on the premises. A person that is not a charitable
organization shall not lease premises that it owns, leases, or otherwise is
empowered to lease to more than three charitable organizations per calendar
week for conducting bingo sessions on the premises. In no case shall more than
nine bingo sessions be conducted on any premises in any calendar week;
      (2)   Display its license conspicuously at the premises where the bingo
session is conducted;
      (3)   Conduct the bingo session in accordance with division (1) of the
definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01.
   (C)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for operating a bingo
session that is conducted by the charitable organization or for preparing,
selling, or serving food or beverages at the site of the bingo session, permit
any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to pay
compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food or
beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable organization, or
permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to prepare,
sell, or serve food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable
organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the
bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or serve the food or beverages;
      (2)   Pay consulting fees to any person for any services performed in
relation to the bingo session;
      (3)   Pay concession fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in the bingo session;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(4) of this section,
conduct more than three bingo sessions in any seven-day period. A volunteer
firefighter’s organization or a volunteer rescue service organization that
conducts not more than five bingo sessions in a calendar year may conduct more
than three bingo sessions in a seven-day period after notifying the Attorney
General when it will conduct the sessions;
      (5)   Pay out more than $6,000 in prizes for bingo games described in
R.C. § 2915.01(S)(1) during any bingo session that is conducted by the
charitable organization. “Prizes” does not include awards from the conduct of
instant bingo.
      (6)   Conduct a bingo session at any time during the eight-hour period
between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., at any time during, or within ten hours of, a
bingo game conducted for amusement only pursuant to R.C. § 2915.12 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, at any premises not specified on
its license, or on any day of the week or during any time period not specified
on its license. This division does not prohibit the sale of instant bingo
tickets beginning at 9:00 a.m. for a bingo session that begins at 10:00 a.m. If
circumstances make it impractical for the charitable organization to conduct a
bingo session at the premises, or on the day of the week or at the time
specified on its license or if a charitable organization wants to conduct bingo
sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than the day or time specified
on its license, the charitable organization may apply in writing to the
Attorney General for an amended license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08(J). A
charitable organization may apply twice in each calendar year for an amended
license to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than
the day or time specified on its license. If the amended license is granted,
the organization may conduct bingo sessions at the premises, on the day of the
week, and at the time specified on its amended license;
      (7)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, is under the age of 18 to work as a bingo game operator;
      (8)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any
jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator;
      (9)   Permit the lessor of the premises on which the bingo session is
conducted, if the lessor is not a charitable organization, to provide the
charitable organization with bingo game operators, security personnel,
concessions, bingo supplies, or any other type of service;
      (10)   Purchase or lease bingo supplies from any person except a
distributor issued a license under R.C. § 2915.081;
      (11)   (a)   Use or permit the use of electronic bingo aids except under
the following circumstances:
            1.   For any single participant, not more than 90 bingo faces can
be played using an electronic bingo aid or aids.
            2.   The charitable organization shall provide a participant using
an electronic bingo aid with corresponding paper bingo cards or sheets.
            3.   The total price of bingo faces played with an electronic bingo
aid shall be equal to the total price of the same number of bingo faces played
with a paper bingo card or sheet sold at the same bingo session but without an
electronic bingo aid.
            4.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be part of an electronic
network other than a network that includes only bingo aids and devices that are
located on the premises at which the bingo is being conducted or be interactive
with any device not located on the premises at which the bingo is being
conducted.
            5.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to participate in bingo
that is conducted at a location other than the location at which the bingo
session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
            6.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to provide for the
input of numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller other than the bingo
caller who physically calls the numbers and letters at the location at which
the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
         (b)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 119 that govern the use of electronic bingo aids. The rules may include
a requirement that an electronic bingo aid be capable of being audited by the
Attorney General to verify the number of bingo cards or sheets played during
each bingo session.
      (12)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, to be under 18 years of age to play bingo described in division (1)
of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01.
   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this section,
no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator, and no bingo
game operator shall receive or accept, any commission, wage, salary, reward,
tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly,
regardless of the source, for conducting bingo or providing other work or labor
at the site of bingo during a bingo session.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this section, no
charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator any commission,
wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation,
directly or indirectly regardless of the source, for conducting instant bingo,
electronic instant bingo, or both other than at a bingo session at the site of
instant bingo, electronic instant bingo, or both other than at a bingo session.
      (3)   Nothing in this division (D) of this section prohibits an employee
of a fraternal organization, veteran’s organization, or sporting organization
from selling instant bingo tickets or cards to the organization’s members or
invited guests, as long as no portion of the employee’s compensation is paid
from any receipts of bingo.
   (E)   Notwithstanding division (B)(1) of this section, a charitable
organization that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written
agreements for the lease of premises it owns to another charitable organization
or other charitable organizations for the conducting of bingo sessions so that
more than two bingo sessions are conducted per calendar week on the premises,
and a person that is not a charitable organization and that, prior to December
6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease of premises it owns
to charitable organizations for the conducting of more than two bingo sessions
per calendar week on the premises, may continue to lease the premises to those
charitable organizations, provided that no more than four sessions are
conducted per calendar week, that the lessor organization or person has
notified the Attorney General in writing of the organizations that will conduct
the sessions and the days of the week and the times of the day on which the
sessions will be conducted, that the initial lease entered into with each
organization that will conduct the sessions was filed with the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977, and that each organization that will conduct the
sessions was issued a license to conduct bingo games by the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977.
   (F)   This section does not prohibit a bingo licensed charitable
organization or a game operator from giving any person an instant bingo ticket
as a prize.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of
illegally conducting a bingo game, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) through (C)(11), or (D)
of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously
has been convicted of a violation of division (A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2),
(B)(3), (C)(1) through (C)(11), or (D) of this section, a violation of division
(A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) through (C)(11), or (D) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates division (C)(12)
of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (C)(12) of this
section, a violation of division (C)(12) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.09) (Prior Code, § 630.06)
§ 134.07 RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo or a game of chance
pursuant to R.C. § 2915.02(D), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, shall fail to maintain the following records for at least three
years from the date on which the bingo or game of chance is conducted:
      (1)   An itemized list of the gross receipts of each bingo session, each
game of instant bingo by serial number, each electronic instant bingo game by
serial number, each raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance, and
an itemized list of the gross profits of each game of instant bingo by serial
number and each electronic instant bingo game by serial number;
      (2)   An itemized list of all expenses, other than prizes, that are
incurred in conducting bingo, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses;
      (3)   A list of all prizes awarded during each bingo session, each
raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance conducted by the
charitable organization, the total prizes awarded from each game of instant
bingo by serial number and each electronic instant bingo game by serial number,
and the name, address, and social security number of all persons who are
winners of prizes of $600 or more in value;
      (4)   An itemized list of the recipients of the net profit of bingo or
game of chance, including the name and address of each recipient to whom the
money is distributed, and if the organization uses the net profit of bingo, or
the money or assets received from a game of chance, for any charitable or other
purpose set forth in R.C. § 2915.01(V), R.C. § 2915.02(D), or R.C. § 2915.101,
a list of each purpose and an itemized list of each expenditure for each
purpose;
      (5)   The number of persons who participate in any bingo session or game
of chance that is conducted by the charitable organization;
      (6)   A list of receipts from the sale of food and beverages by the
charitable organization or one of its auxiliary units or societies, if the
receipts were excluded from “gross receipts” under R.C. § 2915.01(T);
      (7)   An itemized list of all expenses incurred at each bingo session,
each raffle, each punch board game, or each game of instant bingo or electronic
instant bingo conducted by the charitable organization in the sale of food and
beverages by the charitable organization or by an auxiliary unit or society of
the charitable organization, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses.
   (B)   A charitable organization shall keep the records that it is required
to maintain pursuant to division (A) of this section at its principal place of
business in this state or at its headquarters in this state and shall notify
the Attorney General of the location at which those records are kept.
   (C)   The gross profit from each bingo session or game described in division
(1) or (2) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall be deposited
into a checking account devoted exclusively to the bingo session or game.
Payments for allowable expenses incurred in conducting the bingo session or
game and payments to recipients of some or all of the net profit of the bingo
session or game shall be made only by checks or electronic fund transfers drawn
on the bingo session or game account.
   (D)   Each charitable organization shall conduct and record an inventory of
all of its bingo supplies as of the first day of November of each year.
   (E)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C. Chapter
119 that establish standards of accounting, record keeping, and reporting to
ensure that gross receipts from bingo or games of chance are properly accounted
for.
   (F)   A distributor shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing to another person bingo supplies for use in this state.
The record shall include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name of the manufacturer from which the distributor purchased
the bingo supplies and the date of the purchase;
      (2)   The name and address of the charitable organization or other
distributor to which the bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided;
      (3)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies;
      (4)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each charitable organization.
   (G)   A manufacturer shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing bingo supplies for use in this state. The record shall
include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name and address of the distributor to whom the bingo supplies
were sold or otherwise provided;
      (2)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies, including
serial numbers;
      (3)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each distributor.
   (H)   (1)   The Attorney General or any law enforcement agency may do all of
the following:
         (a)   Investigate any charitable organization, distributor, or
manufacturer or any officer, agent, trustee, member, or employee of the
organization, distributor, or manufacturer;
         (b)   Examine the accounts and records of the charitable organization,
distributor, or manufacturer or of any officer, agent, trustee, member, or
employee of the organization, distributor, or manufacturer;
         (c)   Conduct inspections, audits, and observations of bingo or games
of chance;
         (d)   Conduct inspections of the premises where bingo or games of
chance are conducted or where bingo supplies are manufactured or distributed;
         (e)   Take any other necessary and reasonable action to determine if a
violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 has occurred
and to determine whether R.C. § 2915.11, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, has been complied with.
      (2)   If any law enforcement agency has reasonable grounds to believe
that a charitable organization, distributor, or manufacturer or an officer,
agent, trustee, member, or employee of the organization, distributor, or
manufacturer has violated any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915,
the law enforcement agency may proceed by action in the proper court to enforce
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, provided that the law enforcement agency
shall give written notice to the Attorney General when commencing an action as
described in this division.
   (I)   No person shall destroy, alter, conceal, withhold, or deny access to
any accounts or records of a charitable organization, distributor, or
manufacturer that have been requested for examination, or obstruct, impede, or
interfere with any inspection, audit, or observation of bingo or a game of
chance, of premises where bingo or a game of chance is conducted, or of
premises where bingo supplies are manufactured or distributed, or refuse to
comply with any reasonable request of, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with
any other reasonable action undertaken by, the Attorney General or a law
enforcement agency pursuant to division (H) of this section.
   (J)   Whoever violates division (A) or (I) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2915.10) (Prior Code, § 630.07)
§ 134.08 REQUIREMENTS FOR BINGO GAME OPERATORS.
   (A)   No person shall be a bingo game operator unless the person is 18 years
of age or older.
   (B)   No person who has been convicted of a felony or a gambling offense in
any jurisdiction shall be a bingo game operator.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. Whoever violates division (B) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2915.11) (Prior Code, § 630.08)
§ 134.09 BINGO GAMES FOR AMUSEMENT ONLY.
   (A)   Sections
134.06 through
134.13 and
134.15 do not apply to bingo games that are conducted for the purpose of
amusement only. A bingo game is conducted for the purpose of amusement only if
it complies with all of the requirements specified in either division (A)(1) or
(A)(2) of this section.
      (1)   (a)   The participants do not pay any money or any other thing of
value, including an admission fee or any fee, for bingo cards or sheets,
objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo, for the
privilege of participating in the bingo game, or to defray any costs of the
game, or pay tips or make donations during or immediately before or after the
bingo game.
         (b)   All prizes awarded during the course of the game are non-
monetary, and in the form of merchandise, goods, or entitlement to goods or
services only, and the total value of all prizes awarded during the game is
less than $100.
         (c)   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity,
or other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         (d)   The bingo game is not conducted either during or within ten
hours of any of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   A scheme or game of chance, or bingo described in R.C. §
2915.01(O)(2).
         (e)   The number of players participating in the bingo game does not
exceed 50.
      (2)   (a)   The participants do not pay money or any other thing of value
as an admission fee, and no participant is charged more than $0.25 to purchase
a bingo card or sheet, objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in
playing bingo.
         (b)   The total amount of money paid by all of the participants for
bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in
playing bingo does not exceed $100.
         (c)   All of the money paid for bingo cards or sheets, objects to
cover spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo is used only to pay
winners monetary and nonmonetary prizes and to provide refreshments.
         (d)   The total value of all prizes awarded during the game does not
exceed $100.
         (e)   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity,
or other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         (f)   The bingo game is not conducted during or within ten hours of
either of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.15 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance;
            2.   A scheme of chance or a game of chance, or bingo described in
R.C. § 2915.01(O)(2).
         (g)   All of the participants reside at the premises where the bingo
game is conducted.
         (h)   The bingo games are conducted on different days of the week and
not more than twice in a calendar week.
   (B)   The Attorney General or any local law enforcement agency may
investigate the conduct of a bingo game that purportedly is conducted for
purposes of amusement only if there is reason to believe that the purported
amusement bingo game does not comply with the requirements of either division
(A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section. A local law enforcement agency may proceed by
action in the proper court to enforce this section if the local law enforcement
agency gives written notice to the Attorney General when commencing the action.
(R.C. § 2915.12) (Prior Code, § 630.09)
§ 134.10 PROHIBITIONS WHERE INSTANT BINGO GAME IS CONDUCTED.
   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts instant bingo shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 2915.09(A)(1), (A)
(2), and (A)(3), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   Conduct instant bingo unless either of the following applies:
         (a)   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a), is
described in IRC § 501(c)(3), is a charitable organization as defined in R.C. §
2915.01, is in good standing in the state pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08, and is in
compliance with R.C. Chapter 1716;
         (b)   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a), is
described in IRC § 501(c)(7), (c)(8), (c)(10), or (c)(19) or is a veteran’s
organization described in IRC § 501(c)(4), and conducts instant bingo under
R.C. § 2915.13.
      (3)   Conduct instant bingo on any day, at any time, or at any premises
not specified on the organization’s license issued pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08;
      (4)   Permit any person whom the organization knows or should have known
has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction to be a
bingo game operator in the conduct of instant bingo;
      (5)   Purchase or lease supplies used to conduct instant bingo or punch
board games from any person except a distributor licensed under R.C. §
2915.081;
      (6)   Sell or provide any instant bingo ticket or card for a price
different from the price printed on it by the manufacturer on either the
instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare;
      (7)   Sell an instant bingo ticket or card to a person under 18 years of
age;
      (8)   Fail to keep unsold instant bingo tickets or cards for less than
three years;
      (9)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting
instant bingo that is conducted by the organization or for preparing, selling,
or serving food or beverages at the site of the instant bingo game, permit any
auxiliary unit or society of the organization to pay compensation to any bingo
game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food or beverages at an instant
bingo game conducted by the organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or
society of the organization to prepare, sell, or serve food or beverages at an
instant bingo game conducted by the organization, if the auxiliary unit or
society pays any compensation to the bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or
serve the food or beverages;
      (10)   Pay fees to any person for any services performed in relation to
an instant bingo game, except as provided in R.C. § 2915.093(D);
      (11)   Pay fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in an instant bingo game;
      (12)   (a)   Allow instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold to bingo
game operators at a premises at which the organization sells instant bingo
tickets or cards or to be sold to employees of a D permit holder who are
working at a premises at which instant bingo tickets or cards are sold;
         (b)   Division (A)(12)(a) of this section does not prohibit a licensed
charitable organization or a bingo game operator from giving any person an
instant bingo ticket as a prize in place of a cash prize won by a participant
in an instant bingo game. In no case shall an instant bingo ticket or card be
sold or provided for a price different from the price printed on it by the
manufacturer on either the instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare.
      (13)   Fail to display its bingo license, and the serial numbers of the
deal of instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold, conspicuously at each
premises at which it sells instant bingo tickets or cards;
      (14)   Possess a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards that was not
purchased from a distributor licensed under R.C. § 2915.081 as reflected on an
invoice issued by the distributor that contains all of the information required
by R.C. § 2915.10(E);
      (15)   Fail, once it opens a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards, to
continue to sell the tickets or cards in that deal until the tickets or cards
with the top two highest tiers of prizes in that deal are sold;
      (16)   Possess bingo supplies that were not obtained in accordance with
R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (B)   A charitable organization may purchase, lease, or use instant bingo
ticket dispensers to sell instant bingo tickets or cards.
   (C)   Pursuant to R.C. § 2915.091(C), the Attorney General may adopt rules
in accordance with R.C. Chapter 119 that govern the conduct of instant bingo by
charitable organizations.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section or a rule adopted under
division (C) of this section is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of division (A) of this section or of such a rule adopted under
division (C) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.091) (Prior Code, § 630.10)
§ 134.11 RAFFLE DRAWINGS.
   (A)   (1)   Subject to division (A)(2) of this section, a person or entity
may conduct a raffle to raise money for the person or entity and does not need
a license to conduct bingo in order to conduct a raffle drawing that is not for
profit if the person or entity is any of the following:
         (a)   Exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
         (b)   A school district, community school established under R.C.
Chapter 3314, STEM school established under R.C. Chapter 3326, college-
preparatory boarding school established under R.C. Chapter 3328, or chartered
nonpublic school;
         (c)   Exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(4), 501(c)(6), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or
501(c)(19).
      (2)   If a person or entity that is described in division (A)(1)(c) of
this section conducts a raffle, the person or entity shall distribute at least
50% of the net profit from the raffle to a charitable purpose described in R.C.
§ 2915.01(V) or to a department or agency of the federal government, the state,
or any political subdivision.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (A) of this section, no person shall
conduct a raffle drawing that is for profit or a raffle drawing that is not for
profit.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of illegal
conduct of a raffle. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal
conduct of a raffle is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (B) of this section,
illegal conduct of a raffle is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2915.092) (Prior Code, § 630.11)
§ 134.12 INSTANT BINGO OTHER THAN AT BINGO SESSIONS.
   (A)   As used in this section, RETAIL INCOME FROM ALL COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY
means the income that a person receives from the provision of goods, services,
or activities that are provided at the location where instant bingo other than
at a bingo session is conducted, including the sale of instant bingo tickets. A
religious organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §
501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3), at not more than one location at which
it conducts its charitable programs, may include donations from its members and
guests as retail income.
   (B)   (1)   If a charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant
bingo other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued under R.C.
§ 2915.08, the charitable instant bingo organization shall enter into a written
contract with the owner or lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is
conducted to allow the owner or lessor to assist in the conduct of instant
bingo other than at a bingo session, identify each location where the instant
bingo other than at a bingo session is being conducted, and identify the owner
or lessor of each location.
      (2)   A charitable instant bingo organization that conducts instant bingo
other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued under R.C. §
2915.08 is not required to enter into a written contract with the owner or
lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is conducted provided that
the owner or lessor is not assisting in the conduct of the instant bingo other
than at a bingo session and provided that the conduct of the instant bingo
other than at a bingo session at that location is not more than five days per
calendar year and not more than ten hours per day.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (F) of this section, no charitable
instant bingo organization shall conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at a location where the primary source of retail income from all
commercial activity at that location is the sale of instant bingo tickets.
   (D)   (1)   The owner or lessor of a location that enters into a contract
pursuant to division (B) of this section shall pay the full gross profit to the
charitable instant bingo organization, in return for the deal of instant bingo
tickets. The owner or lessor may retain the money that the owner or lessor
receives for selling the instant bingo tickets, provided, however, that after
the deal has been sold, the owner or lessor shall pay to the charitable instant
bingo organization the value of any unredeemed instant bingo prizes remaining
in the deal of instant bingo tickets.
      (2)   The charitable instant bingo organization shall pay 6% of the total
gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets for the purpose of
reimbursing the owner or lessor for expenses described in this division.
      (3)   As used in this division, EXPENSES means those items provided for
in R.C. § 2915.01(GG)(4), (GG)(5), (GG)(6), (GG)(7), (GG)(8), (GG)(12), and
(GG)(13) and that percentage of the owner’s or lessor’s rent for the location
where instant bingo is conducted. Expenses, in the aggregate, shall not exceed
6% of the total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets.
      (4)   As used in this division, FULL GROSS PROFIT means the amount by
which the total receipts of all instant bingo tickets, if the deal has been
sold in full, exceeds the amount that would be paid out if all prizes were
redeemed.
   (E)   A charitable instant bingo organization shall provide the Attorney
General with all of the following information:
      (1)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has terminated a
contract entered into pursuant to division (B) of this section with an owner or
lessor of a location;
      (2)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has entered into a
written contract pursuant to division (B) of this section with a new owner or
lessor of a location;
      (3)   That the charitable instant bingo organization is aware of conduct
by the owner or lessor of a location at which instant bingo is conducted that
is in violation of R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (F)   Division (C) of this section does not apply to a volunteer
firefighter’s organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3), that conducts instant bingo
other than at a bingo session on the premises where the organization conducts
firefighter training, that has conducted instant bingo continuously for at
least five years prior to July 1, 2003, and that, during each of those five
years, had gross receipts of at least $1,500,000.
(R.C. § 2915.093)
   (G)   (1)   Subject to the requirements of R.C. §§ 2915.14 and 2915.15
concerning electronic instant bingo, a veteran’s organization, a fraternal
organization, or a sporting organization authorized to conduct a bingo session
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2915 may conduct instant bingo, electronic instant
bingo, or both other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued
under R.C. § 2915.08 if all of the following apply:
         (a)   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to 12
hours during any day, provided that the sale does not begin earlier than 10:00
a.m. and ends not later than 2:00 a.m.
         (b)   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to
its own premises and to its own members and invited guests.
         (c)   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization is raising money for an organization that is described in IRC §
509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an
organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that
is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC
§ 501(c)(3), and that is in good standing in this state and executes a written
contract with that organization as required in division (G)(2) of this section.
      (2)   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization authorized to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant bingo
pursuant to division (G)(1) of this section is raising money for another
organization that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is
either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal
place of business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c), and that is in good standing
in this state, the veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization shall execute a written contract with the organization that is
described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental
unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of business in this
state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c), and that is in good standing in this state in order
to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant bingo. That contract shall
include a statement of the percentage of the net proceeds that the veteran’s,
fraternal, or sporting organization will be distributing to the organization
that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of
business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §
501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3), and that is in good standing in this
state.
      (3)   (a)   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or
sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant
bingo pursuant to division (G)(1) of this section has been issued a liquor
permit under R.C. Chapter 4303, that permit may be subject to suspension,
revocation, or cancellation if the veteran’s organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization violates a provision of this chapter or
R.C. Chapter 2915.
         (b)   No veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that enters into a written contract pursuant to division (G)(2) of
this section shall violate any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915,
or permit, aid, or abet any other person in violating any provision of this
chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
      (4)   A veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization shall give all required proceeds earned from the conduct of
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to the organization with which the
veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization has
entered into a written contract.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (G) of this section is guilty of illegal
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, illegal instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conduct is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (G) of this section, illegal instant bingo
or electronic instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.13) (Prior Code, § 630.12)
§ 134.13 RESTRICTIONS ON OWNER OR LESSOR OF LOCATION AT INSTANT BINGO.
   (A)   No owner or lessor of a location shall assist a charitable instant
bingo organization in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at that location unless the owner or lessor has entered into a written
contract, as described in R.C. § 2915.093, with the charitable instant bingo
organization to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session.
   (B)   The location of the lessor or owner shall be designated as a location
where the charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant bingo other
than at a bingo session.
   (C)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (A) of this section shall violate any provision of
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, or permit, aid, or abet any other person in
violating any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (D)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (A) of this section shall violate the terms of the
contract.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty
of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (C) or
(D) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If an owner or lessor of a location knowingly, intentionally, or
recklessly violates division (C) or (D) of this section, any license that the
owner or lessor holds for the retail sale of any goods on the owner’s or
lessor’s premises that is issued by the state or a political subdivision is
subject to suspension, revocation, or payment of a monetary penalty at the
request of the Attorney General.
(R.C. § 2915.094) (Prior Code, § 630.13)
§ 134.14 SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINES; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person shall give to another person any item described in division
(1), (2), (3), or (4) of the definition for “merchandise prize” in §
134.01 in exchange for a noncash prize, toy, or novelty received as a reward
for playing or operating a skill-based amusement machine or for a free or
reduced-price game won on a skill-based amusement machine.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of skill-based
amusement machine prohibited conduct. A violation of division (A) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree for each redemption of a prize
that is involved in the violation. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (A) of this section, a violation of that
division is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.06)
   (C)   Any regulation of skill-based amusement machines shall be governed by
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 and not by R.C. Chapter 1345.
(R.C. § 2915.061)
(Prior Code, § 630.14)
§ 134.15 ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   No charitable organization shall conduct electronic instant bingo
unless all of the following are true:
      (1)   The organization is a veteran’s organization described in R.C. §
2915.01(J), or is a fraternal organization described in R.C. § 2915.01(L), and
the organization qualified as a veteran’s organization or fraternal
organization, as applicable, on or before June 30, 2021.
      (2)   The organization is a veteran’s organization described in IRC § 501
(c)(4) or is, and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a
determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the organization
is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a), and is described in
IRC § 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or 501(c)(19).
      (3)   The organization has not conducted a raffle in violation of R.C. §
2915.092(B) using an electronic raffle machine, as described in Ohio Veterans
and Fraternal Charitable Coalition v. DeWine, Case No. 13-CV-13610 (C.P.
Franklin Co. February 23, 2018), at any time on or after January 1, 2022.
   (B)   No charitable organization that conducts electronic instant bingo
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Possess an electronic instant bingo system that was not obtained in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 2915 or with any rule adopted under R.C. Chapter
2915;
      (2)   Conduct electronic instant bingo on any day, at any time, or on any
premises not specified on the organization’s type II or type III license issued
under R.C. § 2915.08;
      (3)   Hold more than one valid license to conduct electronic instant
bingo at any one time;
      (4)   Conduct electronic instant bingo on more than one premises or on
any premises other than the charitable organization’s principal place of
business;
      (5)   Operate more than ten electronic bingo systems at the premises on
which the charitable organization conducts electronic instant bingo under its
license;
      (6)   Fail to display both of the following conspicuously at the premises
on which the charitable organization conducts electronic instant bingo:
         (a)   The charitable organization’s bingo license;
         (b)   The serial number of each deal of electronic instant bingo
tickets being sold.
      (7)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should have
known, to be under 18 years of age to play electronic instant bingo;
      (8)   Sell or provide to any person an electronic instant bingo ticket
for a price different from the price displayed on the game flare for that deal,
except that the charitable organization may give a participant who wins an
electronic instant bingo game an electronic instant bingo ticket as a prize in
place of a cash prize;
      (9)   Fail, once an electronic instant bingo deal is begun, to continue
to sell tickets in that deal until all prizes have been awarded;
      (10)   Permit any person whom the organization knows, or should have
known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction
to be a bingo game operator in the conduct of electronic instant bingo;
      (11)   Permit a bingo game operator to play electronic instant bingo;
      (12)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(12)(b) of this
section, pay compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting electronic
instant bingo.
         (b)   Division (B)(12)(a) of this section does not prohibit an
employee of a veteran’s organization or fraternal organization from redeeming
electronic instant bingo tickets or vouchers for the organization’s members or
invited guests, so long as no portion of the employee’s compensation is paid
from any bingo receipts.
      (13)   Pay consulting fees to any person in relation to electronic
instant bingo.
   (C)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or otherwise provide or offer to
provide an electronic instant bingo system to any person for use in this
municipality unless the electronic instant bingo system has been approved under
R.C. § 2915.15.
   (D)   Whoever knowingly violates division (A), (B), or (C) of this section
or a rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.14(D) is guilty of illegal electronic
instant bingo conduct. Illegal electronic instant bingo conduct is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or state law, or of a rule adopted
under R.C. § 2915.14(D), illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.14) (Prior Code, § 630.15)
CHAPTER 135: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
Section
   
135.01   Definitions
   
135.02   Negligent homicide
   
135.03   Vehicular homicide; vehicular manslaughter; vehicular assault
   
135.04   Assault; negligent assault
   
135.05   Injury to persons by hunters
   
135.06   Menacing; aggravated menacing; menacing by stalking
   
135.07   Unlawful restraint
   
135.08   Unlawful collection of bodily substances
   
135.09   Coercion
   
135.10   Bigamy
   
135.11   Illegal use of a tracking device or application
   
135.12   Misrepresentation relating to provision of child care
   
135.13   Nonsupport of dependents
   
135.14   Endangering children
   
135.15   Interference with custody; interference with support orders
   
135.16   Domestic violence
   
135.17   Hazing prohibited
   
135.18   Contributing to unruliness or delinquency of a child
   
135.19   Failure to provide for a person with a functional impairment
   
135.20   Patient abuse or neglect; patient endangerment; exceptions; false
statements; retaliation
   
135.21   Interference with right of person to engage in housing transactions
because of race, religion, or the like
   
135.22   Ethnic intimidation
   
135.23   Violating a protection order, consent agreement, anti-stalking
protection order or order issued by a court of another state
   
135.24   Adulteration of food
   
135.25   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products; transaction scans
   
135.26   Nonsmoking areas in places of public assembly
   
135.27   Spreading contagion
   
135.28   Abuse of a corpse
   
135.29   Minors curfew
Statutory reference:
   Child care, misrepresentations by providers and failure to disclose death or
serious injuries, misdemeanors, see R.C. §§ 2919.223 et seq.
   Extortionate extension of credit, see R.C. §§ 2905.21 through 2905.24
   Failure to send child to school, see R.C. § 3321.38
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
   Reckless homicide, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.041
   Rights of victims of crimes, see R.C. Chapter 2930
§ 135.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of §§
135.01 through
135.06, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ANOTHER’S UNBORN or OTHER PERSON’S UNBORN. A member of the species Homo
sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of another during a period that
begins with fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth
occurs.
      UNLAWFUL TERMINATION OF ANOTHER’S PREGNANCY. Causing the death of an
unborn member of the species Homo sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of
another, as a result of injuries inflicted during the period that begins with
fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth occurs.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, in no case shall the
definitions of the terms “another’s unborn”, “other person’s unborn” and
“unlawful termination of another’s pregnancy” that are set forth in division
(A) of this section be applied or construed in any of the following manners:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(1) of this section, in
a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as prohibiting any
pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion with the consent of
the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman implied by law in a
medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise authorized by law to
consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant woman. An abortion that
violates the conditions described in the immediately preceding sentence may be
punished as any violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04,
2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21 or
2903.22, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, as applicable. An
abortion that does not violate the conditions described in the second
immediately preceding sentence but that does violate R.C. § 2919.12, 2919.13
(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of such section, as
applicable.
      (2)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
         (a)   Her delivery of a stillborn baby.
         (b)   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying.
         (c)   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who
dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human.
         (d)   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human.
         (e)   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in
any other manner, an injury, illness, or other psychological illness or
condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human
that she is carrying.
(R.C. § 2903.09) (Prior Code, § 636.001)
§ 135.02 NEGLIGENT HOMICIDE.
   (A)   No person shall negligently cause the death of another or the unlawful
termination of another’s pregnancy by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent homicide, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2903.05) (Prior Code, § 636.01)
Statutory reference:
   Reckless homicide, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.041
§ 135.03 VEHICULAR HOMICIDE; VEHICULAR MANSLAUGHTER; VEHICULAR ASSAULT.
   (A)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, utility vehicle, mini-truck, snowmobile, locomotive,
watercraft, or aircraft, shall cause the death of another or the unlawful
termination of another’s pregnancy in any of the following ways:
      (1)   As the proximate result of committing an OVI offense.
      (2)   In one of the following ways:
         (a)   Recklessly;
         (b)   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck,
or motorcycle in a construction zone, a reckless operation offense, provided
that this division applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose
pregnancy is unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of
the offender’s commission of the reckless operation offense in the construction
zone and does not apply as described in division (D) of this section.
      (3)   In one of the following ways:
         (a)   Negligently;
         (b)   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck,
or motorcycle in a construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this
division applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is
unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the offender’s
commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and does not apply
as described in division (D) of this section.
      (4)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of any provision
of any section contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor or of a
municipal ordinance that, regardless of the penalty set by ordinance for the
violation, is substantially equivalent to any provision of any section
contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is
guilty of aggravated vehicular homicide, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(3) of this section is guilty of
vehicular homicide. Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
homicide is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular homicide committed in
violation of division (A)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving
under a suspension or cancellation imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other
provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or
motorcycle, did not have a valid driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the offender’s driver’s license
or commercial driver’s license without examination under R.C. § 4507.10 or if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault
offense.
         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class four suspension of
the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is guilty of
vehicular manslaughter. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the second degree. Vehicular
manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the first degree if, at the time of the
offense, the offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation imposed
under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was
operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege, and was not eligible for renewal
of the offender’s driver’s license or commercial driver’s license without
examination under R.C. § 4507.10 or if the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-
related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.
         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class six suspension of
the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6) or, if the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section, any
traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense, or a traffic-
related murder, felonious assault, or attempted murder offense, a class four
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
   (C)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least 15 days on an
offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation of
division (A)(3)(b) of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer
jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.
   (D)   Divisions (A)(2)(b) and (A)(3)(b) of this section do not apply in a
particular construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C. §
2903.081 are erected in that construction zone in accordance with the
guidelines and design specifications established by the Director of
Transportation under R.C. § 5501.27. The failure to erect signs of the type
described in R.C. § 2903.081 in a particular construction zone in accordance
with those guidelines and design specifications does not limit or affect the
application of division (A)(1), (A)(2)(a), (A)(3)(a), or (A)(4) of this section
in that construction zone or the prosecution of any person who violates any of
those divisions in that construction zone.
   (E)   (1)   As used in this section:
         CONSTRUCTION ZONE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5501.27.
         MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         MINI-TRUCK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
         MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
         OVI OFFENSE. Means a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), a violation R.C.
§ 1547.11(A), a violation of R.C. § 4561.15(A)(3), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
         RECKLESS OPERATION OFFENSE. Means a violation of R.C. § 4511.20 or a
municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.20.
         SPEEDING OFFENSE. Means a violation of R.C. § 4511.21 or a municipal
ordinance pertaining to speed.
         TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MANSLAUGHTER, OR ASSAULT OFFENSE. Means a
violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in circumstances in which division (D) of that
section applies, a violation of R.C. § 2903.06 or 2903.08, or a violation of
R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.07, or 2903.08 as they existed prior to March 23, 2000.
         TRAFFIC-RELATED MURDER, FELONIOUS ASSAULT, OR ATTEMPTED MURDER
OFFENSE. Means a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02 in circumstances
in which the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to commit the
violation, a violation of R.C. § 2903.11(A)(2) in circumstances in which the
deadly weapon used in the commission of the violation is a motor vehicle, or an
attempt to commit aggravated murder or murder in violation of R.C. § 2923.02 in
circumstances in which the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to
attempt to commit the aggravated murder or murder.
         UTILITY VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or suspension is
enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a prior
or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the
specified law or the specified offense includes any violation of any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or
current or former law of this or another state or the United States.
(R.C. § 2903.06)
   (F)   Vehicular assault.
      (1)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, utility vehicle, or mini-truck, shall cause serious
physical harm to another person or another’s unborn as the proximate result of
committing, while operating or participating in the operation of a motor
vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck, or motorcycle in a construction zone, a
speeding offense, provided that this division applies only if the person to
whom the serious physical harm is caused or to whose unborn the serious
physical harm is caused is in the construction zone at the time of the
offender’s commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and does
not apply as described in division (F)(4) of this section.
      (2)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
assault committed in violation of division (F)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular assault committed in violation of
division (F)(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving under a
suspension imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio
Revised Code or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (F)(1) of this section, R.C. § 2903.08, or
any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.
         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed, the court shall
impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender’s driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least seven days
on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation
of division (F)(1) of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer
jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.
      (4)   Division (F)(1) of this section does not apply in a particular
construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C. § 2903.081 are
erected in that construction zone in accordance with the guidelines and design
specifications established by the Director of Transportation under R.C. §
5501.27.
      (5)   As used in this division (F):
         CONSTRUCTION ZONE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5501.27.
         MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         SPEEDING OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.06.
         TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MANSLAUGHTER, OR ASSAULT OFFENSE. Has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.06.
      (6)   For the purposes of this division (F), when a penalty or suspension
is enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a
prior or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the
specified law or the specified offense includes any violation of any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or
current or former law of another state or the United States.
(R.C. 2903.08(A)(3), (C)(3), (D)(3), (E) - (G))
Statutory reference:
   Court to suspend driver’s license, see R.C. §§ 4510.05 and 4510.07
   Vehicular assault and aggravated vehicular assault, felony offenses, see
R.C. § 2903.08
§ 135.04 ASSAULT; NEGLIGENT ASSAULT.
   (A)   Assault.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm
to another or to another’s unborn.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to another
or to another’s unborn.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is
guilty of assault. Except as provided in R.C. § 2903.13(C), assault is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (4)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to assault when
it is a misdemeanor also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification as
described in R.C. § 2941.1423 (victim of the offense was a woman whom the
defendant knew was pregnant at the time of the offense) that was included in
the indictment, count in the indictment, or information charging the offense,
the court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory jail term as provided in
R.C. § 2929.24(F).
      (5)   A prosecution for a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this
section does not preclude a prosecution of a violation of any other section of
the Ohio Revised Code. One or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of
behavior that can be prosecuted under division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section
or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under division
(A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code,
or both sections. However, if an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section and also is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2903.22, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, based on the same conduct involving the same
victim that was the basis of the violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this
section, the offenses are allied offenses of similar import under R.C. §
2941.25.
(R.C. § 2903.13)
   (B)   Negligent assault.
      (1)   No person shall negligently, by means of a deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, cause physical harm to another
or to another’s unborn.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is guilty of
negligent assault, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 2903.14) (Prior Code, §§ 636.02, 636.03)
Cross-reference:
   Jurisdictional limitation on Mayor regarding violations of division (A) of
this section, see § 33.01(E)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated and felonious assault, see R.C. §§ 2903.11 and 2903.12
   Felony assault offenses, see R.C. § 2903.13(C)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
   Persons who may seek relief under anti-stalking protection order; ex parte
orders, see R.C. § 2903.214
   Protection order as pretrial condition of release, see R.C. § 2903.213
   Strangulation, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.18
   Vehicular assault and aggravated vehicular assault, felony offenses, see
R.C. § 2903.08
§ 135.05 INJURY TO PERSONS BY HUNTERS.
   (A)   No person in the act of hunting, pursuing, taking, or killing a wild
animal shall act in a negligent, careless, or reckless manner so as to injure
persons.
(R.C. § 1533.171(A))
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 1533.99(C))
Statutory reference:
   Violation, license revocation, see R.C. § 1533.171(B) through (E)
§ 135.06 MENACING; AGGRAVATED MENACING; MENACING BY STALKING.
   (A)   Menacing.
      (1)   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the
offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s immediate
family. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that the
offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s immediate
family, the other person’s belief may be based on words or conduct of the
offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or other
organization that employs the other person or to which the other person
belongs.
         (b)   No person shall knowingly place or attempt to place another in
reasonable fear of physical harm or death by displaying a deadly weapon,
regardless of whether the deadly weapon displayed is operable or inoperable, if
either of the following applies:
            1.   The other person is an emergency service responder, the person
knows or reasonably should know that the other person is an emergency service
responder, and it is the person’s specific purpose to engage in the specified
conduct against an emergency service responder.
            2.   The other person is a family or household member or co-worker
of an emergency service responder, the person knows or reasonably should know
that the other person is a family or household member or co-worker of an
emergency service responder, and it is the person’s specific purpose to engage
in the specified conduct against a family or household member or co-worker of
an emergency service responder.
      (2)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, menacing is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public
children services agency or a private child placing agency and the offense
relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance
of official responsibilities or duties or if the victim of the offense is an
emergency service responder in the performance of the responder’s official
duties, menacing is one of the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(2)(b) of this
section, a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency or an emergency service responder, and that prior offense
related to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance
of official responsibilities or duties or to the responder’s performance of the
responder’s official duties, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (3)   A prosecution for a violation of division (A) of this section does
not preclude a prosecution of a violation of any other section of the Ohio
Revised Code. One or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that
can be prosecuted under division (A) of this section or any other section of
the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under division (A) of this section, the
other section of the Ohio Revised Code, or both sections. However, if an
offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (A) of
this section and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of R.C. §
2903.13, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance, based on the same
conduct involving the same victim that was the basis of the violation of
division (A) of this section, the offenses are allied offenses of similar
import under R.C. § 2941.25.
      (4)   As used in this section:
         CO-WORKER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 2903.13.
         EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. §
2903.13.
         FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
2903.13.
         ORGANIZATION. Includes an entity that is a governmental employer.
(R.C. § 2903.22)
   (B)   Aggravated menacing.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the
offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the
other person, such other person’s unborn, or a member of such other person’s
immediate family. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief
that the offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of
the other person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s
immediate family, the other person’s belief may be based on words or conduct of
the offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or
other organization that employs the other person or to which the other person
belongs.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is guilty of
aggravated menacing. Except as otherwise provided in this division (B)(2),
aggravated menacing is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the victim of the
offense is an officer or employee of a public children services agency or a
private child placing agency and the offense relates to the officer’s or
employee’s performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities
or duties, aggravated menacing is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties,
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   As used in this division (B), ORGANIZATION includes an entity that
is a governmental employer.
(R.C. § 2903.21)
   (C)   Menacing by stalking.
      (1)   (a)   No person by engaging in a pattern of conduct shall knowingly
cause another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
the other person or a family or household member of the other person or cause
mental distress to the other person or a family or household member of the
other person. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that
the offender will cause physical harm to the other person or the other person’s
family or household member or mental distress to the other person or the other
person’s family or household member, the other person’s belief or mental
distress may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are directed at
or identify a corporation, association, or other organization that employs the
other person or to which the other person belongs.
         (b)   No person, through the use of any form of written communication
or any electronic method of remotely transferring information, including but
not limited to any computer, computer network, computer program, computer
system, or telecommunication device, shall post a message or use any
intentionally written or verbal graphic gesture with purpose to do either of
the following:
            1.   Violate division (C)(1)(a) of this section;
            2.   Urge or incite another to commit a violation of division (C)
(1)(a) of this section.
         (c)   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate division (C)
(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) of this section.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C)(1) of this section is guilty of
menacing by stalking.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2)(b) of this
section, menacing by stalking is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   Menacing by stalking is a felony, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law, if any of the following applies:
            1.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2903.211 or a violation of R.C. § 2911.211, or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to either of these offenses.
            2.   In committing the offense under division (C)(1)(a), (C)(1)(b)
or (C)(1)(c) of this section, the offender made a threat of physical harm to or
against the victim, or as a result of an offense committed under division (C)
(1)(b) or (C)(1)(c) of this section, a third person induced by the offender’s
posted message made a threat of physical harm to or against the victim.
            3.   In committing the offense under division (C)(1)(a), (C)(1)(b)
or (C)(1)(c) of this section, the offender trespassed on the land or premises
where the victim lives, is employed, or attends school, or as a result of an
offense committed under division (C)(1)(b) or (C)(1)(c) of this section, a
third person induced by the offender’s posted message trespassed on the land or
premises where the victim lives, is employed, or attends school.
            4.   The victim of the offense is a minor.
            5.   The offender has a history of violence towards the victim or
any other person or a history of other violent acts towards the victim or any
other person.
            6.   While committing the offense under division (C)(1)(a) of this
section or a violation of division (C)(1)(c) of this section based on conduct
in violation of division (C)(1)(a) of this section, the offender had a deadly
weapon on or about the offender’s person or under the offender’s control.
Division (C)(2)(b)6. of this section does not apply in determining the penalty
for a violation of division (C)(1)(b) of this section or a violation of
division (C)(1)(c) of this section based on conduct in violation of division
(C)(1)(b) of this section.
            7.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
the subject of a protection order issued under R.C. § 2903.213 or R.C. §
2903.214, regardless of whether or not the person to be protected under the
order is the victim of the offense or another person.
            8.   In committing the offense under division (C)(1)(a), (C)(1)(b)
or (C)(1)(c) of this section, the offender caused serious physical harm to the
premises at which the victim resides, to the real property on which that
premises is located, or to any personal property located on that premises, or
as a result of an offense committed under division (C)(1)(b) of this section or
an offense committed under division (C)(1)(c) of this section based on a
violation of division (C)(1)(b) of this section, a third person induced by the
offender’s posted message caused serious physical harm to that premises, that
real property, or any personal property on that premises.
            9.   Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been
determined to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as
manifested by evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior,
evidence of then-recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of
violent behavior and serious harm, or other evidence of then-present
dangerousness.
            10.   The victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the
offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties.
            11.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties.
      (3)   R.C. § 2919.271 applies in relation to a defendant charged with a
violation of this section.
      (4)   As used in division (C) of this section:
         COMPUTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
         COMPUTER NETWORK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
         COMPUTER PROGRAM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
         COMPUTER SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
         EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
         EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency
medical services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
         FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:
            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
person against whom the act prohibited in division (C)(1)(a) of this section is
committed:
               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse
of the person;
               b.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the person, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the person;
               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the person, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
person.
            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the person against
whom the act prohibited in division (C)(1)(a) of this section is committed is
the other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
         MENTAL DISTRESS. Means any of the following:
            1.   Any mental illness or condition that involves some temporary
substantial incapacity;
            2.   Any mental illness or condition that would normally require
psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health
services, whether or not any person requested or received psychiatric
treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health services.
         ORGANIZATION. Includes an entity that is a governmental employer.
         PATTERN OF CONDUCT. Means two or more actions or incidents closely
related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any
of those actions or incidents, or two or more actions or incidents closely
related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any
of those actions or incidents, directed at one or more persons employed by or
belonging to the same corporation, association, or other organization. Actions
or incidents that prevent, obstruct, or delay the performance by a public
official, firefighter, rescuer, emergency medical services person, or emergency
facility person of any authorized act within the public official’s,
firefighter’s, rescuer’s, emergency medical services person’s, or emergency
facility person’s official capacity, or the posting of messages, use of
intentionally written or verbal graphic gestures, or receipt of information or
data through the use of any form of written communication or an electronic
method of remotely transferring information, including but not limited to a
computer, computer network, computer program, computer system, or
telecommunications device, may constitute a “pattern of conduct”.
         PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has lived
with the person against whom the act prohibited in division (C)(1)(a) of this
section is committed in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is
cohabiting with that person, or who otherwise has cohabited with the person
within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in
question.
         POST A MESSAGE. Means transferring, sending, posting, publishing,
disseminating, or otherwise communicating, or attempting to transfer, send,
post, publish, disseminate, or otherwise communicate, any message or
information, whether truthful or untruthful, about an individual, and whether
done under one’s own name, under the name of another, or while impersonating
another.
         PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
         SEXUAL MOTIVATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2971.01.
         TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
         THIRD PERSON. Means, in relation to conduct as described in division
(C)(1)(b) of this section, an individual who is neither the offender nor the
victim of the conduct.
      (5)   The prosecution does not need to prove in a prosecution under
division (C) of this section that a person requested or received psychiatric
treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health services in order to
show that the person was caused mental distress as described in division (2) of
the definition for “mental distress” in this section.
      (6)   (a)   Division (C) of this section does not apply to a person
solely because the person provided access or connection to or from an
electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s
control, including having provided capabilities that are incidental to
providing access or connection to or from the electronic method of remotely
transferring the information, and that do not include the creation of the
content of the material that is the subject of the access or connection. In
addition, any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control
shall not be liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the
receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it believes
is or will be sent in violation of division (C) of this section.
         (b)   Division (C)(6)(a) of this section does not create an
affirmative duty for any person providing access or connection to or from an
electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s
control to block the receipt or transmission through its service of any
information that it believes is or will be sent in violation of division (C) of
this section except as otherwise provided by law.
         (c)   Division (C)(6)(a) of this section does not apply to a person
who conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of division (C) of this section or who
knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
(R.C. § 2903.211) (Prior Code, §§ 636.04, 636.045, 636.05)
Cross-reference:
   Violation of protection orders, see §
135.23
Statutory reference:
   Authority of corporations to seek protection orders in certain
circumstances, see R.C. § 2903.215
   Conditions of bail for violators, see R.C. § 2903.212
   Persons who may seek relief under anti-stalking protection order; ex parte
orders, see R.C. § 2903.214
   Protection order as pretrial condition of release, see R.C. § 2903.213
§ 135.07 UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly restrain
another of the other person’s liberty.
   (B)   No person, without privilege to do so and with a sexual motivation,
shall knowingly restrain another of the other person’s liberty.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful restraint, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   As used in this section, SEXUAL MOTIVATION has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2971.01.
(R.C. § 2905.03) (Prior Code, § 636.06)
§ 135.08 UNLAWFUL COLLECTION OF BODILY SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly collect any blood, urine, tissue, or other
bodily substance of another person without privilege or consent to do so.
   (B)   (1)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         (a)   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a law
enforcement officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice
of a law enforcement officer, for purposes of a chemical test or tests of the
substance under R.C. § 1547.111(A)(1) or R.C. § 4511.191(A)(2) to determine the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the bodily substance;
         (b)   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a peace
officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice of a peace
officer, for purposes of a test or tests of the substance as provided in R.C. §
4506.17(A) to determine the person’s alcohol concentration or the presence of
any controlled substance or metabolite of a controlled substance.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section shall not be construed as implying
that the persons identified in divisions (B)(1)(a) and (b) of this section do
not have privilege to collect the bodily substance of another person as
described in those divisions or as limiting the definition of “privilege” set
forth in R.C. § 2901.01.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of unlawful
collection of a bodily substance. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, unlawful collection of a bodily substance is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (A) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, unlawful collection of a bodily
substance is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.15) (Prior Code, § 636.26)
§ 135.09 COERCION.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to coerce another into taking or refraining
from action concerning which the other person has a legal freedom of choice,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Threaten to commit any offense.
      (2)   Utter or threaten any slander against any person.
      (3)   Expose or threaten to expose any matter tending to subject any
person to hatred, contempt, or ridicule, or to damage any person’s personal or
business repute, or to impair any person’s credit.
      (4)   Institute or threaten criminal proceedings against any person.
      (5)   Take or withhold, or threaten to take or withhold official action,
or cause or threaten to cause official action to be taken or withheld.
   (B)   Divisions (A)(4) and (A)(5) of this section shall not be construed to
prohibit a prosecutor or court from doing any of the following in good faith
and in the interests of justice:
      (1)   Offering or agreeing to grant, or granting immunity from
prosecution pursuant to R.C. § 2945.44.
      (2)   In return for a plea of guilty to one or more offenses charged or
to one or more other or lesser offenses, or in return for the testimony of the
accused in a case to which the accused is not a party, offering or agreeing to
dismiss, or dismissing one or more charges pending against an accused, or
offering or agreeing to impose, or imposing a certain sentence or modification
of sentence.
      (3)   Imposing a community control sanction on certain conditions,
including without limitation requiring the offender to make restitution or
redress to the victim of the offense.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3), (A)
(4), or (A)(5) of this section that the actor’s conduct was a reasonable
response to the circumstances which occasioned it, and that the actor’s purpose
was limited to any of the following:
      (1)   Compelling another to refrain from misconduct or to desist from
further misconduct.
      (2)   Preventing or redressing a wrong or injustice.
      (3)   Preventing another from taking action for which the actor
reasonably believed the other person to be disqualified.
      (4)   Compelling another to take action which the actor reasonably
believed the other person to be under a duty to take.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of coercion, a misdemeanor of
the second degree.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      COMMUNITY CONTROL SANCTION has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      THREAT includes a direct threat and a threat by innuendo.
(R.C. § 2905.12) (Prior Code, § 636.09)
§ 135.10 BIGAMY.
   (A)   No married person shall marry another or continue to cohabit with such
other person in this municipality.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor’s spouse was continuously absent for five years immediately preceding the
purported subsequent marriage, and was not known by the actor to be alive
within that time.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of bigamy, a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
(R.C. § 2919.01)
§ 135.11 ILLEGAL USE OF A TRACKING DEVICE OR APPLICATION.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      BUSINESS ENTITY. Means any form of corporation, partnership, association,
cooperative, joint venture, business trust, or sole proprietorship that
conducts business in this state.
      BUSINESS OF PRIVATE INVESTIGATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4749.01.
      DISABLED ADULT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      ELDERLY PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      ELECTRONIC MONITORING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      ELECTRONIC MONITORING DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Means any organization or unit comprised of law
enforcement officers, and also includes any federal or military law enforcement
agency.
      OHIO PROTECTION ORDER. Means a protection order filed or issued or a
consent agreement approved pursuant to R.C. § 2919.26 or 3113.31, a protection
order filed or issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213, or 2903.214, or a
no contact order issued as any of the following:
         (a)   As part of a person’s sentence under a community control
sanction imposed under R.C. § 2929.16, 2929.17, 2929.26, or 2929.27;
         (b)   As a term or condition of a person’s release under R.C. §
2929.20;
         (c)   As a post-release control sanction imposed as a condition of a
person’s post-release control under R.C. § 2967.28;
         (d)   As a term of supervision for a person transferred to
transitional control under R.C. § 2967.26;
         (e)   As a term or condition of the intervention plan of a person
granted intervention in lieu of conviction under R.C. § 2951.041.
      PERSON. Means an individual, but does not include a business entity.
      PRIVATE INVESTIGATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4749.01.
      PROTECTION ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF ANOTHER STATE. Has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 2919.27.
      TRACKING APPLICATION. Means any software program that permits a person to
remotely determine or track the position or movement of another person or
another person’s property.
      TRACKING DEVICE. Means an electronic or mechanical device that permits a
person to remotely determine or track the position or movement of another
person or another person’s property, including an electronic monitoring device.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D) of this section, no
person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Install a tracking device or tracking application on another
person’s property without the other person’s consent or cause a tracking device
or tracking application to track the position or movement of another person or
another person’s property without the other person’s consent;
      (2)   If the person installed a tracking device or tracking application
on another’s property with the other person’s consent and the other person
subsequently revokes that consent, fail to remove or ensure the removal of the
device or application after the other person revokes the consent.
   (C)   (1)   For purposes of this section, if a person has given consent for
another to install a tracking device or tracking application on the consenting
person’s property, it is presumed that the consenting person has revoked that
consent if any of the following applies:
         (a)   The consenting person and the person to whom consent was given
are lawfully married and one of them files a complaint for divorce or a
petition for dissolution of marriage from the other. Not later than 72 hours
after being served with a complaint for divorce or a petition for dissolution
of marriage, the person to whom consent was given shall lawfully uninstall or
discontinue use of the tracking device or tracking application. If the person
to whom consent was given cannot lawfully uninstall or discontinue use of the
tracking device or tracking application, the person to whom consent was given
shall notify the court in which the complaint for divorce or the petition for
dissolution of marriage was filed in writing.
         (b)   The consenting person or the person to whom consent was given
files an Ohio protection order against the other person or an Ohio protection
order is issued against the other person, and the person to be protected under
the order is the consenting person. Not later than 72 hours after being served
with the Ohio protection order, the person to whom consent was given shall
lawfully uninstall or discontinue use of the tracking device or tracking
application. If the person to whom consent was given cannot lawfully uninstall
or discontinue use of the tracking device or tracking application, the person
to whom consent was given shall notify the court that issued the Ohio
protection order in writing that the person to whom consent was given has
installed or is using a tracking device or tracking application on the
previously consenting person’s person or the person’s property and cannot
uninstall or discontinue its use without violating the Ohio protection order.
      (2)   Revocation of consent under this division is effective upon the
service of the petition or motion or an Ohio protection order.
   (D)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A law enforcement officer, or any law enforcement agency, that
installs a tracking device or tracking application on another person’s property
or causes a tracking device or tracking application to track the position or
movement of another person or another person’s property as part of a criminal
investigation, or a probation officer, parole officer, or employee of the
department of rehabilitation and correction, a halfway house, or a community-
based correctional facility when engaged in the lawful performance of the
officer’s or employee’s official duties;
      (2)   A parent or legal guardian of a minor child who installs or uses a
tracking device or tracking application to track the minor child if any of the
following applies:
         (a)   The parents or legal guardians of the child are lawfully married
to each other and are not separated or otherwise living apart, and either of
those parents or legal guardians consents to the installation of the tracking
device or tracking application;
         (b)   The parent or legal guardian of the child is the sole surviving
parent or legal guardian of the child;
         (c)   The parent or legal guardian of the child has sole custody of
the child;
         (d)   The parents or legal guardians of the child are divorced,
separated, or otherwise living apart and neither parent has sole custody of the
child, and both consent to the installation of the tracking device or tracking
application;
         (e)   The parents or legal guardians of the child are divorced,
separated, or otherwise living apart, neither parent has sole custody of the
child, and either only one parent consents to the installation of the tracking
device or tracking application or one parent revokes consent, if the consenting
parent only uses the tracking device or tracking application during that
parent’s parenting or custodial time and disables or removes the tracking
device or application during the nonconsenting parent’s parenting or custodial
time.
      (3)   A caregiver of an elderly person or disabled adult, if the elderly
person’s or disabled adult’s treating physician certifies that the installation
of a tracking device or tracking application onto the elderly person’s or
disabled adult’s property is necessary to ensure the safety of the elderly
person or disabled adult;
      (4)   A person acting in good faith on behalf of a business entity for a
legitimate business purpose, provided that this division does not apply to a
private investigator engaged in the business of private investigation on behalf
of another person;
      (5)   (a)   A private investigator or other person licensed under R.C. §
4749.03, who is acting in the normal course of the investigator’s business of
private investigation on behalf of another person and who has the consent of
the owner of the property upon which the tracking device or tracking
application is installed, for the purpose of obtaining information with
reference to any of the following:
            1.   Criminal offenses committed, threatened, or suspected against
the United States, a territory of the United States, a state, or any person or
legal entity;
            2.   Locating an individual known to be a fugitive from justice;
            3.   Locating lost or stolen property or other assets that have
been awarded by the court;
            4.   Investigating claims related to workers’ compensation.
         (b)   This division does not apply if the person on whose behalf the
private investigator is working is the subject of an Ohio protection order or a
protection order issued by a court of another state or if the private
investigator knows or reasonably should know that the person on whose behalf
the private investigator is working seeks the investigator’s services to aid in
the commission of a crime.
      (6)   An owner or lessee of a motor vehicle who installs, or directs the
installation of, a tracking device or tracking application on the vehicle
during the period of ownership or lease, if any of the following applies:
         (a)   The tracking device or tracking application is removed before
the vehicle’s title is transferred or the vehicle’s lease expires;
         (b)   The new owner of the vehicle, in the case of a sale, or the
lessor of the vehicle, in the case of an expired lease, consents in writing to
the non-removal of the tracking device or tracking application;
         (c)   The owner of the vehicle at the time of the installation of the
tracking device or tracking application was the original manufacturer of the
vehicle.
      (7)   A person who installs a tracking device or application on property
in which the person has an ownership or contractual interest, unless the person
is the subject of a protective order and the property is likely to be used by
the person who obtained the protective order;
      (8)   A person or business entity that installs a tracking device or
tracking application on any fixed wing aircraft or rotorcraft operated or
managed by the person or business entity pursuant to 14 C.F.R. part 91 or part
135 to track the position or movement of the fixed wing aircraft or rotorcraft;
      (9)   A surety bail bond agent, or any employee or contractor of a surety
bail bond agent, that installs a tracking device or tracking application on
another person’
   (E)   For purposes of division (D)(1) of this section, a probation officer,
parole officer, or employee of the department of rehabilitation and correction,
a halfway house, or a community-based correctional facility is engaged in the
lawful performance of the officer’s or employee’s duties if both of the
following apply:
      (1)   The court or the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction
imposes electronic monitoring on a person.
      (2)   The officer or employee installs or uses an electronic monitoring
device on that person in accordance with the court’s or department’s imposition
of electronic monitoring of that person.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal use of a tracking
device or application.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (F)(2) of this section,
illegal use of a tracking device or application is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   Illegal use of a tracking device or application is a felony to be
prosecuted under state law if any of the following applies:
         (a)   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of this section, R.C. § 2903.216, or R.C. § 2903.211 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         (b)   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
the subject of a protection order issued under R.C. § 2903.213 or 2903.214,
regardless of whether the person to be protected under the order is the victim
of the offense or another person.
         (c)   Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been
determined to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as
manifested by evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior,
evidence of then-recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of
violent behavior and serious physical harm, or other evidence of then-present
dangerousness.
         (d)   The offender has a history of violence toward the victim or a
history of other violent acts towards the victim.
(R.C. § 2903.216)
§ 135.12 MISREPRESENTATION RELATING TO PROVISION OF CHILD CARE.
   (A)   No child care provider shall knowingly misrepresent any factor or
condition that relates to the provision of child care and that substantially
affects the health or safety of any child or children in that provider’s
facility or receiving child care from that provider to any of the following:
      (1)   A parent, guardian, custodian, or other person responsible for the
care of a child in the provider’s facility or receiving child care from the
provider;
      (2)   A parent, guardian, custodian, or other person responsible for the
care of a child who is considering the provider as a child care provider for
the child;
      (3)   A public official responsible for issuing the provider a license or
certificate to provide child care;
      (4)   A public official investigating or inquiring about the provision of
child care by the provider;
      (5)   A peace officer.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, “any factor or condition that
relates to the provision of child care” includes, but is not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   The person or persons who will provide child care to the child of
the parent, guardian, custodian, or other person responsible for the care of
the child, or to the children in general;
      (2)   The qualifications to provide child care of the child care
provider, of a person employed by the provider, or of a person who provides
child care as a volunteer;
      (3)   The number of children to whom child care is provided at one time
or the number of children receiving child care in the child care facility at
one time;
      (4)   The conditions or safety features of the child care facility;
      (5)   The area of the child care facility in which child care is
provided.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
misrepresentation by a child care provider, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2919.224)
§ 135.13 NONSUPPORT OF DEPENDENTS.
   (A)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide adequate support to:
      (1)   The person’s spouse, as required by law;
      (2)   The person’s child who is under age 18, or the persons’s child with
a mental or physical disability who is under age 21;
      (3)   The person’s aged or infirm parent or adoptive parent, who from
lack of ability and means is unable to provide adequately for the parent’s own
support.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide support as
established by a court order to, another person whom, by court order or decree,
the person:
         (a)   Is legally obligated to support; or
         (b)   Was legally obligated to support, and an amount for support:
            1.   Was due and owing prior to the date the person’s duty to pay
current support terminated; and
            2.   Remains unpaid.
      (2)   The period of limitation under R.C. § 2901.13 applicable to
division (B)(1)(b) of this section shall begin to run on the date the person’s
duty to pay current support terminates.
   (C)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to
a child or a ward of the juvenile court becoming a dependent child, as defined
in R.C. § 2151.04, or a neglected child, as defined in R.C. § 2151.03.
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of failure to provide
adequate support under division (A) of this section or a charge of failure to
provide support established by a court order under division (B) of this section
that the accused was unable to provide adequate support or the established
support, but did provide the support that was within his or her ability and
means.
   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3) of this
section that the parent abandoned the accused or failed to support the accused
as required by law, while the accused was under age 18, or had a mental or
physical disability and was under age 21.
   (F)   It is not a defense to a charge under division (B) of this section
that the person whom a court has ordered the accused to support is being
adequately supported by someone other than the accused.
   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of nonsupport of dependents, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A)(2) or (B) of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or if the
offender has failed to provide support under division (A)(2) or (B) of this
section for a total accumulated period of 26 weeks out of 104 consecutive
weeks, whether or not the 26 weeks were consecutive, then a violation of
division (A)(2) or (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a felony violation of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(2) or
(B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender is guilty of nonsupport of dependents by reason of
failing to provide support to his or her child as required by a child support
order issued on or after April 15, 1985, pursuant to R.C. § 2151.23, 2151.231,
2151.232, 2151.33, 3105.21, 3109.05, 3111.13, 3113.04, 3113.31, 3115.401, or
former R.C. § 3115.31, the court, in addition to any other sentence imposed,
shall assess all court costs arising out of the charge against the person and
require the person to pay any reasonable attorney’s fees of any adverse party
other than the state, as determined by the court, that arose in relation to the
charge.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
contributing to the nonsupport of dependents, a misdemeanor of the first
degree. Each day of a violation of division (C) of this section is a separate
offense.
(R.C. § 2919.21) (Prior Code, § 636.10)
§ 135.14 ENDANGERING CHILDREN.
   (A)   No person, who is the parent, guardian, custodian, person having
custody or control, or person in loco parentis of a child under 18 years of age
or a child with a mental or physical disability under 21 years of age, shall
create a substantial risk to the health or safety of the child by violating a
duty of care, protection, or support. It is not a violation of a duty of care,
protection, or support under this division when the parent, guardian,
custodian, or person having custody or control of a child treats the physical
or mental illness or disability of the child by spiritual means through prayer
alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious body.
   (B)   No person shall do any of the following to a child under 18 years of
age or a child with a mental or physical disability under 21 years of age:
      (1)   Abuse the child.
      (2)   Torture or cruelly abuse the child.
      (3)   Administer corporal punishment or other physical disciplinary
measure, or physically restrain the child in a cruel manner or for a prolonged
period, which punishment, discipline or restraint is excessive under the
circumstances and creates a substantial risk of serious physical harm to the
child.
      (4)   Repeatedly administer unwarranted disciplinary measures to a child
when there is a substantial risk that such conduct, if continued, will
seriously impair or retard the child’s mental health or development.
      (5)   Entice, coerce, permit, encourage, compel, hire, employ, use, or
allow the child to act, model, or in any other way participate in, or be
photographed for, the production, presentation, dissemination, or advertisement
of any material or performance that the offender knows or reasonably should
know is obscene, is sexually oriented matter, or is nudity-oriented matter;
      (6)   Allow the child to be on the same parcel of real property and
within 100 feet of, or, in the case of more than one housing unit on the same
parcel of real property, in the same housing unit and within 100 feet of, any
act in violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or 2925.041 when the person knows that the
act is occurring, whether or not any person is prosecuted for or convicted of
the violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or 2925.041 that is the basis of the violation
of this division.
   (C)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle, as defined by R.C. § 4511.01,
within the municipality and in violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, when one or more children under
18 years of age are in the vehicle. Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
a person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation of
this division and a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of the charge of the
violation of this division. For purposes of R.C. §§ 4511.191 through 4511.197
and all related provisions of law, a person arrested for a violation of this
division shall be considered to be under arrest for operating a vehicle while
under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or
for operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a
controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine.
      (2)   As used in division (C)(1) of this section:
         CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
         VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (D)   (1)   Division (B)(5) of this section does not apply to any material
or performance that is produced, presented, or disseminated for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, religious, governmental, judicial, or other
proper purpose, by or to a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist,
teacher, person pursuing bona fide studies for research, librarian, member of
the clergy, prosecutor, judge, or other person having a proper interest in the
material or performance.
      (2)   Mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under division (B)(5)
of this section.
      (3)   In a prosecution under division (B)(5) of this section, the trier
of fact may infer that an actor, model, or participant in the material or
performance involved is a juvenile if the material or performance, through its
title, text, visual representation, or otherwise, represents or depicts the
actor, model, or participant as a juvenile.
      (4)   As used in this division and division (B)(5) of this section:
         MATERIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
         NUDITY-ORIENTED MATTER means any material or performance that shows a
minor in a state of nudity and that, taken as a whole by the average person
applying contemporary community standards, appeals to the prurient interest.
         OBSCENE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
         PERFORMANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
         SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
         SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATTER. Means any material or performance that shows
a minor participating or engaging in sexual activity, masturbation, or
bestiality.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of endangering children.
      (1)   If the offender violates division (A) or (B)(1) of this section,
endangering children is one of the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (E)(1)(b), (E)(1)(c) or
(E)(1)(d), a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of an offense
under this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, or of any offense involving neglect, abandonment, or contributing to
the delinquency of or physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided
in division (E)(1)(c) or (E)(1)(d) of this section, endangering children is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (c)   If the violation is a violation of division (A) of this section
and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (d)   If the violation is a violation of division (B)(1) of this
section and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender violates division (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(5) or
(B)(6) of this section, endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the offender violates division (C) of this section, the offender
shall be punished as follows:
         (a)   Except as provided in (E)(3)(b) or (E)(3)(c), endangering
children in violation of division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
         (b)   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child
or if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any
offense involving neglect, abandonment, or contributing to the delinquency of
or physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided in division (E)(3)
(c) of this section, endangering children in violation of division (C) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (c)   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child
and if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.08, 2919.22(C) or former R.C. § 2903.07 as it
existed prior to March 23, 2000, or R.C. § 2903.04, in a case in which the
offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that
section, endangering children in violation of division (C) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (d)   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other
sentence, penalty or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to
divisions (E)(3)(a), (E)(3)(b) or (E)(3)(c) of this section or pursuant to any
other provision of law, and in addition to any suspension of the offender’s
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege under R.C. Chapter 4506, 4509, 4510, or 4511, or any other
provision of law, the court also may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(7).
         (e)   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other
sentence, penalty or sanction imposed upon the offender pursuant to division
(E)(3)(a), (E)(3)(b), (E)(3)(c) or (E)(3)(d) of this section or pursuant to any
other provision of law for the violation of division (C) of this section, if as
a part of the same trial or proceeding the offender also is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a separate charge charging the violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A),
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the
charge of the violation of division (C) of this section, the offender also
shall be sentenced in accordance with R.C. § 4511.19, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, for that violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (F)   (1)   If a person violates division (C) of this section and if, at the
time of the violation, there were two or more children under 18 years of age in
the motor vehicle involved in the violation, the offender may be convicted of a
violation of division (C) of this section for each of the children, but the
court may sentence the offender for only one of the violations.
      (2)   (a)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation
of division (C) of this section but the person is not also convicted of and
does not also plead guilty to a separate charge of violating R.C. § 4511.19(A),
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the
charge of the violation of division (C) of this section, both the following
apply:
            1.   For purposes of the provisions of R.C. § 4511.19, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that set forth the penalties and
sanctions for a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the violation of
division (C) of this section shall not constitute a violation of R.C. § 4511.19
(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   For purposes of the provisions of law that refers to a
conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and that is not described in
division (F)(2)(a)1. of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty to
the violation of division (C) of this section shall constitute a conviction or
plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
         (b)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (C) of this section and the person also is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a separate charge of violating R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge of the
violation of division (C) of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty
to the violation of division (C) of this section shall not constitute, for the
purposes of any provision of law that refers to a conviction of or a plea of
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, a conviction of or a plea of guilty to a violation of R.C.
§ 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 2919.22(A) - (E), (H)) (Prior Code, § 636.11)
Statutory reference:
   Community service, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(F)
   License suspension, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(G)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
§ 135.15 INTERFERENCE WITH CUSTODY; INTERFERENCE WITH SUPPORT ORDERS.
   (A)   Interference with custody.
      (1)   No person, knowing that he or she is without privilege to do so or
being reckless in that regard, shall entice, take, keep, or harbor a person
identified in division (A)(1)(a), (A)(1)(b) or (A)(1)(c) of this section from
the parent, guardian, or custodian of the person identified in division (A)(1)
(a), (A)(1)(b) or (A)(1)(c) of this section:
         (a)   A child under the age of 18, or a child with a mental or
physical disability under the age of 21;
         (b)   A person committed by law to an institution for delinquent,
unruly, neglected, abused, or dependent children;
         (c)   A person committed by law to an institution for persons with
mental illnesses or an institution for persons with intellectual disabilities.
      (2)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, or encourage a child or a
ward of the juvenile court who has been committed to the custody of any person,
department, or public or private institution to leave the custody of that
person, department, or institution without legal consent.
      (3)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of enticing or taking
under division (A)(1)(a) of this section that the actor reasonably believed
that his or her conduct was necessary to preserve the child’s health or safety.
It is an affirmative defense to a charge of keeping or harboring under division
(A)(1) of this section that the actor in good faith gave notice to law
enforcement or judicial authorities within a reasonable time after the child or
committed person came under his or her shelter, protection, or influence.
      (4)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with
custody.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, a violation of
division (A)(1)(a) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the child who
is the subject of a violation of division (A)(1)(a) is removed from the state
or if the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (A)(1)(a) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. If the child who is the subject of a violation of
division (A)(1)(a) suffers physical harm as a result of the violation, a
violation of division (A)(1)(a) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
         (b)   A violation of division (A)(1)(b) or (A)(1)(c) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
         (c)   A violation of division (A)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. Each day of a violation of division (A)(2) is a separate
offense.
(R.C. § 2919.23)
   (B)   Interference with support orders.
      (1)   No person, by using physical harassment or threats of violence
against another person, shall interfere with the other person’s initiation or
continuance of, or attempt to prevent the other person from initiating or
continuing, an action to issue or modify a support order under R.C. Chapter
3115, or under R.C. § 2151.23, 2151.231, 2151.232, 2151.33, 2151.36, 2151.361,
2151.49, 3105.18, 3105.21, 3109.05, 3109.19, 3111.13, 3113.04, 3113.07, or
3113.31.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of interfering with an
action to issue or modify a support order, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of this division (B) or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, or R.C. § 3111.19, interfering with an action to issue or
modify a support order is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
(R.C. § 2919.231)
(Prior Code, § 636.12)
§ 135.16 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to a
family or household member.
   (B)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to a family or
household member.
   (C)   No person, by threat of force, shall knowingly cause a family or
household member to believe that the offender will cause imminent physical harm
to the family or household member.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of domestic violence,
and the court shall sentence the offender as provided in divisions (D)(2) to
(D)(5) of this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3), (D)(4) or (D)(5)
of this section, a violation of division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree and a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section is
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(4) of this section, if
the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of domestic
violence, a violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or the United States that is substantially equivalent
to domestic violence, a violation of R.C. § 2903.14, 2909.06, 2909.07, 2911.12,
2911.211, or 2919.22 if the victim of the violation was a family or household
member at the time of the violation, a violation of an existing or former
municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States that
is substantially equivalent to any of those sections if the victim of the
violation was a family or household member at the time of the commission of the
violation, or any offense of violence if the victim of the offense was a family
or household member at the time of the commission of the offense, a violation
of division (A) or (B) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law, and a violation of division (C) is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)    If the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted
of two or more offenses of domestic violence or two or more violations or
offenses of the type described in division (D)(3) of this section involving a
person who was a family or household member at the time of the violations or
offenses, a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (C) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two or more offenses of domestic
violence or two or more violations or offenses of the type described in
division (D)(3) of this section involving a person who was a family or
household member at the time of the violations or offenses, and the offender
knew that the victim of the violation was pregnant at the time of the
violation, a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) or (D)(4) of this
section, if the offender knew that the victim of the violation was pregnant at
the time of the violation, a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a violation of
division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no court or unit
of state or local government shall charge any fee, cost, deposit, or money in
connection with the filing of charges against a person alleging that the person
violated this section or a municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to this
section or in connection with the prosecution of any charges so filed.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
offender:
            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse as defined below, or a
former spouse of the offender;
            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the offender, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the offender;
            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the offender, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
offender.
         (b)   The natural parent of any child of whom the offender is the
other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
      PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has lived with
the offender in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting
with the offender, or who otherwise has cohabited with the offender within five
years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in question.
(R.C. § 2919.25) (Prior Code, § 636.17)
Cross-reference:
   Violation of protection orders, see §
135.23
Statutory reference:
   Temporary protection orders, see R.C. § 2919.26
   Violation of protection order or consent agreement, factors to consider,
bail, see R.C. § 2919.251
§ 135.17 HAZING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      HAZING. Means doing any act or coercing another, including the victim, to
do any act of initiation into any student or other organization or any act to
continue or reinstate membership in or affiliation with any student or other
organization that causes or creates a substantial risk of causing mental or
physical harm to any person, including coercing another to consume alcohol or a
drug of abuse, as defined in R.C. § 3719.011.
      ORGANIZATION. Includes a national or international organization with
which a fraternity or sorority is affiliated.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another.
      (2)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other educational institution, public or private,
shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person associated with the
organization.
   (C)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another
when the hazing includes coerced consumption of alcohol or drugs of abuse
resulting in serious physical harm to the other person.
      (2)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other educational institution, public or private,
shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person associated with the
organization when the hazing includes coerced consumption of alcohol or drugs
of abuse resulting in serious physical harm to that person.
   (D)   Whoever violates divisions (B) or (C) of this section is guilty of
hazing. A violation of division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the second degree. A violation of division (C)(1) or (C)(2) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.31)
   (E)   Reckless failure to immediately report knowledge of hazing.
      (1)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other public or private educational institution,
who is acting in an official and professional capacity shall recklessly fail to
immediately report the knowledge of hazing to a law enforcement agency in the
county in which the victim of hazing resides or in which the hazing is
occurring or has occurred.
      (2)   A violation of division (E)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree, except that the violation is a misdemeanor of the first
degree if the hazing causes serious physical harm.
(R.C. § 2903.311(B), (C))
(Prior Code, § 636.19)
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability for hazing, see R.C. § 2307.44
§ 135.18 CONTRIBUTING TO UNRULINESS OR DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      DELINQUENT CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
      UNRULY CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.022.
   (B)   No person, including a parent, guardian, or other custodian of a
child, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to a child or a
ward of the juvenile court becoming an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (2)   Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the juvenile
court to become an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (3)   Act in a way that contributes to an adjudication of the child as a
delinquent child based on the child’s violation of a court order adjudicating
the child an unruly child for being an habitual truant;
      (4)   If the person is the parent, guardian, or custodian of a child who
has the duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950 to register, register a new
residence address, and periodically verify a residence address, and, if
applicable, to send a notice of intent to reside, and if the child is not
emancipated, as defined in R.C. § 2919.121, fail to ensure that the child
complies with those duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the
unruliness or delinquency of a child, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each
day of violation of this section is a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2919.24) (Prior Code, § 636.13)
Statutory reference:
   Failure to send child to school, see R.C. § 3321.38
§ 135.19 FAILURE TO PROVIDE FOR A PERSON WITH A FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENT.
   (A)   No caretaker shall knowingly fail to provide a person with a
functional impairment under the caretaker’s care with any treatment, care,
goods, or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the
person with a functional impairment when this failure results in physical harm
or serious physical harm to the person with a functional impairment.
   (B)   No caretaker shall recklessly fail to provide a person with a
functional impairment under the caretaker’s care with any treatment, care,
goods, or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the
person with a functional impairment when this failure results in serious
physical harm to the person with a functional impairment.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
knowingly failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the person with a functional impairment
under the offender’s care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (A) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
recklessly failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment, a
misdemeanor of the second degree. If the person with a functional impairment
under the offender’s care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (B) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.16)
   (D)   As used in this section:
      CARETAKER. A person who assumes the duty to provide for the care and
protection of a person with a functional impairment on a voluntary basis, by
contract, through receipt of payment for care and protection, as a result of a
family relationship, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. The term
does not include a person who owns, operates, or administers, or who is an
agent or employee of, a care facility, as defined in R.C. § 2903.33.
      PERSON WITH A FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENT. Any person who has a physical or
mental impairment that prevents the person from providing for the person’s own
care or protection or whose infirmities caused by aging prevent the person from
providing for the person’s own care or protection.
(R.C. § 2903.10)
(Prior Code, § 636.23)
§ 135.20 PATIENT ABUSE OR NEGLECT; PATIENT ENDANGERMENT; EXCEPTIONS; FALSE
STATEMENTS; RETALIATION.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      ABUSE. Means knowingly causing physical harm or recklessly causing
serious physical harm to a person by physical contact with the person or by the
inappropriate use of a physical or chemical restraint, medication or isolation
on the person.
      CARE FACILITY. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any “home” as defined in R.C. § 3721.10.
         (b)   Any “residential facility” as defined in R.C. § 5119.34 or
5123.19.
         (c)   Any institution or facility operated or provided by the
Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services or by the Department of
Developmental Disabilities pursuant to R.C. §§ 5119.14 and 5123.03.
         (d)   Any unit of any hospital, as defined in R.C. § 3701.01, that
provided the same services as a nursing home, as defined in R.C. § 3721.01.
         (e)   Any institution, residence or facility that provides, for a
period of more than 24 hours, whether for consideration or not, accommodations
to one individual or two unrelated individuals who are dependent upon the
services of others.
      GROSS NEGLECT. Means knowingly failing to provide a person with any
treatment, care, goods or service that is necessary to maintain the health or
safety of the person when the failure results in serious physical harm to the
person.
      INAPPROPRIATE USE OF A PHYSICAL OR CHEMICAL RESTRAINT, MEDICATION OR
ISOLATION. Means the use of physical or chemical restraint, medication or
isolation as punishment, for staff convenience, excessively, as a substitute
for treatment, or in quantities that preclude habilitation and treatment.
      NEGLECT. Means recklessly failing to provide a person with any treatment,
care, goods or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of
the person when the failure results in serious physical harm to the person.
(R.C. § 2903.33)
   (B)   Patient abuse or neglect; spiritual treatment; defense.
      (1)   No person who owns, operates, or administers, or who is an agent or
employee of a care facility shall do any of the following:
         (a)   Commit abuse against a resident or patient of the facility.
         (b)   Commit gross neglect against a resident or patient of the
facility.
         (c)   Commit neglect against a resident or patient of the facility.
      (2)   (a)   A person who relies upon treatment by spiritual means through
prayer alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious
denomination, shall not be considered neglectful under division (B)(1)(c) of
this section for that reason alone.
         (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of gross neglect or
neglect under this section that the actor’s conduct was committed in good faith
solely because the actor was ordered to commit the conduct by a person with
supervisory authority over the actor.
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(a) is guilty of patient
abuse, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (b)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(b) is guilty of gross patient
neglect, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of, or pleaded guilty to, any violation of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, gross patient
neglect is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (c)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(c) is guilty of patient
neglect, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of, or pleaded guilty to, any violation of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, gross patient
neglect is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.34)
   (C)   Patient endangerment; spiritual treatment; defense.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES CARETAKER. Means any developmental
disabilities employee or any person who assumes the duty to provide for the
care and protection of a person with a developmental disability on a voluntary
basis, by contract, through receipt of payment for care and protection, as a
result of a family relationship, or by order of a court of competent
jurisdiction. The phrase includes a person who is an employee of a care
facility and a person who is an employee of an entity under contract with a
provider. The phrase does not include a person who owns, operates, or
administers a care facility or who is an agent of a care facility unless that
person also personally provides care to a person with a developmental
disability.
         DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES EMPLOYEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5123.50.
         DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5123.01.
      (2)   No developmental disabilities caretaker shall create a substantial
risk to the health or safety of a person with a developmental disability. A
developmental disabilities caretaker does not create a substantial risk to the
health or safety of a person with a developmental disability under this
division when the developmental disabilities caretaker treats a physical or
mental illness or disability of the person with a developmental disability by
spiritual means through prayer alone, in accordance with the tenets of a
recognized religious body.
      (3)   No person who owns, operates, or administers a care facility or who
is an agent of a care facility shall condone, or knowingly permit, any conduct
by a developmental disabilities caretaker who is employed by or under the
control of the owner, operator, administrator, or agent that is in violation of
division (C)(2) of this section and that involves a person with a developmental
disability who is under the care of the owner, operator, administrator, or
agent. A person who relies upon treatment by spiritual means through prayer
alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious denomination,
shall not be considered endangered under this division for that reason alone.
      (4)   (a)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of
division (C)(2) or (C)(3) of this section that the actor’s conduct was
committed in good faith solely because the actor was ordered to commit the
conduct by a person to whom one of the following applies:
            1.   The person has supervisory authority over the actor.
            2.   The person has authority over the actor’s conduct pursuant to
a contract for the provision of services.
         (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of
division (C)(3) of this section that the person who owns, operates, or
administers a care facility or who is an agent of a care facility and who is
charged with the violation is following the individual service plan for the
involved person with a developmental disability or that the admission,
discharge, and transfer rule set forth in the Ohio Administrative Code is being
followed.
         (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of
division (C)(3) of this section that the actor did not have readily available a
means to prevent either the harm to the person with a developmental disability
or the death of such a person and the actor took reasonable steps to summon
aid.
      (5)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(5)(b) or (C)(5)(c) of this
section, whoever violates division (C)(2) or (C)(3) of this section is guilty
of patient endangerment, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of, or pleaded
guilty to, a violation of this section, patient endangerment is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (c)   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the person
with a developmental disability, patient endangerment is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.341)
   (D)   False statements.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly
swear or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, alleging a
violation of division (B) of this section when the statement is made with
purpose to incriminate another.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (D) is guilty of filing a false
patient abuse or neglect complaint, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2903.35)
   (E)   Retaliation against person reporting patient abuse or neglect. No care
facility shall discharge or in any manner discriminate or retaliate against any
person solely because such person, in good faith, filed a complaint, affidavit,
or other document alleging a violation of division (B) of this section or a
violation of R.C. § 2903.34.
(R.C. § 2903.36)
Statutory reference:
   License revocation for felony violations, see R.C. § 2903.37
§ 135.21 INTERFERENCE WITH RIGHT OF PERSON TO ENGAGE IN HOUSING TRANSACTIONS
BECAUSE OF RACE, RELIGION, OR THE LIKE.
   (A)   No person, whether or not acting under color of law, shall by force or
threat of force willfully injure, intimidate, or interfere with, or attempt to
injure, intimidate, or interfere with any of the following:
      (1)   Any person because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status,
as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin, military status as defined in
that section, disability as defined in that section, or ancestry and because
that person is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying,
contracting, or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing, or
occupation of any housing accommodations, or applying for or participating in
any service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or
renting housing accommodations.
      (2)   Any person because that person is or has been doing, or in order to
intimidate that person or any other person or any class of persons from doing
either of the following:
         (a)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin,
military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in that
section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations, or
facilities described in division (A)(1) of this section;
         (b)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
      (3)   Any person because that person is or has been, or in order to
discourage that person or any other person from, lawfully aiding or encouraging
other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin,
military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in that
section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations, or
facilities described in division (A)(1) of this section, or participating
lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity
to so participate.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2927.03) (Prior Code, § 636.22)
§ 135.22 ETHNIC INTIMIDATION.
   (A)   No person shall violate R.C. § 2903.21, 2903.22, 2909.06, or 2909.07,
or R.C. § 2917.21(A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5), by reason of the race, color,
religion, or national origin of another person or group of persons.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of ethnic intimidation. Ethnic
intimidation is an offense of the next higher degree than the offense the
commission of which is a necessary element of ethnic intimidation. In the case
of an offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree, ethnic intimidation is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.12) (Prior Code, § 636.24)
§ 135.23 VIOLATING A PROTECTION ORDER, CONSENT AGREEMENT, ANTI-STALKING
PROTECTION ORDER OR ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF ANOTHER STATE.
   (A)   No person shall recklessly violate the terms of any of the following:
      (1)   A protection order issued or consent agreement approved pursuant to
R.C. § 2919.26 or R.C. § 3113.31;
      (2)   A protection order issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213 or
2903.214;
      (3)   A protection order issued by a court of another state.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of violating a
protection order.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3) or (B)(4) of this
section, violating a protection order is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   Violating a protection order is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the offender previously has been convicted of, pleaded
guilty to, or been adjudicated a delinquent child for any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of a protection order issued or consent agreement
approved pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213, 2903.214, 2919.26, or 3113.31,
or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance;
         (b)   Two or more violations of R.C. § 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, or
2911.211, or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or
any combination of those offenses, that involved the same person who is the
subject of the protection order or consent agreement;
         (c)   One or more violations of this section, or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance.
      (4)   If the offender violates a protection order or consent agreement
while committing a felony offense, violating a protection order is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   If the protection order violated by the offender was an order
issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34 or 2903.214 that required electronic
monitoring of the offender pursuant to that section, the court may require in
addition to any other sentence imposed upon the offender that the offender be
electronically monitored for a period not exceeding five years by a law
enforcement agency designated by the court. If the court requires under this
division that the offender be electronically monitored, unless the court
determines that the offender is indigent, the court shall order that the
offender pay the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring device
and the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3) of this
section that the protection order issued by a court of another state does not
comply with the requirements specified in 18 U.S.C. § 2265(b) for a protection
order that must be accorded full faith and credit by a court of this state or
that it is not entitled to full faith and credit under 18 U.S.C. § 2265(c).
   (D)   In a prosecution for a violation of this section, it is not necessary
for the prosecution to prove that the protection order or consent agreement was
served on the defendant if the prosecution proves that the defendant was shown
the protection order or consent agreement or a copy of either or a judge,
magistrate, or law enforcement officer informed the defendant that a protection
order or consent agreement had been issued, and proves that the defendant
recklessly violated the terms of the order or agreement.
   (E)   As used in this section, PROTECTION ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF ANOTHER
STATE means an injunction or another order issued by a criminal court of
another state for the purpose of preventing violent or threatening acts or
harassment against, contact or communication with, or physical proximity to
another person including a temporary order, and means an injunction or order of
that nature issued by a civil court of another state, including a temporary
order and a final order issued in an independent action or as a pendente lite
order in a proceeding for other relief, if the court issued it in response to a
complaint, petition or motion filed by or on behalf of a person seeking
protection. The term does not include an order for support or for custody of a
child issued pursuant to the divorce and child custody laws of another state,
except to the extent that the order for support or for custody of a child is
entitled to full faith and credit under the laws of the United States.
(R.C. § 2919.27)
§ 135.24 ADULTERATION OF FOOD.
   (A)   No person shall do either of the following, knowing or having
reasonable cause to believe that any person may suffer physical harm or be
seriously inconvenienced or annoyed thereby:
      (1)   Place a pin, razor blade, glass, laxative, drug of abuse, or other
harmful or hazardous object or substance in any food or confection.
      (2)   Furnish to any person any food or confection which has been
adulterated in violation of division (A)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 3716.11)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 3716.99(C))
(Prior Code, § 636.16)
Statutory reference:
   Adulteration of food generally, see R.C. § 3715.59
§ 135.25 ILLEGAL DISTRIBUTION OF CIGARETTES, OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS, OR
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS; TRANSACTION SCANS.
   (A)   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         AGE VERIFICATION. A service provided by an independent third party
(other than a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes) that compares information available from a
commercially available database, or aggregate of databases, that regularly are
used by government and businesses for the purpose of age and identity
verification to personal information provided during an internet sale or other
remote method of sale to establish that the purchaser is 21 years of age or
older.
         ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT.
            1.   Subject to division 2. of this definition, an electronic
smoking device, vapor product, or any other product or device that consists of
or contains nicotine that can be ingested into the body by any means,
including, but not limited to, chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, or
inhaling.
            2.   The phrase does not include any of the following:
               a.   Any cigarette or other tobacco product;
               b.   Any product that is a “drug” as that term is defined in 21
U.S.C. § 321(g)(1);
               c.   Any product that is a “device” as that term is defined in
21 U.S.C. § 321(h);
               d.   Any product that is a “combination product” as described in
21 U.S.C. § 353(g).
         CIGARETTE. Includes clove cigarettes and hand-rolled cigarettes.
         DISTRIBUTE. Means to furnish, give, or provide cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to the ultimate consumer of the cigarettes, other tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes.
         ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. Means any device that can be used to
deliver aerosolized or vaporized nicotine or any other substance to the person
inhaling from the device including an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic hookah, vaping pen, or electronic pipe. The phrase includes any
component, part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately,
and includes any substance intended to be aerosolized or vaporized during the
use of the device. The phrase does not include any product that is a drug,
device, or combination product, as those terms are defined or described in 21
U.S.C. Ch. 9 and §§ 321 et seq.
         PROOF OF AGE. Means a driver’s license, a commercial driver’s license,
a military identification card, a passport, or an identification card issued
under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows that a person is 21 years of age or
older.
         TOBACCO PRODUCT. Means any product that is made or derived from
tobacco or that contains any form of nicotine, if it is intended for human
consumption or is likely to be consumed, whether smoked, heated, chewed,
absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, or ingested by any other means, including, but
not limited to, a cigarette, an electronic smoking device, a cigar, pipe
tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, or snus. The phrase also means any component
or accessory used in the consumption of a tobacco product, such as filters,
rolling papers, pipes, blunt or hemp wraps, and liquids used in electronic
smoking devices, whether or not they contain nicotine. The phrase does not
include any product that is a drug, device, or combination product, as those
terms are defined or described in 21 U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g).
         VAPOR PRODUCT. Means a product, other than a cigarette or other
tobacco product as defined in R.C. Chapter 5743, that contains or is made or
derived from nicotine and that is intended and marketed for human consumption,
including by smoking, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing. The phrase includes any
component, part, or additive that is intended for use in an electronic smoking
device, a mechanical heating element, battery, or electronic circuit and is
used to deliver the product. The phrase does not include any product that is a
drug, device, or combination product, as those terms are defined or described
in 21 U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g). The phrase includes any product containing
nicotine, regardless of concentration.
         VENDING MACHINE. Has the same meaning as “coin machine” in R.C. §
2913.01.
      (2)   No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes, no agent, employee, or representative of a
manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes, and no other person shall do any of the following:
         (a)    Give, sell, or otherwise distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes:
            1.   To any person under 21 years of age; or
            2.   Without first verifying proof of age.
         (b)   Give away, sell, or distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes in
any place that does not have posted in a conspicuous place a legibly printed
sign in letters at least one-half inch high stating that giving, selling, or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to a person under 21 years of age
is prohibited by law;
         (c)   Knowingly furnish any false information regarding the name, age,
or other identification of any person under 21 years of age with purpose to
obtain cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or
papers used to roll cigarettes for that person;
         (d)   Manufacture, sell, or distribute in this state any pack or other
container of cigarettes containing fewer than 20 cigarettes or any package of
roll-your-own tobacco containing less than six-tenths of one ounce of tobacco;
         (e)   Sell cigarettes or alternative nicotine products in a smaller
quantity than that placed in the pack or other container by the manufacturer;
         (f)   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute alternative nicotine
products, papers used to roll cigarettes, or tobacco products other than
cigarettes over the internet or through another remote method without age
verification.
         (g)   Allow an employee under 18 years of age to sell any tobacco
product;
         (h)   Give away or otherwise distribute free samples of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or coupons redeemable
for cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alterative tobacco products.
      (3)   No person shall sell or offer to sell cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products by or from a vending machine, except
in the following locations:
         (a)   An area within a factory, business, office, or other place not
open to the general public;
         (b)   An area to which persons under 21 years of age are not generally
permitted access;
         (c)   Any other place not identified in division (A)(3)(a) or (A)(3)
(b) of this section, upon all of the following conditions:
            1.   The vending machine is located within the immediate vicinity,
plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an
employee of that person, so that all cigarettes, other tobacco product, and
alternative nicotine product purchases from the vending machine will be readily
observed by the person who owns or operates the place or an employee of that
person. For the purpose of this section, a vending machine located in any
unmonitored area, including an unmonitored coatroom, restroom, hallway, or
outer waiting area, shall not be considered located within the immediate
vicinity, plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place,
or an employee of that person.
            2.   The vending machine is inaccessible to the public when the
place is closed.
            3.   A clearly visible notice is posted in the area where the
vending machine is located that states the following in letters that are
legibly printed and at least one-half inch high: “It is illegal for any person
under the age of 21 to purchase tobacco or alternative nicotine products.”
      (4)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under division
(A)(2)(a) of this section:
         (a)   The person under 21 years of age was accompanied by a parent,
spouse who is 21 years of age or older, or legal guardian of the person under
21 years of age.
         (b)   The person who gave, sold, or distributed cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to a person under 21 years of age under division (A)(2)(a) of this
section is a parent, spouse who is 21 years of age or older, or legal guardian
of the person under 21 years of age.
      (5)   (a)   It is not a violation of division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of
this section for a person to give or otherwise distribute to a person under 21
years of age cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
or papers used to roll cigarettes while the person under 21 years of age is
participating in a research protocol if all of the following apply:
            1.   The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of the person under
21 years of age has consented in writing to the person under 21 years of age
participating in the research protocol.
            2.   An institutional human subjects protection review board, or an
equivalent entity, has approved the research protocol.
            3.   The person under 21 years of age is participating in the
research protocol at the facility or location specified in the research
protocol.
         (b)   It is not a violation of division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of this
section for an employer to permit an employee 18, 19, or 20 years of age to
sell a tobacco product.
      (6)   (a)   No delivery service shall accept from, transport or deliver
to, or allow pick-up by, a person under 21 years of age with respect to any of
the following:
            1.   Alternative nicotine products;
            2.   Papers used to roll cigarettes;
            3.   Tobacco products other than cigarettes.
         (b)   A delivery service shall require proof of age as a condition of
accepting, transporting, delivering, or allowing pickup of the items described
in divisions (A)(6)(a)1. to 3. of this section.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(a), (A)(2)(b), (A)(2)(d), (A)(2)
(e), (A)(2)(f), (A)(2)(g), (A)(2)(h), (A)(3) or (A)(6) of this section is
guilty of illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to illegal distribution of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (8)   (a)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2), if an offender is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (A)(2)(a) of this
section, the court shall impose a fine in the following amount:
            1.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (A)(8)(a)2., (A)(8)
(a)3., (A)(8)(a)4., and (A)(8)(a)5. of this section, not more than $250;
            2.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (A)(8)(a)3., (A)(8)
(a)4., and (A)(8)(a)5. of this section, if an offender has previously been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A)(2)(a) of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, not
more than $500;
            3.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (A)(8)(a)4. and (A)
(8)(a)5. of this section, if an offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (A)(2)(a) of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, $500;
            4.   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(8)(a)5. of this
section, if an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
three or more violations of division (A)(2)(a) of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, $1,000;
            5.   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to four or more violations of division (A)(2)(a) of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, $1,500.
         (b)   The financial sanctions required by division (A)(8)(a) of this
section are in lieu of the financial sanctions described in R.C. § 2929.28(A)
(2), but are in addition to any other sanctions or penalties that may apply to
the offender, including other financial sanctions under that section or a jail
term under R.C. § 2929.24.
      (9)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(c) of this section is guilty of
permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of division (A)(2)(c) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (10)   Any cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes that are given, sold, or otherwise
distributed to a person under 21 years of age in violation of this section and
that are used, possessed, purchased, or received by a person under 21 years of
age in violation of R.C. § 2151.87 are subject to seizure and forfeiture as
contraband under R.C. Chapter 2981.
(R.C. § 2927.02)
   (B)   Transaction scan.
      (1)   As used in this division and division (C) of this section:
         CARD HOLDER. Means any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee
of a seller, to purchase or receive cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products from a seller, agent, or employee.
         IDENTIFICATION CARD. Means an identification card issued under R.C. §§
4507.50 through 4507.52.
         SELLER. Means a seller of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products and includes any person whose gift of or other
distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products is subject to the prohibitions of division (A) of this section.
         TRANSACTION SCAN. Means the process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks, by means of a transaction scan device, the
validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card
that is presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.
         TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Means any commercial device or combination of
devices used at a point of sale that is capable of deciphering in an
electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic strip or
bar code of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification
card.
      (2)   (a)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away, or otherwise distributing
to the card holder cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products.
         (b)   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (B)(2)(a) of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away, or otherwise distribute any cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products to the card holder.
         (c)   Division (B)(2)(a) of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card, if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device, as a condition for selling, giving away, or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products to the person presenting the document.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. §
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (B) and division (C) of this section.
      (4)   (a)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except for the following:
            1.   The name and date of birth of the person listed on the
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the
card holder;
            2.   The expiration date and identification number of the driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the card
holder.
         (b)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (B)(4)(a) of this section, except for
purposes of division (C) of this section.
         (c)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (C)(2)(a) of this section.
         (d)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (C) of this section
or another section of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (B) or division (C) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable local, state or federal laws or rules
governing the sale, giving away, or other distribution of cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (B)(2)(b) or (B)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal tobacco product or alternative nicotine
product transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil
penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay
each collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the
County Treasury.
(R.C. § 2927.021)
   (C)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (A) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of cigarettes, other tobacco products,
or alternative nicotine products is an element of the alleged violation, if the
seller, agent, or employee raises and proves as an affirmative defense that all
of the following occurred:
         (a)   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products presented a driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or an identification card.
         (b)   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that
the license or card was valid.
         (c)   The cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products were sold, given away, or otherwise distributed to the card holder in
reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and the completed
transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (C)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (A) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (A) of this
section. For purposes of division (C)(1)(c) of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         (a)   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away, or otherwise distributes cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products is 21 years of age or older;
         (b)   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (C)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
deputy registrar who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50
through 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of
that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(R.C. § 2927.022)
   (D)   Shipment of tobacco products.
      (1)   As used in this division (D):
         AUTHORIZED RECIPIENT OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Means:
            1.   In the case of cigarettes, a person who is:
               a.   Licensed as a cigarette wholesale dealer under R.C. §
5743.15;
               b.   Licensed as a retail dealer as long as the person purchases
cigarettes with the appropriate tax stamp affixed;
               c.   An export warehouse proprietor as defined in Internal
Revenue Code § 5702;
               d.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse under 19 U.S.C. §
1311 or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;
               e.   An officer, employee, or agent of the federal government or
of this state acting in the person's official capacity;
               f.   A department, agency, instrumentality, or political
subdivision of the federal government or of this state;
               g.   A person having a consent for consumer shipment issued by
the Ohio Tax Commissioner under R.C. § 5743.71.
            2.   In the case of electronic smoking devices or vapor products, a
person who is:
               a.   Licensed as a distributor of tobacco or vapor products
under R.C. § 5743.61;
               b.   A retail dealer of vapor products, as defined in R.C. §
5741.01(C)(3), that is not licensed as a vapor distributor, as long as the tax
levied by R.C. § 5743.51, 5743.62, or 5743.63, as applicable, has been paid;
               c.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse under 19 U.S.C. §
1311 or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;
               d.   An officer, employee, or agent of the federal government or
of this state acting in the person's official capacity;
               e.   A department, agency, instrumentality, or political
subdivision of the federal government or of this state.
         MOTOR CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4923.01.
      (2)   The purpose of this section is to prevent the sale of cigarettes,
electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to minors and to ensure
compliance with the Master Settlement Agreement, as defined in R.C. § 1346.01.
      (3)   (a)   No person shall cause to be shipped any cigarettes,
electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in this
municipality other than an authorized recipient of tobacco products.
         (b)   No motor carrier, or other person shall knowingly transport
cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in
this municipality that the carrier or other person reasonably believes is not
an authorized recipient of tobacco products. If cigarettes, electronic smoking
devices, and vapor products are transported to a home or residence, it shall be
presumed that the motor carrier, or other person knew that the person to whom
the cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products were delivered
was not an authorized recipient of tobacco products.
      (4)   No person engaged in the business of selling cigarettes, electronic
smoking devices, and vapor products who ships or causes to be shipped
cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in
this municipality in any container or wrapping other than the original
container or wrapping shall fail to plainly and visibly mark the exterior of
the container or wrapping in which the cigarettes, electronic smoking devices,
and vapor products are shipped with the words “cigarettes”, “electronic smoking
devices”, or “vapor products”, as applicable.
      (5)   A court shall impose a fine of up to $1,000 for each violation of
division (D)(3)(a), (D)(3)(b) or (D)(4) of this section.
(R.C. § 2927.023)
   (E)   Furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products.
      (1)   No person who is 18 years of age or older but younger than 21 years
of age shall knowingly furnish false information concerning that person’s name,
age, or other identification for the purpose of obtaining tobacco products.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (E)(1) of this section is guilty of
furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, furnishing false information to obtain tobacco
products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E)(1) of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(R.C. § 2927.024)
(Prior Code, § 636.20) (Ord. 2018-24, passed 11-13-2018)
§ 135.26 NONSMOKING AREAS IN PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY.
   (A)   As used in this section, PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY means:
      (1)   Enclosed theaters, except the lobby; opera houses; auditoriums;
classrooms; elevators; rooms in which persons are confined as a matter of
health care, including but not limited to a hospital room and a room in a
residential care facility serving as the residence of a person living in such
residential care facility.
      (2)   All buildings and other enclosed structures owned by the state, its
agencies, or political subdivisions, including but not limited to hospitals and
state institutions for persons with mental illnesses and persons with
intellectual disabilities; university and college buildings, except rooms
within those buildings used primarily as the residences of students or other
persons affiliated with the university or college; office buildings; libraries;
museums; and vehicles used in public transportation. That portion of a building
or other enclosed structure that is owned by the state, a state agency, or a
political subdivision, and that is used primarily as a food service
establishment, is not a place of public assembly.
      (3)   Each portion of a building or enclosed structure that is not
included in division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is a place of public
assembly if it has a seating capacity of 50 or more persons and is available to
the public. Restaurants, food service establishments, dining rooms, cafes,
cafeterias, or other rooms used primarily for the service of food, as well as
bowling alleys and places licensed by the Ohio Division of Liquor Control to
sell intoxicating beverages for consumption on the premises, are not places of
public assembly.
   (B)   For the purpose of separating persons who smoke from persons who do
not smoke for the comfort and health of persons not smoking, in every place of
public assembly there shall be an area where smoking is not permitted, which
shall be designated a no smoking area, provided that not more than one-half of
the rooms in any health care facility in which persons are confined as a matter
of health care may be designated as smoking areas in their entirety. The
designation shall be made before the place of public assembly is made available
to the public. In places included in division (A)(1) of this section, the local
fire authority having jurisdiction shall designate the no smoking area. In
places included in division (A)(2) of this section that are owned by the state
or its agencies, the Ohio Director of Administrative Services shall designate
the area, and if the place is owned by a political subdivision, its Legislative
Authority shall designate an officer who shall designate the area. In places
included in division (A)(3) of this section, the person having control of the
operations of the place of public assembly shall designate the no smoking area.
In places included in division (A)(2) of this section which are also included
in division (A)(1) of this section, the officer who has authority to designate
the area in places in division (A)(2) of this section shall designate the no
smoking area. A no smoking area may include the entire place of public
assembly. Designations shall be made by the placement of signs that are clearly
visible and that state “no smoking”. No person shall remove signs from areas
designated as no smoking areas.
   (C)   This section does not affect or modify the prohibition contained in
R.C. § 3313.751(B).
   (D)   No person shall smoke in any area designated as a no smoking area in
accordance with division (B) of this section.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3791.031)
§ 135.27 SPREADING CONTAGION.
   (A)   No person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the
person has a dangerous, contagious disease, shall knowingly fail to take
reasonable measures to prevent exposing self to other persons, except when
seeking medical aid.
   (B)   No person, having charge or care of a person whom the person having
charge or care knows or has reasonable cause to believe has a dangerous,
contagious disease, shall recklessly fail to take reasonable measures to
protect others from exposure to the contagion, and to inform health authorities
of the existence of the contagion.
   (C)   No person, having charge of a public conveyance or place of public
accommodation, amusement, resort, or trade, and knowing or having reasonable
cause to believe that persons using such conveyance or place have been or are
being exposed to a dangerous, contagious disease, shall negligently fail to
take reasonable measures to protect the public from exposure to the contagion,
and to inform health authorities of the existence of the contagion.
(R.C. § 3701.81)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
(R.C. § 3701.99(C))
Statutory reference:
   Contagion and quarantine, see R.C. §§ 3707.04 et seq.
   Power to prevent contagious diseases, see R.C. § 715.37
§ 135.28 ABUSE OF A CORPSE.
   (A)   No person, except as authorized by law, shall treat a human corpse in
a way that he or she knows would outrage reasonable family sensibilities.
   (B)   No person, except as authorized by law, shall treat a human corpse in
a way that would outrage reasonable community sensibilities.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of abuse of a
corpse, a misdemeanor of the second degree. Whoever violates division (B) of
this section is guilty of gross abuse of a corpse, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.01)
§ 135.29 MINORS CURFEW.
   (A)   No child under the age of 18 years shall be on the streets, sidewalks
or other public places in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00
a.m. of the following day, local time, unless exempted under division (E) of
this section.
   (B)   No parent, guardian or other person having the care, control or
custody of a minor child under the age of 18 years shall fail to keep such
child off the streets, sidewalks or other public places in the city between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, local time, unless
exempted under division (E) of this section.
   (C)   No adult person shall be in the company of any child under the age of
18 years on the streets or sidewalks or any public place in the city between
the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, local time, unless
such adult person has the permission from the parent or guardian to be in the
company of such child during such hours unless exempted under division (E) of
this section.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be dealt with in
accordance with Juvenile Court law and procedure. Whoever violates division (B)
or (C) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a first offense and
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for any subsequent offense unless exempted
under division (E) of this section.
   (E)   It is an exemption to a violation under this section that the person
engaged in the prohibited conduct while:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the discretion of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor’s presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with state law.
(Prior Code, § 636.21) (Ord. 92-17, passed 10-27-1992)
CHAPTER 136: OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
136.01   Definitions
   
136.02   Falsification
   
136.03   Compounding a crime
   
136.04   Failure to report a crime
   
136.05   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer
   
136.06   Obstructing official business
   
136.07   Obstructing justice
   
136.08   Resisting arrest
   
136.09   Having an unlawful interest in a public contract
   
136.10   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation
   
136.11   Dereliction of duty
   
136.12   Interfering with civil rights
   
136.13   Illegal conveyance of prohibited items onto grounds of a detention
facility or other specified governmental facilities
   
136.14   False report of child abuse or neglect
   
136.15   Assaulting police dog or horse, or assistance dog
   
136.16   Disclosure of confidential peace officer information
   
136.17   Intimidation of crime victim or witness
   
136.18   Using sham legal process
   
136.19   Making false allegation of peace officer misconduct
   
136.20   Misuse of 9-1-1 system
   
136.21   Failure to disclose personal information
   
136.22   Compliance with lawful order of police officer; fleeing
Cross-reference:
   Failure to comply with order or signal of a police officer, see §
70.02
Statutory reference:
   Escape from detention, see R.C. § 2921.34
   Harassment by inmates by causing or attempting to cause contact with blood,
semen, urine, feces or other bodily substance; knowledge of AIDS, hepatitis or
tuberculosis infection; felony offenses, see R.C. § 2921.38
§ 136.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   CONTRIBUTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   DETENTION. Arrest; confinement in any vehicle subsequent to an arrest;
confinement in any public or private facility for custody of persons charged
with or convicted of crime in this state or another state or under the laws of
the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or unruly child
in this state or another state or under the laws of the United States;
hospitalization, institutionalization, or confinement in any public or private
facility that is ordered pursuant to or under the authority of R.C. § 2945.37,
2945.371, 2945.38, 2945.39, 2945.40, 2945.401 or 2945.402; confinement in any
vehicle for transportation to or from any facility of any of those natures;
detention for extradition or deportation; except as provided in this division,
supervision by any employee of any facility of any of those natures that is
incidental to hospitalization, institutionalization, or confinement in the
facility but that occurs outside the facility; supervision by an employee of
the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction of a person on any type of
release from a state correctional institution; or confinement in any vehicle,
airplane, or place while being returned from outside of this state into this
state by a private person or entity pursuant to a contract entered into under
R.C. § 311.29(E) or R.C. § 5149.03(B). For a person confined in a county jail
who participates in a county jail industry program pursuant to R.C. § 5147.30,
the term includes time spent at an assigned work site and going to and from the
work site.
   DETENTION FACILITY. Any public or private place used for the confinement of
a person charged with or convicted of any crime in this state or another state
or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent
child or an unruly child in this state or another state or under the laws of
the United States.
   LEGISLATIVE CAMPAIGN FUND. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   OFFICIAL PROCEEDING. Any proceeding before a legislative, judicial,
administrative, or other governmental agency or official authorized to take
evidence under oath, and includes any proceeding before a referee, hearing
examiner, commissioner, notary, or other person taking testimony or a
deposition in connection with an official proceeding.
   PARTY OFFICIAL. Any person who holds an elective or appointive post in a
political party in the United States or this state, by virtue of which he or
she directs, conducts, or participates in directing or conducting party affairs
at any level of responsibility.
   POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   POLITICAL CONTRIBUTING ENTITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   POLITICAL PARTY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   PROVIDER AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
   PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Any elected or appointed officer, employee, or agent of the
state or any political subdivision thereof, whether in a temporary or permanent
capacity, and includes but is not limited to legislators, judges, and law
enforcement officers. The term does not include an employee, officer, or
governor-appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit
corporation formed under R.C. § 187.01.
   PUBLIC SERVANT.
      (1)   Any of the following:
         (a)   Any public official.
         (b)   Any person performing ad hoc a governmental function, including
but not limited to a juror, member of a temporary commission, master,
arbitrator, advisor, or consultant.
         (c)   A person who is a candidate for public office, whether or not he
or she is elected or appointed to the office for which he or she is a
candidate. A person is a candidate for purposes of this division if he or she
has been nominated according to law for election or appointment to public
office, or if he or she has filed a petition or petitions as required by law to
have his or her name placed on the ballot in a primary, general, or special
election, or if he or she campaigns as a write-in candidate in any primary,
general, or special election.
      (2)   The term does not include an employee, officer, or governor-
appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit corporation formed
under R.C. § 187.01.
   VALUABLE THING or VALUABLE BENEFIT. Includes but is not limited to a
contribution. This inclusion does not indicate or imply that a contribution was
not included in those terms before September 17, 1986.
(R.C. § 2921.01)
§ 136.02 FALSIFICATION.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly swear
or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, when any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The statement is made in any official proceeding.
      (2)   The statement is made with purpose to incriminate another.
      (3)   The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public official in
performing his or her official function.
      (4)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment of
unemployment compensation; Ohio Works First; prevention, retention and
contingency benefits and services; disability financial assistance; retirement
benefits or health care coverage from a state retirement system; economic
development assistance as defined in R.C. § 9.66; or other benefits
administered by a governmental agency or paid out of a public treasury.
      (5)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the issuance by a
governmental agency of a license, permit, authorization, certificate,
registration, release, or provider agreement.
      (6)   The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary public or
another person empowered to administer oaths.
      (7)   The statement is in writing on or in connection with a report or
return that is required or authorized by law.
      (8)   The statement is in writing, and is made with purpose to induce
another to extend credit to or employ the offender, or to confer any degree,
diploma, certificate of attainment, award of excellence, or honor on the
offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable
benefit or distinction, when the person to whom the statement is directed
relies upon it to his or her detriment.
      (9)   The statement is made with purpose to commit or facilitate the
commission of a theft offense.
      (10)   The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in connection
with any action, proceeding, or other matter within its jurisdiction, either
orally or in a written document, including but not limited to an application,
petition, complaint, or other pleading, or an inventory, account, or report.
      (11)   The statement is made on an account, form, record, stamp, label or
other writing that is required by law.
      (12)   The statement is made in connection with the purchase of a
firearm, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, and in conjunction with the furnishing
to the seller of the firearm of a fictitious or altered driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit, a fictitious or altered identification card, or any
other document that contains false information about the purchaser’s identity.
      (13)   The statement is made in a document or instrument of writing that
purports to be a judgment, lien, or claim of indebtedness and is filed or
recorded with the Secretary of State, a county recorder, or the clerk of a
court of record.
      (14)   The statement is made in an application filed with a county
sheriff pursuant to R.C. § 2923.125 in order to obtain or renew a concealed
handgun license or is made in an affidavit submitted to a county sheriff to
obtain a concealed handgun license on a temporary emergency basis under R.C. §
2923.1213.
      (15)   The statement is required under R.C. § 5743.71 in connection with
the person’s purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products in a delivery sale.
   (B)   No person, in connection with the purchase of a firearm as defined in
R.C. § 2923.11, shall knowingly furnish to the seller of the firearm a
fictitious or altered driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, a
fictitious or altered identification card, or any other document that contains
false information about the purchaser’s identity.
   (C)   No person, in an attempt to obtain a concealed handgun license under
R.C. § 2923.125, shall knowingly present to a sheriff a fictitious or altered
document that purports to be certification of the person’s competence in
handling a handgun as described in division (B)(3) of that section.
   (D)   It is no defense to a charge under division (A)(6) of this section
that the oath or affirmation was administered or taken in an irregular manner.
   (E)   If contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made by the
offender within the period of the statute of limitations for falsification, it
is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which statement was false, but
only that one or the other was false.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)
(5), (A)(6), (A)(7), (A)(8), (A)(10), (A)(11), (A)(13) or (A)(15) of this
section is guilty of falsification. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, falsification is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(9) of this section is guilty of
falsification in a theft offense. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, falsification in a theft offense is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the value of the property or services stolen is $1,000 or more,
falsification in a theft offense is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(12) or (B) of this section is guilty
of falsification to purchase a firearm, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (A)(14) or (C) of this section is guilty
of falsification to obtain a concealed handgun license, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section in removal
proceedings under R.C. § 319.26, 321.37, 507.13 or 733.78 is guilty of
falsification regarding a removal proceeding, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.13)
   (G)   (1)   No person who has knowingly failed to maintain proof of
financial responsibility in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101 shall produce any
document or present to a peace officer an electronic wireless communications
device that is displaying any text or images with the purpose to mislead a
peace officer upon the request of a peace officer for proof of financial
responsibility made in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101(D)(2).
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (G) is guilty of falsification, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4509.102)
(Prior Code, § 606.10)
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability for violations of this section, see R.C. § 2921.13(G)
§ 136.03 COMPOUNDING A CRIME.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly demand, accept, or agree to accept anything
of value in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon a pending
criminal prosecution.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section when both
of the following apply:
      (1)   The pending prosecution involved is for a violation of R.C. §
2913.02, 2913.11, 2913.21(B)(2), or 2913.47, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, of which the actor under this section was the victim.
      (2)   The thing of value demanded, accepted, or agreed to be accepted, in
consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon the prosecution, did not
exceed an amount that the actor reasonably believed due him or her as
restitution for the loss caused him or her by the offense.
   (C)   When a prosecuting witness abandons or agrees to abandon a prosecution
under division (B) of this section, the abandonment or agreement in no way
binds the state to abandoning the prosecution.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of compounding a crime, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.21) (Prior Code, § 606.11)
§ 136.04 FAILURE TO REPORT A CRIME.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) of this section, no
person, knowing that a felony has been or is being committed, shall knowingly
fail to report the information to law enforcement authorities.
      (2)   No person, knowing that a violation of R.C. § 2913.04(B) has been
or is being committed or that the person has received information derived from
such a violation, shall knowingly fail to report the violation to law
enforcement authorities.
   (B)   Except for conditions that are within the scope of division (E) of
this section, no person giving aid to a sick or injured person shall
negligently fail to report to law enforcement authorities any gunshot or stab
wound treated or observed by the person, or any serious physical harm to
persons that the person knows or has reasonable cause to believe resulted from
an offense of violence.
   (C)   No person who discovers the body or acquires the first knowledge of
the death of a person shall fail to report the death immediately to a physician
or advanced practice registered nurse whom the person knows to be treating the
deceased for a condition from which death at such time would not be unexpected,
or to a law enforcement officer, an ambulance service, an emergency squad, or
the coroner in a political subdivision in which the body is discovered, the
death is believed to have occurred, or knowledge concerning the death is
obtained. For purposes of this division, “advanced practice registered nurse”
does not include a certified registered nurse anesthetist.
   (D)   No person shall fail to provide upon request of the person to whom a
report required by division (C) of this section was made, or to any law
enforcement officer who has reasonable cause to assert the authority to
investigate the circumstances surrounding the death, any facts within his or
her knowledge that may have a bearing on the investigation of the death.
   (E)   (1)   As used in this section, BURN INJURY means any of the following:
         (a)   Second or third degree burns;
         (b)   Any burns to the upper respiratory tract or laryngeal edema due
to the inhalation of super- heated air;
         (c)   Any burn injury or wound that may result in death;
         (d)   Any physical harm to persons caused by or as the result of the
use of fireworks, novelties and trick noisemakers, and wire sparklers, as each
is defined by R.C. § 3743.01.
      (2)   No physician, nurse, physician assistant, or limited practitioner
who, outside a hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility, attends or
treats a person who has sustained a burn injury inflicted by an explosion or
other incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a
violent, malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury
immediately to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the
jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local
law enforcement authorities.
      (3)   No manager, superintendent, or other person in charge of a
hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility in which a person is attended
or treated for any burn injury inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary
device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent,
malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately
to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the jurisdiction in
which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement
authorities.
      (4)   No person who is required to report any burn injury under division
(E)(2) or (E)(3) of this section shall fail to file, within three working days
after attending or treating the victim, a written report of the burn injury
with the office of the State Fire Marshal. The report shall be made on a form
provided by the State Fire Marshal.
      (5)   Anyone participating in the making of reports under division (E) of
this section or anyone participating in a judicial proceeding resulting from
the reports is immune from any civil or criminal liability that otherwise might
be incurred or imposed as a result of such actions. Notwithstanding R.C. §
4731.22, the physician-patient relationship or advanced practice registered
nurse-patient relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding a
person’s burn injury or the cause of the burn injury in any judicial proceeding
resulting from a report submitted under division (E) of this section.
   (F)   (1)   No person who knows that a licensed medical professional has
committed an offense under R.C. Chapter 2907, a violation of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to such offense, or a substantially
equivalent criminal offense in another jurisdiction, against a patient of the
licensed medical professional shall fail to report such knowledge to law
enforcement authorities within 30 days of obtaining the knowledge.
      (2)   Except for a self-report or participation in the offense or
violation being reported, any person who makes a report within the 30-day
period provided in division (F)(1) of this section or any person who
participates in a judicial proceeding that results from such report is immune
from civil or criminal liability that otherwise might be incurred or imposed as
a result of making that report or participating in that proceeding so long as
the person is acting in good faith without fraud or malice.
      (3)   The physician-patient relationship or physician assistant-patient
relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding the person’s
knowledge of a licensed medical professional’s commission of an offense or
violation reported under division (F)(1) of this section, against that licensed
medical professional in any judicial proceeding resulting from a report made
under that division.
      (4)   As used in division (F) of this section, LICENSED MEDICAL
PROFESSIONAL has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
   (G)   (1)   Any doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine, hospital intern
or resident, nurse, psychologist, social worker, independent social worker,
social work assistant, licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed
professional counselor, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage
and family therapist who knows or has reasonable cause to believe that a
patient or client has been the victim of domestic violence, as defined in R.C.
§ 3113.31, shall note that knowledge or belief and the basis for it in the
patient’s or client’s records.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 4731.22, the physician-patient privilege or
advanced practice registered nurse-patient privilege shall not be a ground for
excluding any information regarding the report containing the knowledge or
belief noted under division (G)(1) of this section, and the information may be
admitted as evidence in accordance with the Rules of Evidence.
   (H)   Division (A) or (D) of this section does not require disclosure of
information, when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The information is privileged by reason of the relationship between
attorney and client; physician and patient; advanced practice registered nurse
and patient; licensed psychologist or licensed school psychologist and client;
licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed professional counselor,
independent social worker, social worker, independent marriage and family
therapist, or marriage and family therapist and client; member of the clergy,
rabbi, minister, or priest and any person communicating information
confidentially to the member of the clergy, rabbi, minister, or priest for a
religious counseling purpose of a professional character; husband and wife; or
a communications assistant and those who are a party to a telecommunications
relay service call.
      (2)   The information would tend to incriminate a member of the actor’s
immediate family.
      (3)   Disclosure of the information would amount to revealing a news
source, privileged under R.C. § 2739.04 or 2739.12.
      (4)   Disclosure of the information would amount to disclosure by a
member of the ordained clergy of an organized religious body of a confidential
communication made to that member of the clergy in that member’s capacity as a
member of the clergy by a person seeking the aid or counsel of that member of
the clergy.
      (5)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of the actor’s duties in connection with a bona fide
program of treatment or services for persons with drug dependencies or persons
in danger of drug dependence, which program is maintained or conducted by a
hospital, clinic, person, agency, or community addiction services provider
whose alcohol and drug addiction services are certified pursuant to R.C. §
5119.36.
      (6)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of the actor’s duties in connection with a bona fide
program for providing counseling services to victims of crimes that are
violations of R.C. § 2907.02 or R.C. § 2907.05 or to victims of felonious
sexual penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12. As used in this
division, “counseling services”
   (I)   No disclosure of information pursuant to this section gives rise to
any liability or recrimination for a breach of privilege or confidence.
   (J)   Whoever violates division (A), (B), or (F)(1) of this section is
guilty of failure to report a crime. Violation of division (A)(1) or (F)(1) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Violation of division (A)
(2) or (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (K)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty of
failure to report knowledge of a death, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (L)   (1)   Whoever negligently violates division (E) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever knowingly violates division (E) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (M)   As used in this section, NURSE includes an advanced practice
registered nurse, registered nurse, and licensed practical nurse.
(R.C. § 2921.22) (Prior Code, § 606.12)
§ 136.05 FAILURE TO AID A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law enforcement
officer, when called upon for assistance in preventing or halting the
commission of an offense, or in apprehending or detaining an offender, when the
aid can be given without a substantial risk of physical harm to the person
giving it.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to aid a law
enforcement officer, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2921.23) (Prior Code, § 606.13)
§ 136.06 OBSTRUCTING OFFICIAL BUSINESS.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to prevent,
obstruct, or delay the performance by a public official of any authorized act
within the public official’s official capacity, shall do any act that hampers
or impedes a public official in the performance of the public official’s lawful
duties.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing official
business. Except as otherwise provided in this division, obstructing official
business is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If a violation of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, obstructing official business is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.31) (Prior Code, § 606.14)
§ 136.07 OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension,
prosecution, conviction, or punishment of another for crime, or to assist
another to benefit from the commission of a crime, and no person, with purpose
to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, adjudication as a
delinquent child, or disposition of a child for an act that if committed by an
adult would be a crime or to assist a child to benefit from the commission of
an act that if committed by an adult would be a crime, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Harbor or conceal the other person or child.
      (2)   Provide the other person or child with money, transportation, a
weapon, a disguise, or other means of avoiding discovery or apprehension.
      (3)   Warn the other person or child of impending discovery or
apprehension.
      (4)   Destroy or conceal physical evidence of the crime or act, or induce
any person to withhold testimony or information or to elude legal process
summoning him or her to testify or supply evidence.
      (5)   Communicate false information to any person.
      (6)   Prevent or obstruct any person, by means of force, intimidation, or
deception, from performing any act to aid in the discovery, apprehension, or
prosecution of the other person or child.
   (B)   A person may be prosecuted for, and may be convicted of or adjudicated
a delinquent child for committing, a violation of division (A) of this section
regardless of whether the person or child aided ultimately is apprehended for,
is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is adjudicated a
delinquent child for committing the crime or act the person or child aided
committed. The crime or act the person or child aided committed shall be used
under division (C) of this section in determining the penalty for violation of
division (A) of this section, regardless of whether the person or child aided
ultimately is apprehended for, is charge with, is convicted of, pleads guilty
to, or is adjudicated a delinquent child for committing the crime or act the
person or child aided committed.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing justice.
      (1)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a misdemeanor or if
the act committed by the child aided would be a misdemeanor if committed by an
adult, obstructing justice is a misdemeanor of the same degree as the crime
committed by the person aided or a misdemeanor of the same degree that the act
committed by the child aided would be if committed by an adult.
      (2)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a felony or if the
act committed by the child aided would be a felony if committed by an adult, or
if the crime or act committed by the person or child aided is an act of
terrorism, obstructing justice is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      ACT OF TERRORISM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.21.
      ADULT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.
      CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.
      DELINQUENT CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
(R.C. § 2921.32) (Prior Code, § 606.15)
§ 136.08 RESISTING ARREST.
   (A)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of himself, herself or another.
   (B)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person and, during the course of or as a
result of the resistance or interference, cause physical harm to a law
enforcement officer.
   (C)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person if either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The offender, during the course of or as a result of the resistance
or interference, recklessly causes physical harm to a law enforcement officer
by means of a deadly weapon; or
      (2)   The offender, during the course of the resistance or interference,
brandishes a deadly weapon.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest. A
violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (E)   As used in this section, DEADLY WEAPON has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2923.11.
(R.C. § 2921.33) (Prior Code, § 606.16)
Statutory reference:
   Unlawful taking of deadly weapon from a law enforcement officer, felony
offense, see R.C. § 2911.01
§ 136.09 HAVING AN UNLAWFUL INTEREST IN A PUBLIC CONTRACT.
   (A)   No public official shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Authorize or employ the authority of the public official’s office
to secure authorization of any public contract in which the public official, a
member of the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s
business associates has an interest.
      (2)   Authorize or employ the authority or influence of the public
official’s office to secure the investment of public funds in any share, bond,
mortgage, or other security with respect to which the public official, a member
of the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s business
associates either has an interest, is an underwriter, or receives any
brokerage, origination, or servicing fees.
      (3)   During the public official’s term of office or within one year
thereafter, occupy any position of profit in the prosecution of a public
contract authorized by the public official or by a legislative body,
commission, or board of which the public official was a member at the time of
authorization, unless the contract was let by competitive bidding to the lowest
and best bidder.
      (4)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
entered into by or for the use of the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality with which the public official is connected.
      (5)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
that is not let by competitive bidding when required by law, and that involves
more than $150.
   (B)   In the absence of bribery or a purpose to defraud, a public official,
member of a public official’s family, or any of a public official’s business
associates shall not be considered as having an interest in a public contract
or the investment of public funds, if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The interest of that person is limited to owning or controlling
shares of the corporation, or being a creditor of the corporation or other
organization, that is the contractor on the public contract involved, or that
is the issuer of the security in which public funds are invested.
      (2)   The shares owned or controlled by that person do not exceed 5% of
the outstanding shares of the corporation, and the amount due that person as
creditor does not exceed 5% of the total indebtedness of the corporation or
other organization.
      (3)   That person, prior to the time the public contract is entered into,
files with the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality
involved, an affidavit giving that person’s exact status in connection with the
corporation or other organization.
   (C)   This section does not apply to a public contract in which a public
official, member of a public official’s family, or one of a public official’s
business associates has an interest, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies or
services for the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved.
      (2)   The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for the same or
lower cost, or are being furnished to the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality as part of a continuing course of dealing established
prior to the public official’s becoming associated with the political
subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality involved.
      (3)   The treatment accorded the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality is either preferential to or the same as that
accorded other customers or clients in similar transactions.
      (4)   The entire transaction is conducted at arm’s length, with full
knowledge by the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved, of the interest of the public official, member of the
public official’s family, or business associate, and the public official takes
no part in the deliberations or decision of the political subdivision or
governmental agency or instrumentality with respect to the public contract.
   (D)   Division (A)(4) of this section does not prohibit participation by a
public employee in any housing program funded by public monies if the public
employee otherwise qualifies for the program and does not use the authority or
influence of the public employee’s office or employment to secure benefits from
the program and if the monies are to be used on the primary residence of the
public employee. Such participation does not constitute an unlawful interest in
a public contract in violation of this section.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful interest
in a public contract. Violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Violation of division
(A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (F)   It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting attorney to
appoint assistants and employees in accordance with R.C. §§ 309.06 and
2921.421, or for a chief legal officer of a municipality or an official
designated as prosecutor in a municipality to appoint assistants and employees
in accordance with R.C. §§ 733.621 and 2921.421, or for a township law director
appointed under R.C. § 504.15 to appoint assistants and employees in accordance
with R.C. §§ 504.151 and 2921.421.
   (G)   Any public contract in which a public official, a member of the public
official’s family, or any of the public official’s business associates has an
interest in violation of this section is void and unenforceable. Any contract
securing the investment of public funds in which a public official, a member of
the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s business
associates has an interest, is an underwriter, or receives any brokerage,
origination or servicing fees and that was entered into in violation of this
section is void and unenforceable.
   (H)   As used in this section:
      CHIEF LEGAL OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 733.621.
      PUBLIC CONTRACT. Means any of the following:
         (a)   The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the purchase or
acquisition, of property or services by or for the use of the state or any of
its political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either,
including the employment of an individual by the state, any of its political
subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either.
         (b)   A contract for the design, construction, alteration, repair, or
maintenance of any public property.
(R.C. § 2921.42) (Prior Code, § 606.17)
Statutory reference:
   Assistants and employees of Prosecutors, Law Directors, and Solicitors, see
R.C. § 2921.421
§ 136.10 SOLICITING OR RECEIVING IMPROPER COMPENSATION.
   (A)   No public servant shall knowingly solicit or accept and no person
shall knowingly promise or give to a public servant either of the following:
      (1)   Any compensation, other than as allowed by R.C. § 102.03(G), (H),
(I), or other provisions of law, to perform the public servant’s official
duties, to perform any other act or service in the public servant’s public
capacity, for the general performance of the duties of the public servant’s
public office or public employment, or as a supplement to the public servant’s
public compensation.
      (2)   Additional or greater fees or costs than are allowed by law to
perform the public servant’s official duties.
   (B)   No public servant for the public servant’s own personal or business
use and no person for the person’s own personal or business use or for the
personal or business use of a public servant or party official, shall solicit
or accept anything of value in consideration of either of the following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment, or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion, or other
material aspects of employment.
   (C)   No person for the benefit of a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity shall coerce any contribution in consideration of either of the
following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment, or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion, or other
material aspects of employment.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting improper
compensation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (E)   A public servant who is convicted of a violation of this section is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or position of trust
in this state for a period of seven years from the date of conviction.
   (F)   Divisions (A), (B), and (C) of this section do not prohibit any person
from making voluntary contributions to a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity or prohibit a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign
fund, political action committee or political contributing entity from
accepting voluntary contributions.
(R.C. § 2921.43) (Prior Code, § 606.18)
§ 136.11 DERELICTION OF DUTY.
   (A)   No law enforcement officer shall negligently do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to serve a lawful warrant without delay.
      (2)   Fail to prevent or halt the commission of an offense or to
apprehend an offender, when it is in the law enforcement officer’s power to do
so alone or with available assistance.
   (B)   No law enforcement, ministerial, or judicial officer shall negligently
fail to perform a lawful duty in a criminal case or proceeding.
   (C)   No officer, having charge of a detention facility, shall negligently
do any of the following:
      (1)   Allow the detention facility to become littered or unsanitary.
      (2)   Fail to provide persons confined in the detention facility with
adequate food, clothing, bedding, shelter, and medical attention.
      (3)   Fail to control an unruly prisoner, or to prevent intimidation of
or physical harm to a prisoner by another.
      (4)   Allow a prisoner to escape.
      (5)   Fail to observe any lawful and reasonable regulation for the
management of the detention facility.
   (D)   No public official shall recklessly create a deficiency, incur a
liability, or expend a greater sum than is appropriated by the Legislative
Authority for the use in any one year of the department, agency, or institution
with which the public official is connected.
   (E)   No public servant shall recklessly fail to perform a duty expressly
imposed by law with respect to the public servant’s office, or recklessly do
any act expressly forbidden by law with respect to the public servant’s office.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of dereliction of duty, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (G)   Except as otherwise provided by law, a public servant who is a county
treasurer; county auditor; township fiscal officer; city auditor; city
treasurer; village fiscal officer; village clerk-treasurer; village clerk; in
the case of a municipal corporation having a charter that designates an officer
who, by virtue of the charter, has duties and functions similar to those of the
city or village officers referred to in this section, the officer so designated
by the charter; school district treasurer; fiscal officer of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314; treasurer of a science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics school established under R.C. Chapter 3326; or
fiscal officer of a college-preparatory boarding school established under R.C.
Chapter 3328 and is convicted of or pleads guilty to dereliction of duty is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or position of trust
in this state for four years following the date of conviction or of entry of
the plea, and is not entitled to hold any public office until any repayment or
restitution required by the court is satisfied.
   (H)   As used in this section, PUBLIC SERVANT includes the following:
      (1)   An officer or employee of a contractor as defined in R.C. § 9.08;
      (2)   A fiscal officer employed by the operator of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314 or by the operator of a college-preparatory
boarding school established under R.C. Chapter 3328.
(R.C. § 2921.44) (Prior Code, § 606.19)
§ 136.12 INTERFERING WITH CIVIL RIGHTS.
   (A)   No public servant, under color of the public servant’s office,
employment, or authority, shall knowingly deprive, or conspire or attempt to
deprive any person of a constitutional or statutory right.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interfering with civil
rights, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.45) (Prior Code, § 606.20)
Statutory reference:
   Restraining or confining pregnant children or pregnant women, see R.C. §
2152.75(B) and R.C. § 2901.10
§ 136.13 ILLEGAL CONVEYANCE OF PROHIBITED ITEMS ONTO GROUNDS OF A DETENTION
FACILITY OR OTHER SPECIFIED GOVERNMENTAL FACILITY.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly convey, or attempt to convey, onto the
grounds of a detention facility or of an institution, office building, or other
place that is under the control of the Department of Mental Health and
Addiction Services, the Department of Developmental Disabilities, the
Department of Youth Services, or the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction, any of the following items:
      (1)   Any deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance, as defined in R.C. §
2923.11, or any part of or ammunition for use in such deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   Any drug of abuse, as defined in R.C. § 3719.011.
      (3)   Any intoxicating liquor, as defined in R.C. § 4301.01, except for
small amounts of wine for sacramental purposes when the person engaging in the
specified conduct is a cleric, as defined in R.C. § 2317.02.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any person who conveys
or attempts to convey an item onto the grounds of a detention facility or of an
institution, office building, or other place under the control of the
Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services, the Department of
Developmental Disabilities, the Department of Youth Services, or the Department
of Rehabilitation and Correction, with written authorization of the person in
charge of the detention facility or the institution, office building, or other
place and in accordance with the written rules of the detention facility or the
institution, office building, or other place.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, to a prisoner who is temporarily released from confinement
for a work assignment, or to any patient in an institution under the control of
the Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services or the Department of
Developmental Disabilities, any item listed in division (A).
   (D)   No person shall knowingly deliver or attempt to deliver cash to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment.
   (E)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment a cellular telephone, two-way radio, or other
electronic communications device.
   (F)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(1)
of this section that the weapon or dangerous ordnance in question was being
transported in a motor vehicle for any lawful purpose, that it was not on the
actor’s person, and if the weapon or dangerous ordnance was a firearm, that it
was unloaded and was being carried in a closed package, box or case or in a
compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (C) of this
section that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from delivering the
item to the confined person, the child, the prisoner, or the patient and that
either of the following applies:
         (a)   The actor was permitted by the written rules of the detention
facility or the institution, office building, or other place to deliver the
item to the confined person or the patient.
         (b)   The actor was given written authorization by the person in
charge of the detention facility or the institution, office building, or other
place to deliver the item to the confined person or the patient.
   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section or commits a
violation of division (C) of this section involving any item listed in division
(A)(1) of this section is guilty of illegal conveyance of weapons onto the
grounds of a specified governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section or commits a
violation of division (C) of this section involving any drug of abuse is guilty
of illegal conveyance of drugs of abuse onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(3) of this section or commits a
violation of division (C) of this section involving any intoxicating liquor is
guilty of illegal conveyance of intoxicating liquor onto the grounds of a
specified governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of illegal
conveyance of cash onto the grounds of a detention facility, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (D) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, illegal conveyance of cash onto
the grounds of a detention facility is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of illegal
conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E)
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
illegal conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a detention
facility is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.36)
   (H)   The person in charge of a detention facility shall, on the grounds of
the detention facility, have the same power as a peace officer, as defined in
R.C. § 2935.01, to arrest a person who violates this section.
(R.C. § 2921.37)
(Prior Code, § 612.09)
Cross-reference:
   Possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety
zone, see §
137.11
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, see §
137.12
Statutory reference:
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance on school
premises, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122
   Conveyance, possession, or control of deadly weapon or dangerous ordinance
in a courthouse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.123
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offense, see R.C.
§ 2923.131
§ 136.14 FALSE REPORT OF CHILD ABUSE OR NEGLECT.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make or cause another person to make a false
report under R.C. § 2151.421(B) alleging that any person has committed an act
or omission that resulted in a child being an abused child as defined in R.C. §
2151.031 or a neglected child as defined in R.C. § 2151.03.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or causing a false
report of child abuse or child neglect, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.14) (Prior Code, § 606.105)
§ 136.15 ASSAULTING POLICE DOG OR HORSE, OR ASSISTANCE DOG.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
a police dog or horse in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in
the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical harm
is caused or attempted.
      (2)   The police dog or horse is not assisting a law enforcement officer
in the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical
harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog
or horse is a police dog or horse.
   (B)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike a police dog or horse;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at a police dog or horse;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct a police dog or horse, or interfere with
or obstruct a law enforcement officer who is being assisted by a police dog or
horse, in a manner that does any of the following:
         (a)   Inhibits or restricts the law enforcement officer’s control of
the police dog or horse;
         (b)   Deprives the law enforcement officer of control of the police
dog or horse;
         (c)   Releases the police dog or horse from its area of control;
         (d)   Enters the area of control of the police dog or horse without
the consent of the law enforcement officer, including placing food or any other
object or substance into that area;
         (e)   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the police dog or horse to
assist a law enforcement officer;
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to a police dog or horse;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger a police dog or horse that at the time of the conduct, the
police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance
of the officer’s duties or that the person knows is a police dog or horse.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
an assistance dog in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The dog, at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, is
assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment.
      (2)   The dog, at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, is
not assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment, but the offender has actual knowledge that
the dog is an assistance dog.
   (D)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike an assistance dog;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at an assistance dog;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct an assistance dog, or interfere with or
obstruct a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a person with a
mobility impairment who is being assisted or served by an assistance dog, in a
manner that does any of the following:
         (a)   Inhibits or restricts the assisted or served person’s control of
the dog;
         (b)   Deprives the assisted or served person of control of the dog;
         (c)   Releases the dog from its area of control;
         (d)   Enters the area of control of the dog without the consent of the
assisted or served person, including placing food or any other object or
substance into that area;
         (e)   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the dog to assist the
assisted or served person;
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to an assistance dog;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger an assistance dog that at the time of the conduct is
assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment or that the person knows is an assistance
dog.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
assaulting a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. If the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse
other than death or serious physical harm, assaulting a police dog or horse is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death, assaulting a police
dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
harassing a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided this division,
harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse but does not
result in its death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing a police dog
or horse is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in
serous physical harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death,
harassing a police dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
assaulting an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog other than death or
serious physical harm, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the
assistance dog or results in its death, assaulting an assistance dog is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of
harassing an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog but does not result in
the death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing an assistance dog is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the assistance dog or results in its death, harassing an assistance dog
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   In addition to any other sanctions or penalty imposed for the
offense under this section, R.C. Chapter 2929 or any other provision of the
Ohio Revised Code or this code, whoever violates division (A), (B), (C), or (D)
of this section is responsible for the payment of all of the following:
         (a)   Any veterinary bill or bill for medication incurred as a result
of the violation by the police department regarding a violation of division (A)
or (B) of this section or by the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired
or the person with a mobility impairment assisted or served by the assistance
dog regarding a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section;
         (b)   The cost of any damaged equipment that results from the
violation;
         (c)   If the violation did not result in the death of the police dog
or horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation and if, as
a result of that dog or horse being the subject of the violation, the dog or
horse needs further training or retraining to be able to continue in the
capacity of a police dog or horse or an assistance dog, the cost of any further
training or retraining of that dog or horse by a law enforcement officer or by
the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or the person with a
mobility impairment assisted or served by the assistance dog;
         (d)   If the violation resulted in the death of the assistance dog
that was the subject of the violation or resulted in serious physical harm to
the police dog or horse or the assistance dog or horse that was the subject of
the violation to the extent that the dog or horse needs to be replaced on
either a temporary or a permanent basis, the cost of replacing that dog or
horse and of any further training of a new police dog or horse or a new
assistance dog by a law enforcement officer or by the person who is blind,
deaf, or hearing impaired or the person with a mobility impairment assisted or
served by the assistance dog, which replacement or training is required because
of the death of or the serious physical harm to the dog or horse that was the
subject of the violation.
   (F)   This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian whose conduct
is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4741.
   (G)   This section only applies to an offender who knows or should know at
the time of the violation that the police dog or horse or assistance dog that
is the subject of a violation under this section is a police dog or horse or an
assistance dog.
   (H)   As used in this section:
      ASSISTANCE DOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
      BLIND. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
      PERSON WITH A MOBILITY IMPAIRMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
955.011.
      PHYSICAL HARM. Means any injury, illness, or other psychological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
      POLICE DOG OR HORSE. Means a dog or horse that has been trained and may
be used to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their official
duties.
      SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death.
         (b)   Any physical harm that causes permanent maiming or that involves
some temporary, substantial maiming.
         (c)   Any physical harm that causes acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering.
(R.C. § 2921.321) (Prior Code, § 642.08)
§ 136.16 DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL PEACE OFFICER INFORMATION.
   (A)   No officer or employee of a law enforcement agency or court, or of the
clerk’s office of any court, shall disclose during the pendency of any criminal
case the home address of any peace officer, parole officer, prosecuting
attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or youth
services employee who is a witness or arresting officer in the case.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not prohibit a peace officer, parole
officer, prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional
employee, or youth services employee from disclosing the peace officer’s,
parole officer’s, prosecuting attorney’s, assistant prosecuting attorney’s,
correctional employee’s, or youth services employee’s own home address, and
does not apply to any person who discloses the home address of a peace officer,
parole officer, prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney,
correctional employee, or youth services employee pursuant to a court-ordered
disclosure under division (C) of this section.
   (C)   The court in which any criminal case is pending may order the
disclosure of the home address of any peace officer, parole officer,
prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or
youth services employee who is a witness or arresting officer in the case, if
the court determines after a written request for the disclosure that good cause
exists for disclosing the home address of the peace officer, parole officer,
prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or
youth services employee.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of disclosure
of confidential information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2921.24)
   (E)   No judge of a court of record, or Mayor presiding over a Mayor’s
Court, shall order a peace officer, parole officer, prosecuting attorney,
assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or youth services
employee who is a witness in a criminal case, to disclose the peace officer’s,
parole officer’s, prosecuting attorney’s, assistant prosecuting attorney’s,
correctional employee’s, or youth services employee’s home address during the
peace officer’s, parole officer’s, prosecuting attorney’s, assistant
prosecuting attorney’s, correctional employee’s, or youth services employee’s
examination in the case unless the judge or Mayor determines that the defendant
has a right to the disclosure.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
      CORRECTIONAL EMPLOYEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 149.43.
      YOUTH SERVICES EMPLOYEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 149.43.
(R.C. § 2921.25)
§ 136.17 INTIMIDATION OF CRIME VICTIM OR WITNESS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly attempt to intimidate or hinder the victim
of a crime or delinquent act in the filing or prosecution of criminal charges
or a delinquent child action or proceeding, and no person shall knowingly
attempt to intimidate a witness to a criminal or delinquent act by reason of
the person being a witness to that act.
   (B)   No person, knowingly and by force or by unlawful threat of harm to any
person or property or by unlawful threat to commit any offense or calumny
against any person, shall attempt to influence, intimidate, or hinder any of
the following persons:
      (1)   The victim of a crime or delinquent act in the filing or
prosecution of criminal charges or a delinquent child action or proceeding;
      (2)   A witness to a criminal or delinquent act by reason of the person
being a witness to that act;
      (3)   An attorney by reason of the attorney’s involvement in any criminal
or delinquent child action or proceeding.
   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any person who is
attempting to resolve a dispute pertaining to the alleged commission of a
criminal offense, either prior to or subsequent to the filing of a complaint,
indictment, or information by participating in the arbitration, mediation,
compromise, settlement or conciliation of that dispute pursuant to an
authorization for arbitration, mediation, compromise, settlement, or
conciliation of a dispute of that nature that is conferred by any of the
following:
      (1)   A section of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (2)   The Rules of Criminal Procedure, the Rules of Superintendence for
Municipal Courts and County Courts, the Rules of Superintendence for Courts of
Common Pleas, or another rule adopted by the Ohio Supreme Court in accordance
with Ohio Constitution, Article IV, Section 5.
      (3)   A local rule of court, including but not limited to a local rule of
court that relates to alternative dispute resolution or other case management
programs and that authorizes the referral of disputes pertaining to the alleged
commission of certain types of criminal offenses to appropriate and available
arbitration, mediation, compromise, settlement or other conciliation programs.
      (4)   The order of a judge of a municipal court, county court, or court
of common pleas.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of intimidation of an
attorney, victim or witness in a criminal case. A violation of division (A) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. A violation of division (B)
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (E)   As used in this section, WITNESS means any person who has or claims to
have knowledge concerning a fact or facts concerning a criminal or delinquent
act, whether or not criminal or delinquent child charges are actually filed.
(R.C. § 2921.04)
Statutory reference:
   Retaliation, felony offense, see R.C. § 2921.05
§ 136.18 USING SHAM LEGAL PROCESS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      LAWFULLY ISSUED. Means adopted, issued, or rendered in accordance with
the United States Constitution, the Constitution of a state, and the applicable
statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances of the United States, a state, and
the political subdivisions of a state.
      POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS. Means municipal corporations, townships,
counties, school districts, and all other bodies corporate and politic that are
organized under state law and are responsible for governmental activities only
in geographical areas smaller than that of a state.
      SHAM LEGAL PROCESS. Means an instrument that meets all of the following
conditions:
         (a)   It is not lawfully issued.
         (b)   It purports to do any of the following:
            1.   To be a summons, subpoena, judgment, or order of a court, a
law enforcement officer, or a legislative, executive or administrative body.
            2.   To assert jurisdiction over or determine the legal or
equitable status, rights, duties, powers, or privileges of any person or
property.
            3.   To require or authorize the search, seizure, indictment,
arrest, trial, or sentencing of any person or property.
         (c)   It is designed to make another person believe that it is
lawfully issued.
      STATE. Means a state of the United States, including without limitation
the state legislature, the highest court of the state that has statewide
jurisdiction, the offices of all elected state officers, and all departments,
boards, offices, commissions, agencies, institutions, and other
instrumentalities of the state. The term does not include the political
subdivisions of the state.
   (B)   No person shall, knowing the sham legal process to be a sham legal
process, do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly issue, display, deliver, distribute, or otherwise use
sham legal process.
      (2)   Knowingly use sham legal process to arrest, detain, search or seize
any person or the property of another person.
      (3)   Knowingly commit or facilitate the commission of an offense using
sham legal process.
      (4)   Knowingly commit a felony by using sham legal process.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B)(1) or (B)
(2) of this section that the use of sham legal process was for a lawful
purpose.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using sham legal process. A
violation of division (B)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. A violation of division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the purpose of a violation of
division (B)(3) of this section is to commit or facilitate the commission of a
felony, a violation of division (B)(3) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (B)(4) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.52(A) - (D)) (Prior Code, § 606.27)
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability, see R.C. § 2921.52(E)
§ 136.19 MAKING FALSE ALLEGATION OF PEACE OFFICER MISCONDUCT.
   (A)   As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2935.01.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly file a complaint against a peace officer
that alleges that the peace officer engaged in misconduct in the performance of
the officer’s duties if the person knows that the allegation is false.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of making a
false allegation of peace officer misconduct, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2921.15)
§ 136.20 MISUSE OF 9-1-1 SYSTEM.
   (A)   As used in this section, 9-1-1 SYSTEM means a system through which
individuals can request emergency service using the access number 9-1-1.
(R.C. § 128.01(A))
   (B)   No person shall knowingly use the telephone number of a 9-1-1 system
established under R.C. Chapter 128 to report an emergency if the person knows
that no emergency exists.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly use a 9-1-1 system for a purpose other than
obtaining emergency service.
   (D)   No person shall disclose or use any information concerning telephone
numbers, addresses, or names obtained from the database that serves the public
safety answering point of a 9-1-1 system established under R.C. Chapter 128,
except for any of the following purposes or under any of the following
circumstances:
      (1)   For the purpose of the 9-1-1 system;
      (2)   For the purpose of responding to an emergency call to an emergency
service provider;
      (3)   In the circumstance of the inadvertent disclosure of such
information due solely to technology of the wireless telephone network portion
of the 9-1-1 system not allowing access to the database to be restricted to 9-
1-1 specific answering lines at a public safety answering point;
      (4)   In the circumstance of access to a database being given by a
telephone company that is a wireless service provider to a public utility or
municipal utility in handling customer calls in times of public emergency or
service outages. The charge, terms, and conditions for the disclosure or use of
such information for the purpose of such access to a database shall be subject
to the jurisdiction of the Steering Committee;
      (5)   In the circumstance of access to a database given by a telephone
company that is a wireline service provider to a state and local government in
warning of a public emergency, as determined by the Steering Committee. The
charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of that information for
the purpose of access to a database is subject to the jurisdiction of the
Steering Committee.
(R.C. § 128.96(F) - (H))
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 128.99(A), (B)) (Prior Code, § 606.29)
§ 136.21 FAILURE TO DISCLOSE PERSONAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   No person who is in a public place shall refuse to disclose the
person’s name, address, or date of birth, when requested by a law enforcement
officer who reasonably suspects either of the following:
      (1)   The person is committing, has committed, or is about to commit a
criminal offense.
      (2)   The person witnessed any of the following:
         (a)   An offense of violence that would constitute a felony under the
laws of this state;
         (b)   A felony offense that causes or results in, or creates a
substantial risk of, serious physical harm to another person or property;
         (c)   Any attempt or conspiracy to commit, or complicity in
committing, any offenses identified in division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of this
section;
         (d)   Any conduct reasonably indicating that any offense identified in
division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of this section or any attempt, conspiracy, or
complicity described in division (A)(2)(c) of this section has been, is being,
or is about to be committed.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of failure to
disclose one’s personal information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (C)   Nothing in division (A) of this section requires a person to answer
any questions beyond that person’
   (D)   It is not a violation of division (A) of this section to refuse to
answer a question that would reveal a person’s age or date of birth if age is
an element of the crime that the person is suspected of committing.
(R.C. § 2921.29)
   (E)   No person entering an airport, train station, port, or other similar
critical transportation infrastructure site shall refuse to show identification
when requested by a law enforcement officer when there is a threat to security
and the law enforcement officer is requiring identification of all persons
entering the site.
   (F)   A law enforcement officer may prevent any person who refuses to show
identification when asked under the circumstances described in division (E) of
this section from entering the critical transportation infrastructure site.
(R.C. § 2909.31)
(Prior Code, § 606.28)
§ 136.22 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWFUL ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER; FLEEING.
   (A)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any police officer invested with authority to direct, control or regulate
traffic.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to elude or
flee a police officer after receiving a visible or audible signal from a police
officer to bring the person’s motor vehicle to a stop.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to comply
with an order or signal of a police officer.
      (2)   A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (C)(4) and (C)(5) of this section,
a violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (C)(5) of this section, a violation
of division (B) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier of fact finds by proof
beyond a reasonable doubt that in committing the offense, the offender was
fleeing immediately after the commission of a felony.
      (5)   (a)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a felony and
shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier
of fact finds any of the following by proof beyond a reasonable doubt:
            1.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender was a
proximate cause of serious physical harm to persons or property; or
            2.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender caused a
substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or property.
         (b)   If a police officer pursues an offender who is violating
division (B) of this section and division (C)(5)(a) of this section applies,
the sentencing court, in determining the seriousness of an offender’s conduct
for purposes of sentencing the offender for a violation of division (B) of this
section, shall consider, along with the factors set forth in R.C. §§ 2929.12
and 2929.13 that are required to be considered, all of the following:
            1.   The duration of the pursuit;
            2.   The distance of the pursuit;
            3.   The rate of speed at which the offender operated the motor
vehicle during the pursuit;
            4.   Whether the offender failed to stop for traffic lights or stop
signs during the pursuit;
            5.   The number of traffic lights or stop signs for which the
offender failed to stop during the pursuit;
            6.   Whether the offender operated the motor vehicle during the
pursuit without lighted lights during a time when lighted lights are required;
            7.   Whether the offender committed a moving violation during the
pursuit;
            8.   The number of moving violations the offender committed during
the pursuit; or
            9.   Any other relevant factors indicating that the offender’s
conduct is more serious than conduct normally constituting the offense.
   (D)   In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of division
(A) of this section or a misdemeanor violation of division (B) of this section,
the court shall impose a class five suspension from the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(5). If the offender previously has been found guilty of an offense
under this section or under R.C. § 2921.331 or any other substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, in addition to any other sanction imposed for
the offense, the court shall impose a class one suspension as described in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(1). The court may grant limited driving privileges to the offender
on a suspension imposed for a misdemeanor violation of this section as set
forth in R.C. § 4510.021. No judge shall suspend any portion of the suspension
under a class one suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege
required by this division.
   (E)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      MOVING VIOLATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2743.70.
      POLICE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F)) (Prior Code, § 606.165)
CHAPTER 137: WEAPONS CONTROL
Section
   
137.01   Definitions
   
137.02   Carrying concealed weapons
   
137.03   Using weapons while intoxicated
   
137.04   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle
   
137.05   Possessing criminal tools
   
137.06   Failure to secure dangerous ordnance
   
137.07   Unlawful transactions in weapons
   
137.08   Underage purchase of firearm or handgun
   
137.09   Pointing and discharging firearms and other weapons
   
137.10   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance
   
137.11   Possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school
safety zone
   
137.12   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention
   
137.13   Concealed handgun licenses: possession of a revoked or suspended
license; additional restrictions; posting of signs prohibiting possession
   
137.14   Defaced firearms
   
137.15   Discharge of firearms; hunting
Cross-reference:
   Conveyance into certain facilities, see §
136.13
   Fireworks, see
Ch. 95
   Injury to persons by hunters, see §
135.05
   Injury to property by hunters, see §
131.24
   Using weapons to endanger or damage aircraft or airport operations, see §
131.05
Statutory reference:
   Return of surrendered firearms by law enforcement, see R.C. § 2923.163
§ 137.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTIVE DUTY. Has the same meaning as defined in 10 U.S.C. § 101.
   ALIEN REGISTRATION NUMBER. The number issued by the United States
Citizenship and Immigration Services Agency that is located on the alien’s
permanent resident card and may also be commonly referred to as the “USCIS
number” or the “alien number”.
   AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a
succession of cartridges with a single function of the trigger.
   BALLISTIC KNIFE. A knife with a detachable blade that is propelled by a
spring-operated mechanism.
   CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED HANDGUN.
      (1)   Means, subject to division (2) of this definition, a license or
temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun issued under R.C. §
2923.125 or R.C. § 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed handgun issued
by another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
      (2)   A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed handgun
license issued under R.C. § 2923.125 or a license to carry a concealed handgun
issued under R.C. § 2923.125 means only a license of the type that is specified
in that section. A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed
handgun license issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, a license to carry a concealed
handgun issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, or a license to carry a concealed
handgun on a temporary emergency basis means only a license of the type that is
specified in R.C. § 2923.1213. A reference in any provision of this Code to a
concealed handgun license issued by another state or a license to carry a
concealed handgun issued by another state means only a license issued by
another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
      (1)   Any of the following, except as provided in division (2) of this
definition:
         (a)   Any automatic or sawed-off firearm, zip-gun, or ballistic knife.
         (b)   Any explosive device or incendiary device.
         (c)   Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitrostarch, PETN, cyclonite,
TNT, picric acid, and other high explosives; amatol, tritonal, tetrytol,
pentolite, pecretol, cyclotol, and other high explosive compositions; plastic
explosives; dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin dynamite, sensitized ammonium
nitrate, liquid-oxygen blasting explosives, blasting powder, and other blasting
agents; and any other explosive substance having sufficient brisance or power
to be particularly suitable for use as a military explosive, or for use in
mining, quarrying, excavating, or demolitions.
         (d)   Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery piece, grenade,
mine, bomb, torpedo, or similar weapon, designed and manufactured for military
purposes, and the ammunition for that weapon.
         (e)   Any firearm muffler or suppressor.
         (f)   Any combination of parts that is intended by the owner for use
in converting any firearm or other device into a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   The term does not include any of the following:
         (a)   Any firearm, including a military weapon and the ammunition for
that weapon, and regardless of its actual age, that employs a percussion cap or
other obsolete ignition system, or that is designed and safe for use only with
black powder.
         (b)   Any pistol, rifle, or shotgun, designed or suitable for sporting
purposes, including a military weapon as issued or as modified, and the
ammunition for that weapon, unless the firearm is an automatic or sawed-off
firearm.
         (c)   Any cannon or other artillery piece that, regardless of its
actual age, is of a type in accepted use prior to 1887, has no mechanical,
hydraulic, pneumatic, or other system for absorbing recoil and returning the
tube into battery without displacing the carriage, and is designed and safe for
use only with black powder.
         (d)   Black powder, priming quills, and percussion caps possessed and
lawfully used to fire a cannon of a type defined in division (2)(c) of this
definition during displays, celebrations, organized matches or shoots, and
target practice, and smokeless and black powder, primers, and percussion caps
possessed and lawfully used as a propellant or ignition device in small-arms or
small-arms ammunition.
         (e)   Dangerous ordnance that is inoperable or inert and cannot
readily be rendered operable or activated, and that is kept as a trophy,
souvenir, curio, or museum piece.
         (f)   Any device that is expressly excepted from the definition of a
destructive device pursuant to the Gun Control Act of 1968, 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)
(4), as amended, and regulations issued under that act.
         (g)   Any firearm with an overall length of at least 26 inches that is
approved for sale by the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and
Explosives under the “Gun Control Act of 1968”, 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. § 921
(a)(3), but that is found by the Bureau not to be regulated under the “National
Firearms Act”, 68A Stat. 725 (1934), 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).
   DEADLY WEAPON. Any instrument, device, or thing capable of inflicting death,
and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon, or possessed, carried,
or used as a weapon.
   EXPLOSIVE. Any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or common
purpose of which is to function by explosion. The term includes all materials
that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division 1.3, or
division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of Transportation in
its regulations and includes but is not limited to dynamite, black powder,
pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps, electric blasting caps,
safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant fuses, instantaneous
fuses, and igniter cords and igniters. The term does not include “fireworks”,
as defined in R.C. § 3743.01, or any substance or material otherwise meeting
the definition of explosive set forth in this section that is manufactured,
sold, possessed, transported, stored, or used in any activity described in R.C.
§ 3743.80, provided the activity is conducted in accordance with all applicable
laws, rules, and regulations, including but not limited to the provisions of
R.C. § 3743.80 and the rules of the Fire Marshal adopted pursuant to R.C. §
3737.82.
   EXPLOSIVE DEVICE. Any device designed or specially adapted to cause physical
harm to persons or property by means of an explosion, and consisting of an
explosive substance or agency and a means to detonate it. The term includes
without limitation any bomb, any explosive demolition device, any blasting cap
or detonator containing an explosive charge, and any pressure vessel that has
been knowingly tampered with or arranged so as to explode.
   FIREARM.
      (1)   Any deadly weapon capable of expelling or propelling one or more
projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible propellant. The term
includes an unloaded firearm, and any firearm that is inoperable but that can
readily be rendered operable.
      (2)   When determining whether a firearm is capable of expelling or
propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible
propellant, the trier of fact may rely upon circumstantial evidence, including
but not limited to the representations and actions of the individual exercising
control over the firearm.
   HANDGUN. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be held and
fired by the use of a single hand;
      (2)   Any combination of parts from which a firearm of a type described
in division (1) of this definition can be assembled.
   INCENDIARY DEVICE. Any firebomb, and any device designed or specially
adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of fire, and
consisting of an incendiary substance or agent and a means to ignite it.
   MISDEMEANOR PUNISHABLE BY IMPRISONMENT FOR A TERM EXCEEDING ONE YEAR. The
phrase does not include any of the following:
      (1)   Any federal or state offense pertaining to antitrust violations,
unfair trade practices, restraints of trade, or other similar offenses relating
to the regulation of business practices;
      (2)   Any misdemeanor offense punishable by a term of imprisonment of two
years or less.
   SAWED-OFF FIREARM. A shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches long, or a
rifle with a barrel less than 16 inches long, or a shotgun or rifle less than
26 inches long overall. “Sawed-off firearm” does not include any firearm with
an overall length of at least 26 inches that is approved for sale by the
Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives under the “Gun
Control Act of 1968”, 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(3), but that is found
by the Bureau not to be regulated under the “National Firearms Act”, 68A Stat.
725 (1934), 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).
   SEMI-AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a
single cartridge and automatically chamber a succeeding cartridge ready to
fire, with a single function of the trigger.
   VALID CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or VALID LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED
HANDGUN. A concealed handgun license that is currently valid, that is not under
a suspension under R.C. § 2923.128(A)(1), under R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a
suspension provision of the state other than this state in which the license
was issued, and that has not been revoked under R.C. § 2923.128(B)(1), under
R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a revocation provision of the state other than this
state in which the license was issued.
   ZIP-GUN. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm of crude and extemporized manufacture.
      (2)   Any device, including without limitation a starter’s pistol, not
designed as a firearm, but that is specially adapted for use as a firearm.
      (3)   Any industrial tool, signaling device, or safety device, not
designed as a firearm, but that as designed is capable of use as such, when
possessed, carried, or used as a firearm.
(R.C. § 2923.11) (Prior Code § 672.01)
§ 137.02 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly carry or have, concealed on the person’s
person or concealed ready at hand, any of the following:
      (1)   A deadly weapon other than a handgun;
      (2)   A handgun other than a dangerous ordnance;
      (3)   A dangerous ordnance.
   (B)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license shall do any
of the following:
      (1)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, before or at the time a law enforcement officer
asks if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to disclose
that the person then is carrying a concealed handgun, provided that it is not a
violation of this division if the person fails to disclose that fact to an
officer during the stop and the person already has notified another officer of
that fact during the same stop;
      (2)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins approaching
the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless
the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer;
      (3)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose, if the
person is carrying a concealed handgun, and if the person is approached by any
law enforcement officer while stopped, knowingly remove or attempt to remove
the loaded handgun from the holster, pocket, or other place in which the person
is carrying it, knowingly grasp or hold the loaded handgun, or knowingly have
contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with the person’s hands or
fingers at any time after the law enforcement officer begins approaching and
before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the person removes, attempts
to remove, grasps, holds, or has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to
and in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer;
      (4)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any
lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the person is stopped,
including but not limited to a specific order to the person to keep the
person’s hands in plain sight.
   (C)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or to a law enforcement officer, who is authorized to carry
concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry handguns and
is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         (b)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry
handguns, and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C.
§ 109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly
specified that the exemption provided in this division (C)(1)(b) does not apply
to the person;
         (c)   A person’s transportation or storage of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in a motor vehicle for any
lawful purpose if the firearm is not on the actor’s person;
         (d)   A person’s storage or possession of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in the actor’s own home for any
lawful purpose.
      (2)   Division (A)(2) of this section does not apply to any person who
has been issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time of the
alleged carrying or possession of a handgun or who, at the time of the alleged
carrying or possession of a handgun, is an active duty member of the armed
forces of the United States and is carrying a valid military identification
card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets
or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), unless
the person knowingly is in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(1) of this
section of carrying or having control of a weapon other than a handgun and
other than a dangerous ordnance, that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by
law from having the weapon, and that any of the following applies:
      (1)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in or was going to or from the
actor’s lawful business or occupation, which business or occupation was of a
character or was necessarily carried on in a manner or at a time or place as to
render the actor particularly susceptible to criminal attack, such as would
justify a prudent person in going armed.
      (2)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in a lawful activity and had
reasonable cause to fear a criminal attack upon the actor, a member of the
actor’s family, or the actor’s home, such as would justify a prudent person in
going armed.
      (3)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for any
lawful purpose and while in the actor’s own home.
   (E)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of this section shall
be required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a condition for the
dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to, or
has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B)(1) of this section as it
existed prior to June 13, 2022, the person may file an application under R.C. §
2953.35 requesting the expungement of the record of conviction.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of carrying concealed
weapons. Except as otherwise provided in this division or divisions (F)(2), (F)
(6), and (F)(7) of this section, carrying concealed weapons in violation of
division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Except as
otherwise provided in this division or divisions (F)(2), (F)(6), and (F)(7) of
this section, if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance
or of any offense of violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is
either loaded or for which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the
weapon involved is dangerous ordnance, carrying concealed weapons in violation
of division (A) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. Except as otherwise provided in divisions (F)(2), (F)(6), and (F)(7)
of this section, if the offense is committed aboard an aircraft, or with
purpose to carry a concealed weapon aboard an aircraft, regardless of the
weapon involved, carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (A) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A person shall not be arrested for a violation of division (A)(2)
of this section solely because the person does not promptly produce a valid
concealed handgun license. If a person is arrested for a violation of division
(A)(2) of this section and is convicted of or pleads guilty to the violation,
the offender shall be punished as follows:
         (a)   The offender shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor if both of
the following apply:
            1.   Within 10 days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license, which license was valid at the time of the arrest to
the law enforcement agency that employs the arresting officer.
            2.   At the time of the arrest, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
         (b)   The offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined
$500 if all of the following apply:
            1.   The offender previously had been issued a concealed handgun
license, and that license expired within the two years immediately preceding
the arrest.
            2.   Within 45 days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license to the law enforcement agency that employed the
arresting officer, and the offender waives in writing the offender’s right to a
speedy trial on the charge of the violation that is provided in R.C. § 2945.71.
            3.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
not knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
         (c)   If divisions (F)(2)(a) and (F)(2)(b) and (F)(6) of this section
do not apply, the offender shall be punished under division (F)(1) or (F)(7) of
this section.
      (3)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(1) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(2) or (B)
(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of division (B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section, the offender’s concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2).
      (5)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(3) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (6)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (A)(2) of
this section is an active duty m ember of the armed forces of the United States
and is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of
successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), and if at the time of the
violation the person was not knowingly in a place described in R.C. 2923.126
(B), the officer shall not arrest the person for a violation of that division.
If the person is not able to promptly produce a valid military identification
card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets
or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) and if
the person is not in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B), the officer shall
issue a citation and the offender shall be assessed a civil penalty of not more
than $500. The citation shall be automatically dismissed and the civil penalty
shall not be assessed if both of the following apply:
         (a)   Within ten days after the issuance of the citation, the offender
presents a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), which were both valid at the time of the
issuance of the citation to the law enforcement agency that employs the citing
officer.
         (b)   At the time of the citation, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
      (7)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (A)(2) of
this section is knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B)(5) and is
not authorized to carry a handgun or have a handgun concealed on the person’s
person or concealed ready at hand under that division, the penalty shall be as
follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person
produces a valid concealed handgun license within ten days after the arrest and
has not previously been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(A)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a minor misdemeanor;
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A)
(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
         (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division
(A)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree;
         (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of
division (A)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, or convicted of or pleaded guilty to any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is a
dangerous ordnance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (G)   If a law enforcement officer stops a person to question the person
regarding a possible violation of this section, for a traffic stop, or for any
other law enforcement purpose, if the person surrenders a firearm to the
officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the officer,
and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this section
or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise prohibited by
law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not contraband, the officer
shall return the firearm to the person at the termination of the stop. If a
court orders a law enforcement officer to return a firearm to a person pursuant
to the requirement set forth in this division, R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.
   (H)   For purposes of this section, “deadly weapon” or “weapon” does not
include any knife, razor, or cutting instrument if the instrument was not used
as a weapon.
(R.C. § 2923.12) (Prior Code § 672.02)
Statutory reference:
   Carrying concealed handguns, licensing through county sheriff, see R.C. §§
2923.124 et seq.
   Concealed carry by a qualifying adult, see R.C. § 2923.111
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance on school
premises, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122
   Conveyance, possession, or control of deadly weapon or dangerous ordinance
in a courthouse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.123
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offense, see R.C.
§ 2923.131
   Possession of firearm in liquor permit premises, felony offense, see R.C. §
2923.121
§ 137.03 USING WEAPONS WHILE INTOXICATED.
   (A)   No person, while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse,
shall carry or use any firearm or dangerous ordnance.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using weapons while
intoxicated, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2923.15) (Prior Code § 672.03)
§ 137.04 IMPROPERLY HANDLING FIREARMS IN A MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly discharge a firearm while in or on a motor
vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded firearm in a
motor vehicle in such a manner that the firearm is accessible to the operator
or any passenger without leaving the vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a motor
vehicle, unless the person may lawfully possess that firearm under applicable
law of this state or the United States, the firearm is unloaded, and the
firearm is carried in one of the following ways:
      (1)   In a closed package, box, or case.
      (2)   In a compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (3)   In plain sight and secured in a rack or holder made for the
purpose.
      (4)   If the firearm is at least 24 inches in overall length as measured
from the muzzle to the part of the stock furthest from the muzzle and if the
barrel is at least 18 inches in length, either in plain sight with the action
open or the weapon stripped, or, if the firearm is of a type on which the
action will not stay open or which cannot easily be stripped, in plain sight.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded handgun in a
motor vehicle if, at the time of that transportation or possession, any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them.
      (2)   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine
contains a concentration of alcohol, a listed controlled substance, or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance prohibited for persons operating a
vehicle, as specified in R.C. § 4511.19(A), regardless of whether the person at
the time of the transportation or possession as described in this division is
the operator of or a passenger in the motor vehicle.
   (E)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license or who is an
active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a
valid military identification card and documentation of successful completion
of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described
in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), who is the driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle
that is stopped as a result of a traffic stop or a stop for another law
enforcement purpose or is the driver or an occupant of a commercial motor
vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit
for the purposes defined in R.C. § 5503.34, and who is transporting or has a
loaded handgun in the motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle in any manner,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Before or at the time a law enforcement officer asks if the person
is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to disclose that the person
then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle, provided that it
is not a violation of this division if the person fails to disclose that fact
to an officer during the stop and the person already has notified another
officer of that fact during the same stop;
      (2)   Before or at the time an employee of the motor carrier enforcement
unit asks if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to
disclose that the person then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the
commercial motor vehicle, provided that it is not a violation of this division
if the person fails to disclose that fact to an employee of the unit during the
stop and the person already has notified another employee of the unit of that
fact during the same stop;
      (3)   Knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle while stopped, or
knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in plain sight at any time after any
law enforcement officer begins approaching the person while stopped and before
the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in
accordance with directions given by a law enforcement officer;
      (4)   Knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with
the person’s hands or fingers in the motor vehicle at any time after the law
enforcement officer begins approaching and before the law enforcement officer
leaves, unless the person has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to and
in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer.
      (5)   Knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful order of any
law enforcement officer given while the motor vehicle is stopped, including but
not limited to a specific order to the person to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight.
   (F)   (1)   Divisions (A), (B), (C), and (E) of this section do not apply to
any of the following:
         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, when authorized to carry or have
loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles and acting within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         (b)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles, and who is
subject to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless
the appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the
exemption provided in this division (F)(1)(b) does not apply to the person.
      (2)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following circumstances apply:
         (a)   The person discharges a firearm from a motor vehicle at a coyote
or groundhog, the discharge is not during the deer gun hunting season as set by
the Chief of the Division of Wildlife of the Department of Natural Resources,
and the discharge at the coyote or groundhog, but for the operation of this
section, is lawful.
         (b)   The motor vehicle from which the person discharges the firearm
is on real property that is located in an unincorporated area of a township and
that is either zoned for agriculture or is used for agriculture.
         (c)   The person owns the real property described in division (F)(2)
(b) of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that
real property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is
the spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real
property.
         (d)   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the
following manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, highway or other public or
private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including but not
limited to a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (3)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following apply:
         (a)   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         (b)   The person discharges a firearm at a wild quadruped or game bird
as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 during the open hunting season for the applicable
wild quadruped or game bird.
         (c)   The person discharges a firearm from a stationary all-purpose
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 from private or publicly owned lands or
from a motor vehicle that is parked on a road that is owned or administered by
the Division of Wildlife.
         (d)   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the
following manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, a highway, or other public or
private property that is used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including but not
limited to a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (4)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following circumstances apply:
         (a)   At the time of the alleged violation of either of those
divisions, the person is the operator of or a passenger in a motor vehicle.
         (b)   The motor vehicle is on real property that is located in an
unincorporated area of a township and that is either zoned for agriculture or
is used for agriculture.
         (c)   The person owns the real property described in division (F)(4)
(b) of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that
real property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is
the spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real
property.
         (d)   The person, prior to arriving at the real property described in
division (F)(4)(b) of this section, did not transport or possess a firearm in
the motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (B) or (C) of this section
while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway or other public
or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking.
      (5)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a person who
transports or possesses a handgun in a motor vehicle if, at the time of that
transportation or possession, both of the following apply:
         (a)   The person transporting or possessing the handgun has been
issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         (b)   The person transporting or possessing the handgun is not
knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
      (6)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following apply:
         (a)   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         (b)   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 or a motor vehicle during the open hunting season for a wild
quadruped or game bird.
         (c)   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 on private or publicly owned lands or on or in a motor vehicle that
is parked on a road that is owned or administered by the Division of Wildlife.
   (G)   (1)   The affirmative defenses authorized in R.C. § 2923.12(D)(1) and
(D)(2) are affirmative defenses to a charge under division (B) or (C) of this
section that involves a firearm other than a handgun.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B) or (C)
of this section of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle that the
actor transported or had the firearm in the motor vehicle for any lawful
purpose and while the motor vehicle was on the actor’s own property, provided
that this affirmative defense is not available unless the person, immediately
prior to arriving at the actor’s own property, did not transport or possess the
firearm in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (B) or (C) of
this section while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway,
or other public or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic.
   (H)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of division (B), (C),
or (D) of this section shall be required to obtain a concealed handgun license
as a condition for the dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   (a)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty
to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E) of this section as it
existed prior to September 30, 2011, and the conduct that was the basis of the
violation no longer would be a violation of division (E) of this section on or
after September 30, 2011, or if a person is convicted of, was convicted of,
pleads guilty to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E)(1) or
(E)(2) of this section as it existed prior to June 13, 2022, the person may
file an application under R.C. § 2953.35 requesting the expungement of the
record of conviction.
         (b)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to,
or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B) or (C) of this section as
the division existed prior to September 30, 2011, and if the conduct that was
the basis of the violation no longer would be a violation of division (B) or
(C) of this section on or after September 30, 2011, due to the application of
division (F)(5) of this section as it exists on and after September 30, 2011,
the person may file an application under R.C. § 2953.35 requesting the
expungement of the record of conviction.
   (I)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly handling
firearms in a motor vehicle. A violation of division (A) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division
(C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of
division (D) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law and, if the loaded handgun is concealed on the person’s person, it is
also a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of
division (E)(1) or (E)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (E)(4) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (E)(3) or (E)
(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(E)(3) or (E)(5) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of division (E)(3) or (E)(5) of this section, the offender’s concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2). A violation of
division (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (J)   If a law enforcement officer stops a motor vehicle for a traffic stop
or any other purpose, if any person in the motor vehicle surrenders a firearm
to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the
officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this
section or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise
prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not
contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the
termination of the stop. If a court orders a law enforcement officer to return
a firearm to a person pursuant to the requirement set forth in this division,
R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.
   (K)   As used in this section:
      AGRICULTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 519.01.
      COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.25(A).
      HIGHWAY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      MOTOR CARRIER ENFORCEMENT UNIT. Means the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit
in the Department of Public Safety, Division of State Highway Patrol, that is
created by R.C. § 5503.34.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.01.
      STREET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      TENANT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.
      UNLOADED.
         (a)   With respect to a firearm other than a firearm described in
division (d) of this definition, means that no ammunition is in the firearm in
question, no magazine or speed loader containing ammunition is inserted into
the firearm, and one of the following applies:
            1.   There is no ammunition in a magazine or speed loader that is
in the vehicle in question and that may be used with the firearm in question.
            2.   Any magazine or speed loader that contains ammunition and that
may be used with the firearm in question is stored in a compartment within the
vehicle in question that cannot be accessed without leaving the vehicle or is
stored in a container that provides complete and separate enclosure.
         (b)   For the purposes of division (a)2. of this definition, a
“container that provides complete and separate enclosure” includes, but is not
limited to, any of the following:
            1.   A package, box, or case with multiple compartments, as long as
the loaded magazine or speed loader and the firearm in question either are in
separate compartments within the package, box, or case, or, if they are in the
same compartment, the magazine or speed loader is contained within a separate
enclosure in that compartment that does not contain the firearm and that closes
using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop closing mechanism, or other
fastener that must be opened to access the contents or the firearm is contained
within a separate enclosure of that nature in that compartment that does not
contain the magazine or speed loader;
            2.   A pocket or other enclosure on the person of the person in
question that closes using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop
closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be opened to access the
contents.
         (c)   For the purposes of divisions (a) and (b) of this definition,
ammunition held in stripper-clips or in en-bloc clips is not considered
ammunition that is loaded into a magazine or speed loader.
         (d)   “Unloaded” means, with respect to a firearm employing a
percussion cap, flintlock, or other obsolete ignition system, when the weapon
is uncapped or when the priming charge is removed from the pan.
   (L)   Divisions (a) and (b) of the definition of “unloaded” in division (K)
of this section do not affect the authority of a person who has been issued a
concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question to have one or
more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a vehicle,
without being transported as described in those divisions, as long as no
ammunition is in a firearm, other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as
permitted under any other provision of this chapter. A person who has been
issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question may
have one or more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a
vehicle without further restriction, as long as no ammunition is in a firearm,
other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as permitted under any
provision of this chapter.
(R.C. § 2923.16) (Prior Code § 672.04)
Statutory reference:
   Return of surrendered firearms by law enforcement, see R.C. § 2923.163
§ 137.05 POSSESSING CRIMINAL TOOLS.
   (A)   No person shall possess or have under his or her control any
substance, device, instrument, or article, with purpose to use it criminally.
   (B)   Each of the following constitutes prima facie evidence of criminal
purpose:
      (1)   Possession or control of any dangerous ordnance, or the materials
or parts for making a dangerous ordnance, in the absence of circumstances
indicating the dangerous ordnance, materials or parts are intended for a
legitimate use.
      (2)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument, or
article designed or specially adapted for criminal use.
      (3)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument, or
article commonly used for criminal purposes, under circumstances indicating the
item is intended for criminal use.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing criminal tools.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, possessing criminal tools is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the circumstances indicate that the
substance, device, instrument, or article involved in the offense was intended
for use in the commission of a felony, possessing criminal tools is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2923.24) (Prior Code § 672.12)
§ 137.06 FAILURE TO SECURE DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (A)   No person, in acquiring, possessing, carrying, or using any dangerous
ordnance, shall negligently fail to take proper precautions:
      (1)   To secure the dangerous ordnance against theft, or against its
acquisition or use by any unauthorized or incompetent person.
      (2)   To insure the safety of persons and property.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to a secure
dangerous ordnance, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2923.19) (Prior Code § 672.06)
§ 137.07 UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS IN WEAPONS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Recklessly sell, lend, give or furnish any firearm to any person
prohibited by R.C. § 2923.13 or 2923.15, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, from acquiring or using any firearm, or recklessly sell,
lend, give or furnish any dangerous ordnance to any person prohibited by R.C. §
2923.13, 2923.15 or 2923.17, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
from acquiring or using any dangerous ordnance;
      (2)   Possess any firearm or dangerous ordnance with purpose to dispose
of it in violation of division (A)(1) of this section;
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section,
knowingly solicit, persuade, encourage, or entice a federally licensed firearms
dealer or private seller to transfer a firearm or ammunition to any person in a
manner prohibited by state or federal law;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section, with
an intent to deceive, knowingly provide materially false information to a
federally licensed firearms dealer or private seller;
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section,
knowingly procure, solicit, persuade, encourage, or entice a person to act in
violation of division (A)(3) or (A)(4) of this section;
      (6)   When transferring any dangerous ordnance to another, negligently
fail to require the transferee to exhibit such identification, license, or
permit showing the transferee to be authorized to acquire dangerous ordnance
pursuant to R.C. § 2923.17, or negligently fail to take a complete record of
the transaction and forthwith forward a copy of the record to the sheriff of
the county or Safety Director or Police Chief of the municipality where the
transaction takes place;
      (7)   Knowingly fail to report to law enforcement authorities forthwith
the loss or theft of any firearm or dangerous ordnance in the person’s
possession and under his or her control.
   (B)   Divisions (A)(3), (A)(4), and (A)(5) of this section do not apply to
any of the following:
      (1)   A law enforcement officer who is acting within the scope of the
officer’s duties;
      (2)   A person who is acting in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer described in division (B)(1) of this section.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful transactions in
weapons. A violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A
violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (A)(7) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      AMMUNITION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.401.
      FEDERALLY LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5502.63.
      MATERIALLY FALSE INFORMATION. Means information regarding the transfer of
a firearm or ammunition that portrays an illegal transaction as legal or a
legal transaction as illegal.
      PRIVATE SELLER. Means a person who sells, offers for sale, or transfers a
firearm or ammunition and who is not a federally licensed firearms dealer.
(R.C. § 2923.07)
§ 137.08 UNDERAGE PURCHASE OF FIREARM OR HANDGUN.
   (A)   No person under 18 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a firearm.
   (B)   No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a handgun; provided, that this division does not apply to the purchase or
attempted purchase of a handgun by a person 18 years of age or older and under
21 years of age if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is a law enforcement officer and has received firearms
training approved by the Ohio Peace Officer Training Council or equivalent
firearms training.
      (2)   The person is an active or reserve member of the armed services of
the United States or the Ohio National Guard, or was honorably discharged from
military service in the active or reserve armed services of the United States
or the Ohio National Guard, and the person has received firearms training from
the armed services or the national guard or equivalent firearms training.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of underage
purchase of a firearm, a delinquent act that would be a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law if it could be committed by an adult. Whoever
violates division (B) of this section is guilty of underage purchase of a
handgun, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2923.211) (Prior Code § 672.085)
Statutory reference:
   Improperly furnishing firearms to a minor, felony, see R.C. § 2923.21
§ 137.09 POINTING AND DISCHARGING FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS.
   (A)   Discharge of firearms on or near prohibited premises. No person shall
do any of the following:
      (1)   Without permission from the proper officials and subject to
division (B)(1) of this section, discharge a firearm upon or over a cemetery or
within 100 yards of a cemetery;
      (2)   Subject to division (B)(2) of this section, discharge of a firearm
on a lawn, park, pleasure ground, orchard, or other ground appurtenant to a
schoolhouse, church, or inhabited dwelling, the property of another, or a
charitable institution;
      (3)   Discharge a firearm upon or over a public road or highway.
   (B)   Application of division (A).
      (1)   Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
while on the person’s own land, discharges a firearm.
      (2)   Division (A)(2) of this section does not apply to a person who owns
any type of property described in that division and who, while on the person’s
own enclosure, discharges a firearm.
   (C)   Penalty for violation of division (A). Whoever violates division (A)
of this section is guilty of discharge of a firearm on or near prohibited
premises. A violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of division (A)(3) shall be
punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) of this section, a
violation of division (A)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   If the violation created a substantial risk of physical harm to any
person, caused serious physical harm to property, caused physical harm to any
person, or caused serious physical harm to any person, a violation of division
(A)(3) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2923.162)
   (D)   Hunting near township park.
      (1)   No person shall hunt, shoot, or kill game within one-half mile of a
township park unless the Board of Township Park Commissioners has granted
permission to kill game not desired within the limits prohibited by this
division.
(R.C. § 3773.06)
      (2)   Whoever violates division (D)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 3773.99(A))
   (E)   Unlawful discharge. No person shall discharge any BB gun, air gun, or
firearm, or make use of any sling, bow and arrow, or crossbow, within the
corporate limits of the municipality.
   (F)   Unlawful pointing or aiming. No person shall, intentionally and
without malice, point or aim any BB gun, air gun, or firearm, or any sling, bow
and arrow, or crossbow at or toward another.
   (G)   Penalty for violations of division (E) or (F). Whoever violates
division (E) or (F) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
   (H)   Exceptions. This section shall not prohibit the firing of a military
salute or the firing of weapons by persons of the nation’s armed forces acting
under military authority, and shall not apply to law enforcement officials or
other government officials in the proper enforcement of the law, or to any
person in the proper exercise of the right of self defense, or to any person
otherwise lawfully permitted by proper federal, state or local authorities to
discharge a BB gun, air gun, or firearm, or to use a sling, bow and arrow, or
crossbow in a manner contrary to the provisions of this section. Division (E)
of this section does not extend to cases in which BB guns, air guns, or
firearms, or slings, bows and arrows, or crossbows are used in the confines of
structures or used within the confines of a person’s own property, provided
such use is under adult supervision and is approved by the municipality.
Statutory reference:
   Improperly discharging firearm at or into habitation or school safety zone,
felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.161
§ 137.10 LICENSE OR PERMIT TO POSSESS DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (A)   Upon application to the sheriff of the county or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has the
applicant’s principal place of business, and upon payment of the fee specified
in division (B) of this section, a license or temporary permit shall be issued
to qualified applicants to acquire, possess, carry or use a dangerous ordnance
for the following purposes:
      (1)   Contractors, wreckers, quarriers, mine operators and other persons
regularly employing explosives in the course of a legitimate business, with
respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired, possessed, carried or
used in the course of such business.
      (2)   Farmers, with respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired,
possessed, carried or used for agricultural purposes on lands farmed by them.
      (3)   Scientists, engineers, and instructors, with respect to a dangerous
ordnance acquired, possessed, carried or used in the course of bona fide
research or instruction.
      (4)   Financial institutions and armored car company guards, with respect
to automatic firearms lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or used by any such
person while acting within the scope of the person’s duties.
      (5)   In the discretion of the issuing authority, any responsible person,
with respect to a dangerous ordnance lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or
used for a legitimate research, scientific, educational, industrial or other
proper purpose.
   (B)   Application for a license or temporary permit under this section shall
be in writing under oath to the sheriff of the county or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has the
applicant’s principal place of business. The application shall be accompanied
by an application fee of $50 when the application is for a license, and an
application fee of $5 when the application is for a temporary permit. The fees
shall be paid into the General Revenue Fund of the county or municipality. The
application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name, age, address, occupation and business address of the
applicant, if the applicant is a natural person, or the name, address, and
principal place of business of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation.
      (2)   A description of the dangerous ordnance for which a permit is
requested.
      (3)   A description of the places where and the manner in which the
dangerous ordnance is to be kept, carried, and used.
      (4)   A statement of the purposes for which the dangerous ordnance is to
be acquired, possessed, carried or used.
      (5)   Such other information as the issuing authority may require in
giving effect to this section.
   (C)   Upon investigation, the issuing authority shall issue a license or
temporary permit only if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The applicant is not otherwise prohibited by law from acquiring,
having, carrying or using a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   The applicant is 21 years of age or over, if the applicant is a
natural person.
      (3)   It appears that the applicant has sufficient competence to safely
acquire, possess, carry or use the dangerous ordnance, and that proper
precautions will be taken to protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and
ensure the safety of persons and property.
      (4)   It appears that the dangerous ordnance will be lawfully acquired,
possessed, carried and used by the applicant for a legitimate purpose.
   (D)   The license or temporary permit shall identify the person to whom it
is issued, identify the dangerous ordnance involved and state the purposes for
which the license or temporary permit is issued, state the expiration date, if
any, and list such restrictions on the acquisition, possession, carriage, or
use of the dangerous ordnance as the issuing authority considers advisable to
protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and ensure the safety of persons
and property.
   (E)   A temporary permit shall be issued for the casual use of explosives
and explosive devices, and other consumable dangerous ordnance, and shall
expire within 30 days of its issuance. A license shall be issued for the
regular use of consumable dangerous ordnance, or for any non-consumable
dangerous ordnance, which license need not specify an expiration date, but the
issuing authority may specify such expiration date, not earlier than one year
from the date of issuance, as it considers advisable in view of the nature of
the dangerous ordnance and the purposes for which the license is issued.
   (F)   The dangerous ordnance specified in a license or temporary permit may
be obtained by the holder anywhere in the state. Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.18(F),
the holder of a license may use such dangerous ordnance anywhere in the state.
The holder of a temporary permit may use such dangerous ordnance only within
the territorial jurisdiction of the issuing authority.
   (G)   The issuing authority shall forward to the State Fire Marshal a copy
of each license or temporary permit issued pursuant to this section, and a copy
of each record of a transaction in a dangerous ordnance and of each report of a
lost or stolen dangerous ordnance, given to the local law enforcement authority
as required by R.C. § 2923.20(A)(6) and (A)(7) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. The State Fire Marshal will keep a permanent file of all
licenses and temporary permits issued pursuant to this section, and of all
records of transactions in, and losses or thefts of a dangerous ordnance
forwarded by local law enforcement authorities pursuant to this section.
(R.C. § 2923.18) (Prior Code § 672.05)
§ 137.11 POSSESSION OF AN OBJECT INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A FIREARM IN A SCHOOL
SAFETY ZONE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly possess an object in a school safety zone if
both of the following apply:
      (1)   The object is indistinguishable from a firearm, whether or not the
object is capable of being fired.
      (2)   The person indicates that the person possesses the object and that
it is a firearm, or the person knowingly displays or brandishes the object and
indicates that it is a firearm.
   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States who is authorized to carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance
and is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         (b)   A law enforcement officer who is authorized to carry deadly
weapons or dangerous ordnance;
         (c)   A security officer employed by a board of education or governing
body of a school during the time that the security officer is on duty pursuant
to that contract of employment;
         (d)   1.   Any person not described in divisions (B)(1)(a) to (B)(1)
(c) of this section who has written authorization from the board of education
or governing body of a school to convey deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance
into a school safety zone or to possess a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance
in a school safety zone and who conveys or possesses the deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance in accordance with that authorization, provided both of the
following apply:
               a.   Either the person has successfully completed the
curriculum, instruction, and training established under R.C. § 5502.703, or the
person has received a certificate of having satisfactorily completed an
approved basic peace officer training program or is a law enforcement officer;
               b.   The board or governing body has notified the public, by
whatever means the affected school regularly communicates with the public, that
the board or governing body has authorized one or more persons to go armed
within a school operated by the board or governing authority.
            2.   A district board or school governing body that authorizes a
person under division (B)(1)(d) of this section shall require that person to
submit to an annual criminal records check conducted in the same manner as R.C.
§ 3319.39 or R.C. § 3319.391.
         (e)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance, and who is subject to and in
compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless the appointing
authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption provided in
division (B)(1)(e) of this section does not apply to the person.
      (2)   This section does not apply to premises upon which home schooling
is conducted. This section also does not apply to a school administrator,
teacher or employee who possesses an object that is indistinguishable from a
firearm for legitimate school purposes during the course of employment, a
student who uses an object that is indistinguishable from a firearm under the
direction of a school administrator, teacher or employee, or any other person
who, with the express prior approval of a school administrator, possesses an
object that is indistinguishable from a firearm for a legitimate purpose,
including the use of the object in a ceremonial activity, a play, re-enactment
or other dramatic presentation, school safety training, or a ROTC activity or
another similar use of the object.
      (3)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if, at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession of the
handgun, all of the following apply:
         (a)   The person does not enter into a school building or onto school
premises and is not at a school activity.
         (b)   The person has been issued a concealed handgun license that is
valid at the time of the conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         (c)   The person is in the school safety zone in accordance with 18
U.S.C. § 922(q)(2)(B).
         (d)   The person is not knowingly in a place described in R.C. §
2923.126(B)(1) or (B)(3) through (B)(8).
      (4)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession of the handgun
all of the following apply:
         (a)   The person has been issued a concealed handgun license that is
valid at the time of the conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         (b)   The person leaves the handgun in a motor vehicle.
         (c)   The handgun does not leave the motor vehicle.
         (d)   If the person exits the motor vehicle, the person locks the
motor vehicle.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal possession of an
object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, illegal possession of an object
indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of this section, illegal possession of an object indistinguishable from a
firearm in a school safety zone is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (D)   (1)   In addition to any other penalty imposed upon a person who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section, and subject to
division (D)(2) of this section, if the offender has not attained 19 years of
age, regardless of whether the offender is attending or is enrolled in a school
operated by a board of education or for which the Director of Education and
Workforce prescribes minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07, the court shall
impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender’s probationary
driver’s license, restricted license, driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary commercial driver’s
license that then is in effect from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4)
and shall deny the offender the issuance of any permit or license of that type
during the period of the suspension. If the offender is not a resident of this
state, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the nonresident
operating privilege of the offender from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(4).
      (2)   If the offender shows good cause why the court should not suspend
one of the types of licenses, permits or privileges specified in division (D)
(1) of this section or deny the issuance of one of the temporary instruction
permits specified in division (D)(1) of this section, the court in its
discretion may choose not to impose the suspension, revocation or denial
required in division (D)(1) of this section, but the court, in its discretion,
instead may require the offender to perform community service for a number of
hours determined by the court.
   (E)   As used in this section, OBJECT THAT IS INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A
FIREARM means an object made, constructed or altered so that, to a reasonable
person without specialized training in firearms, the object appears to be a
firearm.
(R.C. § 2923.122(C) - (G)) (Prior Code § 672.13)
Statutory reference:
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance in a school
safety zone, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122(A) and (B)
§ 137.12 POSSESSION OF DEADLY WEAPON WHILE UNDER DETENTION.
   (A)   As used in this section, DETENTION and DETENTION FACILITY have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 2921.01.
   (B)   No person under detention at a detention facility shall possess a
deadly weapon.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession of a deadly
weapon while under detention.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) of this section,
possession of a deadly weapon while under detention is a felony to be
prosecuted under state law.
      (2)   If the offender, at the time of the commission of the offense, was
under detention as an alleged or adjudicated delinquent child or unruly child
and if at the time the offender commits the act for which the offender was
under detention it would not be a felony if committed by an adult, possession
of a deadly weapon while under detention is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2923.131) (Prior Code § 672.025)
Statutory reference:
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offenses, see R.C.
§ 2923.131
§ 137.13 CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSES: POSSESSION OF A REVOKED OR SUSPENDED
LICENSE; ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS; POSTING OF SIGNS PROHIBITING POSSESSION.
   (A)   Possession of a revoked or suspended concealed handgun license.
      (1)   No person, except in the performance of official duties, shall
possess a concealed handgun license that was issued and that has been revoked
or suspended.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of possessing a
revoked or suspended concealed handgun license, a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 2923.1211(B), (C))
   (B)   Additional restrictions. Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.126:
      (1)   A concealed handgun license that is issued under R.C. § 2923.125
shall expire five years after the date of issuance. A licensee who has been
issued a license under that section shall be granted a grace period of 30 days
after the licensee's license expires during which the licensee's license
remains valid. Except as provided in divisions (B)(2) and (B)(3) of this
section, a licensee who has been issued a concealed handgun license under R.C.
§ 2923.125 or 2923.1213 may carry a concealed handgun anywhere in this state if
the license is valid when the licensee is in actual possession of a concealed
handgun. The licensee shall give notice of any change in the licensee's
residence address to the sheriff who issued the license within 45 days after
that change.
      (2)   A valid concealed handgun license does not authorize the licensee
to carry a concealed handgun in any manner prohibited under R.C. § 2923.12(B)
or in any manner prohibited under R.C. § 2923.16. A valid license does not
authorize the licensee to carry a concealed handgun into any of the following
places:
         (a)   A police station, sheriff’s office, or state highway patrol
station, premises controlled by the bureau of criminal identification and
investigation; a state correctional institution, jail, workhouse, or other
detention facility; any area of an airport passenger terminal that is beyond a
passenger or property screening checkpoint or to which access is restricted
through security measures by the airport authority or a public agency; or an
institution that is maintained, operated, managed, and governed pursuant to
R.C. § 5119.14(A) or R.C. § 5123.03(A)(1);
         (b)   A school safety zone if the licensee’s carrying the concealed
handgun is in violation of R.C. § 2923.122;
         (c)   A courthouse or another building or structure in which a
courtroom is located if the licensee’s carrying the concealed handgun is in
violation of R.C. § 2923.123;
         (d)   Any premises or open air arena for which a D permit has been
issued under R.C. Chapter 4303 if the licensee’s carrying the concealed handgun
is in violation of R.C. § 2923.121;
         (e)   Any premises owned or leased by any public or private college,
university, or other institution of higher education, unless the handgun is in
a locked motor vehicle or the licensee is in the immediate process of placing
the handgun in a locked motor vehicle or unless the licensee is carrying the
concealed handgun pursuant to a written policy, rule, or other authorization
that is adopted by the institution’s board of trustees or other governing body
and that authorizes specific individuals or classes of individuals to carry a
concealed handgun on the premises;
         (f)   Any church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship, unless
the church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship posts or permits
otherwise;
         (g)   Any building that is a government facility of this state or a
political subdivision of this state and that is not a building that is used
primarily as a shelter, restroom, parking facility for motor vehicles, or rest
facility and is not a courthouse or other building or structure in which a
courtroom is located that is subject to division (B)(2)(c) of this section,
unless the governing body with authority over the building has enacted a
statute, ordinance, or policy that permits a licensee to carry a concealed
handgun into the building;
         (h)   A place in which federal law prohibits the carrying of handguns.
      (3)   (a)   Nothing in this division (B) shall negate or restrict a rule,
policy, or practice of a private employer that is not a private college,
university, or other institution of higher education concerning or prohibiting
the presence of firearms on the private employer’s premises or property,
including motor vehicles owned by the private employer. Nothing in this
division (B) shall require a private employer of that nature to adopt a rule,
policy, or practice concerning or prohibiting the presence of firearms on the
private employer’s premises or property, including motor vehicles owned by the
private employer.
         (b)   1.   A private employer shall be immune from liability in a
civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto the
premises or property of the private employer, including motor vehicles owned by
the private employer, unless the private employer acted with malicious purpose.
A private employer is immune from liability in a civil action for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to
the private employer’s decision to permit a licensee to bring, or prohibit a
licensee from bringing, a handgun onto the premises or property of the private
employer.
            2.   A political subdivision shall be immune from liability in a
civil action, to the extent and in the manner provided in R.C. Chapter 2744,
for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused
by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto any premises or property
owned, leased, or otherwise under the control of the political subdivision. As
used in this division, POLITICAL SUBDIVISION has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2744.01.
            3.    An institution of higher education shall be immune from
liability in a civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or
property that allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a
handgun onto the premises of the institution, including motor vehicles owned by
the institution, unless the institution acted with malicious purpose. An
institution of higher education is immune from liability in a civil action for
any injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by
or related to the institution’s decision to permit a licensee or class of
licensees to bring a handgun onto the premises of the institution.
            4.   A nonprofit corporation shall be immune from liability in a
civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto the
premises of the nonprofit corporation, including any motor vehicle owned by the
nonprofit corporation, or to any event organized by the nonprofit corporation,
unless the nonprofit corporation acted with malicious purpose. A nonprofit
corporation is immune from liability in a civil action for any injury, death,
or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to the
nonprofit corporation’s decision to permit a licensee to bring a handgun onto
the premises of the nonprofit corporation or to any event organized by the
nonprofit corporation. The immunities described in this division apply to an
entity that leases its property to the nonprofit corporation or permits its
property to be used by the nonprofit corporation for any purpose.
         (c)   1.   a.   Except as provided in division (B)(3)(c)2. of this
section and R.C. § 2923.1214, the owner or person in control of private land or
premises, and a private person or entity leasing land or premises owned by the
state, the United States, or a political subdivision of the state or the United
States, may post a sign in a conspicuous location on that land or on those
premises prohibiting persons from carrying firearms or concealed firearms on or
onto that land or those premises. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, a person who knowingly violates a posted prohibition of that nature
is guilty of criminal trespass in violation of R.C. § 2911.21(A)(4) and is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If a person knowingly violates a
posted prohibition of that nature and the posted land or premises primarily was
a parking lot or other parking facility, the person is not guilty of criminal
trespass under R.C. § 2911.21 or under any other criminal law of this state or
criminal law, ordinance, or resolution of a political subdivision of this
state, and instead is subject only to a civil cause of action for trespass
based on the violation.
               b.   If a person knowingly violates a posted prohibition of the
nature described in this division and the posted land or premises is a child
care center, type A family child care home, or type B family child care home,
unless the person is a licensee who resides in a type A family child care home
or type B family child care home, the person is guilty of aggravated trespass
in violation of R.C. § 2911.211. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the person
previously has been convicted of a violation of this division or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is
dangerous ordnance, the offender is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
            2.   A landlord may not prohibit or restrict a tenant who is a
licensee and who on or after September 9, 2008 enters into a rental agreement
with the landlord for the use of residential premises, and the tenant’s guest
while the tenant is present, from lawfully carrying or possessing a handgun on
those residential premises.
            3.   As used in division (B)(3)(c) of this section:
               LANDLORD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5321.01.
               RENTAL AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5321.01.
               RESIDENTIAL PREMISES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5321.01,
except the term does not include a dwelling unit that is owned or operated by a
college or university.
               TENANT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5321.01.
      (4)   A person who holds a valid concealed handgun license issued by
another state that is recognized by the Attorney General pursuant to a
reciprocity agreement entered into pursuant to R.C. § 109.69 or a person who
holds a valid concealed handgun license under the circumstances described in
R.C. § 109.69(B) has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in this state
as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125
and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a person who has been
issued a license under that section that is valid at the time in question.
      (5)   (a)   A peace officer has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125, provided that the officer when carrying a concealed
handgun under authority of this division is carrying validating identification.
For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a peace officer shall be
considered to be a licensee in this state.
         (b)   An active duty member of the armed forces of the United States
who is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of
successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions as
specified in this division (B).
         (c)   A tactical medical professional who is qualified to carry
firearms while on duty under R.C. § 109.771 has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under R.C. § 2923.125.
         (d)   A fire investigator who is qualified to carry firearms while on
duty under R.C. § 109.774 has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in
this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license under R.C. §
2923.125.
      (6)   (a)   A qualified retired peace officer who possesses a retired
peace officer identification card issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this
section and a valid firearms requalification certification issued pursuant to
division (B)(6)(c) of this section has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a
person who has been issued a license issued under that section that is valid at
the time in question. For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a
qualified retired peace officer who possesses a retired peace officer
identification card issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this section and a
valid firearms requalification certification issued pursuant to division (B)(6)
(c) of this section shall be considered to be a licensee in this state.
         (b)   1.   Each public agency of this state or of a political
subdivision of this state that is served by one or more peace officers shall
issue a retired peace officer identification card to any person who retired
from service as a peace officer with that agency, if the issuance is in
accordance with the agency’s policies and procedures and if the person, with
respect to the person’s service with that agency, satisfies all of the
following:
               a.   The person retired in good standing from service as a peace
officer with the public agency, and the retirement was not for reasons of
mental instability.
               b.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was authorized to engage in or supervise the prevention,
detection, investigation, or prosecution of, or the incarceration of any person
for, any violation of law and the person had statutory powers of arrest.
               c.   At the time of the person’s retirement as a peace officer
with that agency, the person was trained and qualified to carry firearms in the
performance of the peace officer’s duties.
               d.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was regularly employed as a peace officer for an aggregate
of 15 years or more, or, in the alternative, the person retired from service as
a peace officer with that agency, after completing any applicable probationary
period of that service, due to a service-connected disability, as determined by
the agency.
            2.   A retired peace officer identification card issued to a person
under division (B)(6)(b)1. of this section shall identify the person by name,
contain a photograph of the person, identify the public agency of this state or
of the political subdivision of this state from which the person retired as a
peace officer and that is issuing the identification card, and specify that the
person retired in good standing from service as a peace officer with the
issuing public agency and satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)
(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(B)1.d. of this section. In addition to the required content
specified in this division, a retired peace officer identification card issued
to a person under division (B)(6)(b)1. of this section may include the firearms
requalification certification described in division (B)(6)(c) of this section,
and if the identification card includes that certification, the identification
card shall serve as the firearms requalification certification for the retired
peace officer. If the issuing public agency issues credentials to active law
enforcement officers who serve the agency, the agency may comply with division
(B)(6)(b)1. of this section by issuing the same credentials to persons who
retired from service as a peace officer with the agency and who satisfy the
criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section,
provided that the credentials so issued to retired peace officers are stamped
with the word “RETIRED”.
            3.   A public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of
this state may charge persons who retired from service as a peace officer with
the agency a reasonable fee for issuing to the person a retired peace officer
identification card pursuant to division (B)(6)(b)1. of this section.
         (c)   1.   If a person retired from service as a peace officer with a
public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of this state and the
person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)
(b)1.d. of this section, the public agency may provide the retired peace
officer with the opportunity to attend a firearms requalification program that
is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required under R.C. §
109.801. The retired peace officer may be required to pay the cost of the
course.
            2.   If a retired peace officer who satisfies the criteria set
forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section attends a
firearms requalification program that is approved for purposes of firearms
requalification required under R.C. § 109.801, the retired peace officer’s
successful completion of the firearms requalification program requalifies the
retired peace officer for purposes of division (B)(6) of this section for five
years from the date on which the program was successfully completed, and the
requalification is valid during that five-year period. If a retired peace
officer who satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)
(6)(b)1.d. of this section satisfactorily completes such a firearms
requalification program, the retired peace officer shall be issued a firearms
requalification certification that identifies the retired peace officer by
name, identifies the entity that taught the program, specifies that the retired
peace officer successfully completed the program, specifies the date on which
the course was successfully completed, and specifies that the requalification
is valid for five years from that date of successful completion. The firearms
requalification certification for a retired peace officer may be included in
the retired peace officer identification card issued to the retired peace
officer under division (B)(6)(b) of this section.
            3.   A retired peace officer who attends a firearms requalification
program that is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required
under R.C. § 109.801 may be required to pay the cost of the program.
      (7)   As used in division (B) of this section:
         FIRE INVESTIGATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 109.71.
         GOVERNING BODY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 154.01.
         GOVERNMENT FACILITY OF THIS STATE OR A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF THIS
STATE. Means any of the following:
            1.   A building or part of a building that is owned or leased by
the government of this state or a political subdivision of this state and where
employees of the government of this state or the political subdivision
regularly are present for the purpose of performing their official duties as
employees of the state or political subdivision;
            2.   The office of a deputy registrar serving pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 4503 that is used to perform deputy registrar functions.
         NONPROFIT CORPORATION. Means any private organization that is exempt
from federal income taxation pursuant to subsection 501(a) and described in
subsection 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         QUALIFIED RETIRED PEACE OFFICER. Means a person who satisfies all of
the following:
            1.   The person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)
(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section.
            2.   The person is not under the influence of alcohol or another
intoxicating or hallucinatory drug or substance.
            3.   The person is not prohibited by federal law from receiving
firearms.
         RETIRED PEACE OFFICER IDENTIFICATION CARD. Means an identification
card that is issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this section to a person
who is a retired peace officer.
         TACTICAL MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
109.71.
         VALIDATING IDENTIFICATION. Means photographic identification issued by
the agency for which an individual serves as a peace officer that identifies
the individual as a peace officer of the agency.
(R.C. § 2923.126)
   (C)   Posting of signs prohibiting possession. Each person, board, or entity
that owns or controls any place or premises identified in R.C. § 2923.126(B) as
a place into which a valid license does not authorize the licensee to carry a
concealed handgun, or a designee of such a person, board, or entity, shall post
in the following one or more conspicuous locations in the premises a sign that
contains a statement in substantially the following form: “Unless otherwise
authorized by law, pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code, no person shall knowingly
possess, have under the person’s control, convey, or attempt to convey a deadly
weapon or dangerous ordnance onto these premises.”
(R.C. § 2923.1212)
(Prior Code § 672.14)
§ 137.14 DEFACED FIREARMS.
   (A)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Change, alter, remove, or obliterate the name of the manufacturer,
model, manufacturer’s serial number, or other mark of identification on a
firearm.
      (2)   Possess a firearm knowing or having reasonable cause to believe
that the name of the manufacturer, model, manufacturer’s serial number, or
other mark of identification on the firearm has been changed, altered, removed,
or obliterated.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section is guilty of
defacing identification marks of a firearm. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (A)(1) of this section, defacing
identification marks of a firearm is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of
possessing a defaced firearm. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
possessing a defaced firearm is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (A)(2) of this section, possessing a defaced firearm is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any firearm on which no
manufacturer’s serial number was inscribed at the time of its manufacture.
(R.C. § 2923.201) (Prior Code § 672.15)
§ 137.15 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS; HUNTING.
   (A)   Discharge of firearms.
      (1)   Except as enumerated below, no person shall discharge, or cause to
be discharged, a cannon, pistol, revolver or rifle within the city limits.
      (2)   No person shall negligently discharge, or cause to be discharged,
any firearm in such manner as to cause the projectile or projectiles to exit
the property on which the shooter is lawfully discharging said firearm.
      (3)   Lawful hunting sanctioned by the Ohio Division of Wildlife or the
Ohio Division of Natural Resources within the boundaries of Nimisila Reservoir
is not prohibited by this section.
      (4)   Discharge of a firearm in self-defense is not prohibited by this
section.
      (5)   Organized firing of ceremonial salutes with blank ammunition by
members of the military, veterans’ organizations or police honor guard units is
not prohibited by this section.
      (6)   Discharge of any authorized firearm by any law enforcement officer
in the course of his or her duty within the city is not prohibited by this
section.
      (7)   Shooting ranges operated by any law enforcement agency for the
purpose of training and/or proficiency enhancement are not prohibited by this
section.
      (8)   The discharge of shot guns, using bird shot, is not prohibited on a
parcel of land consisting of 30 acres or more, providing that such discharge
occurs more than 450 feet in the direction of fire and 350 feet from an
adjoining property. Single projectile ammunition is prohibited.
      (9)   The landowner of 40 acres or more, or his or her designated agent,
for purposes of nuisance animal control, may discharge a .22 caliber rimfire
firearm, providing that such discharge occurs more than 350 feet from an
adjoining property or public road.
      (10)   Trapped nuisance animals may be euthanized using a .22 caliber
firearm.
      (11)   No person shall discharge a firearm on the property of another
without first having obtained written permission from the property owner or
other person having legal control of the property.
   (B)   Penalties.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a first
degree misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
130.99.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of improper
hunting within the city limits, a misdemeanor of the first degree, and shall be
subject to the penalty provided in §
130.99.
(Prior Code, § 672.11) (Ord. 93-18, passed 8-24-1993; Ord. 03-09, passed 6-24-
2003)
CHAPTER 138: DRUG OFFENSES
Section
   
138.01   Definitions
   
138.02   Adult use cannabis control; limitations on conduct by individuals
   
138.03   Possession of drug offenses
   
138.04   Possessing drug abuse instruments
   
138.05   Permitting drug abuse
   
138.06   (Reserved
   
138.07   Abusing harmful intoxicants
   
138.08   Illegal dispensing of drug samples
   
138.09   Federal prosecution bar to municipal prosecution
   
138.10   Nitrous oxide: improper dispensing or distribution; possession in a
motor vehicle
   
138.11   Laboratory report required
   
138.12   Counterfeit controlled substances
   
138.13   Use, possession, or sale of drug paraphernalia
   
138.14   Controlled substance or prescription labels
   
138.15   Possession, sale and disposal of hypodermics
   
138.16   Controlled substance schedules
   
138.17   Unlawful furnishing of prescription to enable persons to be issued
handicapped parking placards or license plates
   
138.18   Sale of pseudoephedrine
   
138.19   Sale of pure caffeine product
   
138.20   Sale of dextromethorphan
   
138.21   Adult use cannabis operator prohibited
Statutory reference:
   Administration of epinephrine, exemption from prosecution, see R.C. §
2925.64
   Controlled substances, regulation of pharmacists and other professionals,
see R.C. Chapters 3719 and 4729
   Conviction of professionally licensed persons to be reported to licensing
board, see R.C. § 2925.38
   Criminal and civil forfeiture of property for felony drug abuse offenses,
see R.C. Chapter 2981
   Destruction of chemicals used to produce methamphetamine; preservation of
samples, see R.C. § 2925.52
   Tampering with drugs, felony offense, see R.C. § 2925.24
§ 138.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words,
terms and phrases and their derivatives used in this chapter which are not
defined in this section shall have the meanings given to them in the Ohio
Revised Code.
   ADMINISTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   ADULTERATE. To cause a drug to be adulterated as described in R.C. §
3715.63.
   ALCOHOL AND DRUG ADDICTION SERVICES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5119.01.
   BULK AMOUNT. Of a controlled substance means any of the following:
      (1)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in
Schedule I, Schedule II, or Schedule III, with the exception of any controlled
substance analog, marihuana, cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, any fentanyl-related
compound, and hashish and except as provided in division (2), (5), or (6) of
this definition, whichever of the following is applicable:
         (a)   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams or 25 unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule I opiate or opium derivative;
         (b)   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams of a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of raw or gum
opium;
         (c)   An amount equal to or exceeding 30 grams or ten unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule I hallucinogen other than tetrahydrocannabinol or lysergic acid
amide, or a Schedule I stimulant or depressant;
         (d)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II opiate or opium
derivative;
         (e)   An amount equal to or exceeding five grams or ten unit doses of
a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount
of phencyclidine;
         (f)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II stimulant that is in
a final dosage form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal
drug abuse control laws, as defined in this section, that is or contains any
amount of a Schedule II depressant substance or a Schedule II hallucinogenic
substance;
         (g)   An amount equal to or exceeding three grams of a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule
II stimulant, or any of its salts or isomers, that is not in a final dosage
form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal drug abuse
control laws;
      (2)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III or IV substance other than an anabolic
steroid or a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (3)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (4)   An amount equal to or exceeding 250 milliliters or 250 grams of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule V substance;
      (5)   An amount equal to or exceeding 200 solid dosage units, 16 grams,
or 16 milliliters of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III anabolic steroid;
      (6)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is a
combination of a fentanyl-related compound and any other compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V,
if the defendant is charged with a violation of R.C. § 2925.11 and the
sentencing provisions set forth in R.C. § 2925.11(C)(10)(b) and (C)(11) will
not apply regarding the defendant and the violation, the bulk amount of the
controlled substance for purposes of the violation is the amount specified in
division (1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) of this definition for the other Schedule
III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance that is combined with the
fentanyl-related compound.
   CERTIFIED GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE. A duly constituted and organized committee of
the Ohio State Bar Association or of one or more local bar associations of the
state that complies with the criteria set forth in Rule V, Section 6 of the
Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   COCAINE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A cocaine salt, isomer, or derivative, a salt of a cocaine isomer
or derivative, or the base form of cocaine.
      (2)   Coca leaves or a salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of coca
leaves, including ecgonine, a salt, isomer, or derivative of ecgonine, or a
salt of an isomer or derivative of ecgonine.
      (3)   A salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of a substance
identified in division (1) or (2) of this definition that is chemically
equivalent to or identical with any of those substances, except that the
substances shall not include decocainized coca leaves or extraction of coca
leaves if the extractions do not contain cocaine or ecgonine.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A JUVENILE. An offense is “committed in the
vicinity of a juvenile” if the offender commits the offense within 100 feet of
a juvenile or within the view of a juvenile, regardless of whether the offender
knows the age of the juvenile, whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed within 100 feet of or within view of the juvenile, or whether the
juvenile actually views the commission of the offense.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. An offense is “committed in the
vicinity of a school” if the offender commits the offense on school premises,
in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of any school
premises, regardless of whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed on school premises, in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the
boundaries of any school premises.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER OR A
RECOVERING ADDICT. An offense is “committed in the vicinity of a substance
addiction services provider or a recovering addict” if either of the following
apply:
      (1)   The offender commits the offense on the premises of a substance
addiction services provider’s facility, including a facility licensed prior to
June 29, 2019, under R.C. § 5119.391 to provide methadone treatment or an
opioid treatment program licensed on or after that date under R.C. § 5119.37,
or within 500 feet of the premises of a substance addiction services provider’s
facility and the offender knows or should know that the offense is being
committed within the vicinity of the substance addiction services provider’s
facility.
      (2)   The offender sells, offers to sell, delivers, or distributes the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog to a person who is
receiving treatment at the time of the commission of the offense, or received
treatment within 30 days prior to the commission of the offense, from a
substance addiction services provider and the offender knows that the person is
receiving or received that treatment.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any drug that bears, or whose container or label bears, a
trademark, trade name, or other identifying mark used without authorization of
the owner of rights to the trademark, trade name, or identifying mark.
      (2)   Any unmarked or unlabeled substance that is represented to be a
controlled substance manufactured, processed, packed, or distributed by a
person other than the person that manufactured, processed, packed, or
distributed it.
      (3)   Any substance that is represented to be a controlled substance but
is not a controlled substance or is a different controlled substance.
      (4)   Any substance other than a controlled substance that a reasonable
person would believe to be a controlled substance because of its similarity in
shape, size, and color, or its markings, labeling, packaging, distribution, or
the price for which it is sold or offered for sale.
   CULTIVATE. Includes planting, watering, fertilizing or tilling.
   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   DECEPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL. The disciplinary counsel appointed by the Board of
Commissioners on Grievances and Discipline of the Ohio Supreme Court under the
Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   DISPENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   DISTRIBUTE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2913.02(A) that constitutes theft of drugs,
or any violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, 2925.04, 2925.041, 2925.05,
2925.06, 2925.11, 2925.12, 2925.13, 2925.22, 2925.23, 2925.24, 2925.31,
2925.32, 2925.36, or 2925.37.
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former law of a municipality, state
or any other state or of the United States, that is substantially equivalent to
any section listed in division (1) of this definition.
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former law of a municipality, state
or any other state, or of the United States, of which planting, cultivating,
harvesting, processing, making, manufacturing, producing, shipping,
transporting, delivering, acquiring, possessing, storing, distributing,
dispensing, selling, inducing another to use, administering to another, using,
or otherwise dealing with a controlled substance is an element.
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing or attempting to commit, any offense under division (1), (2), or (3)
of this definition.
   DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
   FELONY DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any drug abuse offense that would constitute a
felony under the laws of this state, any other state, or the United States.
   FENTANYL-RELATED COMPOUND. Any of the following:
      (1)   Fentanyl;
      (2)   Alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1-(alpha-methyl-beta-phenyl)ethyl-4-
piperidyl] propionanilide; 1-(1-methyl-2-phenylethyl)-4-(N-propanilido)
piperidine);
      (3)   Alpha-methylthiofentanyl (N-[1-methyl-2-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylpropanamide);
      (4)   Beta-hydroxyfentanyl (N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-phenethyl-4-piperidinyl]-N-
phenylpropanamide);
      (5)   Beta-hydroxy-3-methylfentanyl (other name: N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-
phenethyl)-3- methyl-4-piperidinyl]-N-phenylpropanamide);
      (6)   3-methylfentanyl (N-[3-methyl-1-(2-phenylethyl)-4-piperidyl]-N-
phenylpropanamide);
      (7)   3-methylthiofentanyl (N-[3-methyl-1-[2-(thienyl)ethyl]-4-
piperidinyl]-– phenylpropanamide);
      (8)   Para-fluorofentanyl (N-(4-fluorophenyl)-N-[1-(2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]propanamide;
      (9)   Thiofentanyl (N-phenyl-N-[1-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-piperidinyl]-
propanamide;
      (10)   Alfentanil;
      (11)   Carfentanil;
      (12)   Remifentanil;
      (13)   Sufentanil;
      (14)   Acetyl-alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1-(1-methyl-2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylacetamide); and
      (15)   Any compound that meets all of the following fentanyl
pharmacophore requirements to bind at the mu receptor, as identified by a
report from an established forensic laboratory, including acetylfentanyl,
furanylfentanyl, valerylfentanyl, butyrylfentanyl, isobutyrylfentanyl, 4-
methoxybutyrylfentanyl, para-fluorobutyrylfentanyl, acrylfentanyl, and ortho-
fluorofentanyl:
         (a)   A chemical scaffold consisting of both of the following:
            1.   A five, six, or seven member ring structure containing a
nitrogen, whether or not further substituted;
            2.   An attached nitrogen to the ring, whether or not that nitrogen
is enclosed in a ring structure, including an attached aromatic ring or other
lipophilic group to that nitrogen.
         (b)   A polar functional group attached to the chemical scaffold,
including but not limited to a hydroxyl, ketone, amide, or ester;
         (c)   An alkyl or aryl substitution off the ring nitrogen of the
chemical scaffold; and
         (d)   The compound has not been approved for medical use by the United
States food and drug administration.
   HARMFUL INTOXICANT. Does not include beer or intoxicating liquor, but means
any of the following:
      (1)   Any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance the gas, fumes, or
vapor of which when inhaled can induce intoxication, excitement, giddiness,
irrational behavior, depression, stupefaction, paralysis, unconsciousness,
asphyxiation, or other harmful physiological effects, and includes but is not
limited to any of the following:
         (a)   Any volatile organic solvent, plastic cement, model cement,
fingernail polish remover, lacquer thinner, cleaning fluid, gasoline, or other
preparation containing a volatile organic solvent.
         (b)   Any aerosol propellant.
         (c)   Any fluorocarbon refrigerant.
         (d)   Any anesthetic gas.
      (2)   Gamma Butyrolactone;
      (3)   1,4 Butanediol.
   HASHISH.
      (1)   A resin or a preparation of a resin to which both of the following
apply:
         (a)   It is contained in or derived from any part of the plant of the
genus cannabis, whether in solid form or in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract, or liquid distillate form.
   Drug Offenses   283
         (b)   It has a delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of more than
0.3%.
      (2)   The term does not include a hemp byproduct in the possession of a
licensed hemp processor under R.C. Chapter 928, provided that the hemp
byproduct is being produced, stored, and disposed of in accordance with rules
adopted under R.C. § 928.03.
   HYPODERMIC. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   JUVENILE. A person under 18 years of age.
   LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   L.S.D. Lysergic acid diethylamide.
   MAJOR DRUG OFFENDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   MANUFACTURE. To plant, cultivate, harvest, process, make, prepare, or
otherwise engage in any part of the production of a drug, by propagation,
extraction, chemical synthesis, or compounding, or any combination of the same,
and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling, and other activities incident to
production.
   MANUFACTURER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   MARIHUANA. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01, except that it does
not include hashish.
   METHAMPHETAMINE. Methamphetamine, any salt, isomer, or salt of an isomer of
methamphetamine, or any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance containing
methamphetamine or any salt, isomer, or salt of an isomer of methamphetamine.
   MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE. Either of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it exists on and after July 1,
1996, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that is a misdemeanor
or a felony of the fifth degree.
   OFFICIAL WRITTEN ORDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   PERSON WITH A DRUG DEPENDENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
   PHARMACIST. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   PHARMACY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   POSSESS or POSSESSION. Having control over a thing or substance but may not
be inferred solely from mere access to the thing or substance through ownership
or occupation of the premises upon which the thing or substance is found.
   PREMISES OF A SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER'S FACILITY. Means the
parcel of real property on which any substance addiction service provider’s
facility is situated.
   PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   PRESUMPTION FOR A PRISON TERM or PRESUMPTION THAT A PRISON TERM SHALL BE
IMPOSED. A presumption as described in R.C. § 2929.13(D) that a prison term is
a necessary sanction for a felony in order to comply with the purposes and
principles of sentencing under R.C. § 2929.11.
   PROFESSIONAL LICENSE. Any license, permit, certificate, registration,
qualification, admission, temporary license, temporary permit, temporary
certificate, or temporary registration that is described in R.C. § 2925.01(W)
(1) through (W)(37) and that qualifies a person as a professionally licensed
person.
   PROFESSIONALLY LICENSED PERSON. Any of the following:
      (1)   A person who has received a certificate or temporary certificate as
a certified public accountant or who has registered as a public accountant
under R.C. Chapter 4701 and who holds an Ohio permit issued under that chapter;
      (2)   A person who holds a certificate of qualification to practice
architecture issued or renewed and registered under R.C. Chapter 4703;
      (3)   A person who is registered as a landscape architect under R.C.
Chapter 4703 or who holds a permit as a landscape architect issued under that
chapter;
      (4)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4707;
      (5)   A person who has been issued a barber’s license, barber
instructor’s license, assistant barber instructor’s license, or independent
contractor’s license under R.C. Chapter 4709;
      (6)   A person licensed and regulated to engage in the business of a debt
pooling company by a legislative authority, under authority of R.C. Chapter
4710;
      (7)   A person who has been issued a cosmetologist’s license, hair
designer’s license, manicurist’s license, esthetician’s license, natural hair
stylist’s license, advanced license to practice cosmetology, advanced license
to practice hair design, advanced license to practice manicuring, advanced
license to practice esthetics, advanced license to practice natural hair
styling, cosmetology instructor’s license, hair design instructor’s license,
manicurist instructor’s license, esthetics instructor’s license, natural hair
style instructor’s license, independent contractor’s license, or tanning
facility permit under R.C. Chapter 4713;
      (8)   A person who has been issued a license to practice dentistry, a
general anesthesia permit, a conscious sedation permit, a limited resident’s
license, a limited teaching license, a dental hygienist’s license, or a dental
hygienist’s teacher’s certificate under R.C. Chapter 4715;
      (9)   A person who has been issued an embalmer’s license, a funeral
director’s license, a funeral home license, or a crematory license, or who has
been registered for an embalmer’s or funeral director’s apprenticeship under
R.C. Chapter 4717;
      (10)   A person who has been licensed as a registered nurse or practical
nurse, or who has been issued a certificate for the practice of nurse-midwifery
under R.C. Chapter 4723;
      (11)   A person who has been licensed to practice optometry or to engage
in optical dispensing under R.C. Chapter 4725;
      (12)   A person licensed to act as a pawnbroker under R.C. Chapter 4727;
      (13)   A person licensed to act as a precious metals dealer under R.C.
Chapter 4728;
      (14)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a pharmacist or
pharmacy intern or registered under that chapter as a registered pharmacy
technician, certified pharmacy technician, or pharmacy technician trainee;
      (15)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a manufacturer of
dangerous drugs, outsourcing facility, third-party logistics provider,
repackager of dangerous drugs, wholesale distributor of dangerous drugs, or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
      (16)   A person who is authorized to practice as a physician assistant
under R.C. Chapter 4730;
      (17)   A person who has been issued a license to practice medicine and
surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric medicine and surgery
under R.C. Chapter 4731 or has been issued a certificate to practice a limited
branch of medicine under that chapter;
      (18)   A person licensed as a psychologist, independent school
psychologist, or school psychologist under R.C. Chapter 4732;
      (19)   A person registered to practice the profession of engineering or
surveying under R.C. Chapter 4733;
      (20)   A person who has been issued a license to practice chiropractic
under R.C. Chapter 4734;
      (21)   A person licensed to act as a real estate broker or real estate
salesperson under R.C. Chapter 4735;
      (22)   A person registered as a registered environmental health
specialist under R.C. Chapter 3776;
      (23)   A person licensed to operate or maintain a junkyard under R.C.
Chapter 4737;
      (24)   A person who has been issued a motor vehicle salvage dealer’s
license under R.C. Chapter 4738;
      (25)   A person who has been licensed to act as a steam engineer under
R.C. Chapter 4739;
      (26)   A person who has been issued a license or temporary permit to
practice veterinary medicine or any of its branches, or who is registered as a
graduate animal technician under R.C. Chapter 4741;
      (27)   A person who has been issued a hearing aid dealer’s or fitter’s
license or trainee permit under R.C. Chapter 4747;
      (28)   A person who has been issued a class A, class B, or class C
license or who has been registered as an investigator or security guard
employee under R.C. Chapter 4749;
      (29)   A person licensed to practice as a nursing home administrator
under R.C. Chapter 4751;
      (30)   A person licensed to practice as a speech-language pathologist or
audiologist under R.C. Chapter 4753;
      (31)   A person issued a license as an occupational therapist or physical
therapist under R.C. Chapter 4755;
      (32)   A person who is licensed as a licensed professional clinical
counselor, licensed professional counselor, social worker, independent social
worker, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage and family
therapist, or registered as a social work assistant under R.C. Chapter 4757;
      (33)   A person issued a license to practice dietetics under R.C. Chapter
4759;
      (34)   A person who has been issued a license or limited permit to
practice respiratory therapy under R.C. Chapter 4761;
      (35)   A person who has been issued a real estate appraiser certificate
under R.C. Chapter 4763;
      (36)   A person who has been issued a home inspector license under R.C.
Chapter 4764;
      (37)   A person who has been admitted to the bar by order of the Ohio
Supreme Court in compliance with its prescribed and published rules;
      (38)   A person who has been issued a license to practice as a certified
mental health assistant under R.C. Chapter 4772.
   PUBLIC PREMISES. Any hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other
place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort.
   SALE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   SAMPLE DRUG. A drug or pharmaceutical preparation that would be hazardous to
health or safety if used without the supervision of a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs, or a drug of abuse, and that, at
one time, had been placed in a container plainly marked as a sample by a
manufacturer.
   SCHEDULE I, SCHEDULE II, SCHEDULE III, SCHEDULE IV or SCHEDULE V. Have the
same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   SCHOOL. Any school operated by a board of education, any community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or any nonpublic school for which the
Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards under R.C. §
3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or
training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a criminal
offense is committed.
   SCHOOL BUILDING. Any building in which any of the instruction,
extracurricular activities, or training provided by a school is conducted,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
   SCHOOL PREMISES. Either of the following:
      (1)   The parcel of real property on which any school is situated,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted on the premises at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
      (2)   Any other parcel of real property that is owned or leased by a
board of education of a school, the governing authority of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or the governing body of a nonpublic
school for which the Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum
standards under R.C. § 3301.07 and on which some of the instruction,
extracurricular activities, or training of the school is conducted, whether or
not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the
school is being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a criminal
offense is committed.
   STANDARD PHARMACEUTICAL REFERENCE MANUAL. The current edition, with
cumulative changes if any, of references that are approved by the State Board
of Pharmacy.
   SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Means an agency, association,
corporation or other legal entity, individual, or program that provides one or
more of the following at a facility:
      (1)   Either alcohol addiction services, or drug addiction services, or
both such services that are certified by the Ohio Director of Mental Health and
Addiction Services under R.C. § 5119.36;
      (2)   Recovery supports that are related to either alcohol addiction
services, or drug addiction services, or both such services and paid for with
federal, state, or local funds administered by the Ohio Department of Mental
Health and Addiction Services or a board of alcohol, drug addiction, and mental
health services.
   UNIT DOSE. An amount or unit or a compound, mixture, or preparation
containing a controlled substance that is separately identifiable and in a form
that indicates that it is the amount or unit by which the controlled substance
is separately administered to or taken by an individual.
   WHOLESALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
(R.C.§ 2925.01) (Prior Code, § 624.01)
§ 138.02 ADULT USE CANNABIS CONTROL; LIMITATIONS ON CONDUCT BY INDIVIDUALS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780 and notwithstanding
any conflicting provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, an adult use
consumer, may do the following:
      (1)   Use adult use cannabis;
      (2)   Possess, transfer without remuneration to another adult consumer,
or transport adult use cannabis, subject to division (B) of this section; and
      (3)   Purchase adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary per day in
amounts that do not exceed the possession limits set forth in division (B)(1)
of this section.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3796:
      (1)   The amount of cannabis that may be possessed by an adult use
consumer shall not exceed:
         (a)   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         (b)   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
      (2)   The amount of cannabis that may be transferred by an adult use
consumer without remuneration and not advertised or promoted to the public
shall not exceed:
         (a)   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         (b)   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
      (3)   The amount of cannabis that may be transported by an adult use
consumer shall not exceed:
         (a)   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         (b)   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, an adult use
consumer shall not be subject to arrest, criminal prosecution, or civil penalty
for engaging in any of the activities authorized under R.C. Chapter 3780,
including:
      (1)   Obtaining, using, possessing, or transporting adult use cannabis;
      (2)   Performing conduct authorized under R.C. § 3780.29;
      (3)   Acquiring, possessing, using, purchasing, manufacturing, selling,
or transporting paraphernalia; and
      (4)   Assisting another adult use consumer, or allowing property to be
used, in any of the acts authorized by R.C. Chapter 3780.
   (D)   (1)   An individual is prohibited from operating a vehicle, motor
vehicle, streetcar, trackless trolley, bike, watercraft, or aircraft while
using adult use cannabis or while under the influence of adult use cannabis and
is subject to R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance
for any violation of this division.
      (2)   An individual is prohibited from smoking, vaporizing, or using any
other combustible adult use cannabis product while in a vehicle, motor vehicle,
streetcar, trackless trolley, bike, watercraft, or aircraft and is subject to
R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for any
violation of this division.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, no individual under
21 years of age shall knowingly show or give false information concerning the
individual’s name, age, or other identification for the purpose of purchasing
adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter
3780.
   (F)   Nothing in R.C. Chapter 3780 is intended to permit the transfer or
sale of adult use cannabis, with or without remuneration, to an individual
under 21 years of age, or to allow an individual under 21 years of age to
purchase, possess, use, process, transport, or cultivate cannabis except where
authorized by R.C. Chapter 3796.
   (G)   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly permit their
residence, any other private property under their control, or any vehicle,
conveyance, or watercraft under their control to be used by an invitee of the
parent’s child or the guardian’s ward, if the invitee is under 21 years of age,
in a manner that constitutes a violation of R.C. Chapter 3780.
      (1)   A parent or guardian is deemed to have knowingly permitted their
residence, any other private property under their control, or any vehicle,
conveyance, or watercraft under their control to be used in violation of R.C.
Chapter 3780 if they knowingly authorize or permit consumption of cannabis by
underage invitees.
      (2)   Where the residence or other property has an owner and a tenant or
lessee, the trier of fact may infer that the residence or other property is
occupied only by the tenant or lessee.
(R.C. § 3780.36)
   (H)   Penalties.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3796, R.C. § 2925.11
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall apply when an adult use
consumer possesses an amount of cannabis greater than the limits set forth in
division (B)(1) of this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, an adult use
consumer who uses adult use cannabis in public areas, or who violates division
(D)(2) of this section as a passenger, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   (a)   An individual under 21 years of age who knowingly shows or
gives false information concerning the individual’s name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining adult use
cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter 3780 is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If, in committing a first
violation, the offender presented to an adult use dispensary licensed under
R.C. Chapter 3780 a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $250 and not
more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more
than six months.
         (b)   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the
offender presented to an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter 3780
a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false or fictitious
driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s license issued
by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000,
and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months. The
court also may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from
the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7). The court, in lieu of suspending
the offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or
driver’s license, instead may order the offender to perform a determinate
number of hours of community service, with the court determining the actual
number of hours and the nature of the community service the offender shall
perform.
         (c)   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or
subsequent time, the offender presented to an adult use dispensary licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3780 a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a
false or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a
driver’s license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than
$500 nor more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of
not more than six months. Except as provided in this division, the court also
may impose a class six suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that the suspension
or denial remain in effect until the offender attains the age of 21 years. The
court, in lieu of suspending the offender’s temporary instruction permit,
probationary driver’s license, or driver’s license, instead may order the
offender to perform a determinate number of hours of community service, with
the court determining the actual number of hours and the nature of the
community service the offender shall perform.
      (4)   An individual who is under 21 years of age and who solicits another
individual to purchase adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3780 is guilty of:
         (a)   For a first violation, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; and
         (b)   For a second or subsequent violation, a misdemeanor of the
second degree.
      (5)   An employee or agent of an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C.
Chapter 3780 who knowingly sells cannabis to an individual under 21 years of
age is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   Any individual who violates R.C. § 3780.10(A), or R.C. § 3780.29
(F), is guilty of the illegal trafficking in drugs under R.C. § 2925.03 and the
illegal manufacture of drugs under R.C. § 2925.04.
      (7)   Any individual who violates division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this
section guilty of the illegal trafficking in drugs under R.C. § 2925.03.
      (8)   Any individual who violates R.C. § 3780.20(B) is guilty of illegal
dispensing of drug samples under R.C. § 2925.36 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
      (9)   (a)   An individual who violates division (G) of this section is
guilty of:
            1.   For a first violation, a misdemeanor of the third degree; and
            2.   For a second or subsequent violation, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
         (b)   If a violation of division (G) of this section directly or
indirectly results in great bodily harm or death to any individual, the
individual violating division (G) is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 3780.99)
§ 138.03 DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly obtain, possess, or use a controlled
substance or a controlled substance analog.
   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)    Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
4741, and 4772.
         (b)   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is
conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an
anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration.
         (c)   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses, or
administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is
expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other
nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the Federal Food, Drug,
and Cosmetic Act, and is sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed, or
administered for that purpose in accordance with that Act.
         (d)   Any person who obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs if the prescription was issued for a legitimate medical purpose and not
altered, forged, or obtained through deception or commission of a theft
offense. As used in this division (B)(1)(d), “deception” and “theft offense”
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (2)   (a)   As used in division (B)(2) of this section:
            COMMUNITY ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 5119.01.
            COMMUNITY CONTROL SANCTION. Has the same meanings as in R.C. §
2929.01
            HEALTH CARE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2919.16.
            MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE. A violation of this section or R.C.
§ 2925.11 that is a misdemeanor or a felony of the fifth degree.
            PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
            POST-RELEASE CONTROL SANCTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2967.28.
            PUBLIC AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2930.01.
            QUALIFIED INDIVIDUAL. A person who is acting in good faith who
seeks or obtains medical assistance for another person who is experiencing a
drug overdose, a person who experiences a drug overdose and who seeks medical
assistance for that overdose, or a person who is the subject of another person
seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that overdose as described in
division (B)(2)(b) of this section.
            SEEK OR OBTAIN MEDICAL ASSISTANCE. Includes, but is not limited to
making a 9-1-1 call, contacting in person or by telephone call an on-duty peace
officer, or transporting or presenting a person to a health care facility.
         (b)   Subject to division (B)(2)(e) of this section, a qualified
individual shall not be arrested, charged, prosecuted, convicted, or penalized
pursuant to this chapter for a minor drug possession offense or a violation of
R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141 if all of the
following apply:
            1.   The evidence of the obtaining, possession, or use of the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog, drug abuse instruments, or
drug paraphernalia that would be the basis of the offense was obtained as a
result of the qualified individual seeking the medical assistance or
experiencing an overdose and needing medical assistance.
            2.   Subject to division (B)(2)(f) of this section, within 30 days
after seeking or obtaining the medical assistance, the qualified individual
seeks and obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment from a
community addiction services provider or a properly credentialed addiction
treatment professional.
            3.   Subject to division (B)(2)(f) of this section, the qualified
individual who obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment under
division (B)(2)(b)2. of this section, upon the request of any prosecuting
attorney, submits documentation to the prosecuting attorney that verifies that
the qualified individual satisfied the requirements of that division. The
documentation shall be limited to the date and time of the screening obtained
and referral received.
         (c)   If a person who is serving a community control sanction or is
under a sanction on post-release control acts pursuant to division (B)(2)(b) of
this section, then R.C. § 2929.141(B), R.C. § 2929.15(B)(2), R.C. § 2929.25(D)
(3), or R.C. § 2967.28(F)(3) applies to the person with respect to any
violation of the sanction or post-release control sanction based on a minor
drug possession offense, as defined in R.C. § 2925.11, or a violation of R.C. §
2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141.
         (d)   Nothing in division (B)(2)(b) of this section shall be construed
to do any of the following:
            1.   Limit the admissibility of any evidence in connection with the
investigation or prosecution of a crime with regards to a defendant who does
not qualify for the protections of division (B)(2)(b) of this section or with
regards to any crime other than a minor drug possession offense or a violation
of R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141 committed by a
person who qualifies for protection pursuant to division (B)(2)(b) of this
section;
            2.   Limit any seizure of evidence or contraband otherwise
permitted by law;
            3.   Limit or abridge the authority of a peace officer to detain or
take into custody a person in the course of an investigation or to effectuate
an arrest for any offense except as provided in that division;
            4.   Limit, modify, or remove any immunity from liability available
pursuant to law in effect prior to September 13, 2016 to any public agency or
to an employee of any public agency.
         (e)   Division (B)(2)(b) of this section does not apply to any person
who twice previously has been granted an immunity under division (B)(2)(b) of
this section. No person shall be granted an immunity under division (B)(2)(b)
of this section more than two times.
         (f)   Nothing in this section shall compel any qualified individual to
disclose protected health information in a way that conflicts with the
requirements of the “Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996”, 104 Pub. L. No. 191, 110 Stat. 2021, 42 U.S.C. §§ 1320d et seq., as
amended, and regulations promulgated by the United States Department of Health
and Human Services to implement the act or the requirements of 42 C.F.R. Part
2.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of one of the
following:
      (1)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II, with the
exception of marihuana or hashish, whoever violates division (A) of this
section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V,
whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of drugs.
The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2)(b) of this
section, possession of drugs is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the
offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds the bulk
amount, possession of drugs is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is marihuana or a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance containing marihuana other than hashish,
whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of
marihuana. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3)(b) or (C)(3)(c)
of this section, possession of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 100 grams
but is less than 200 grams, possession of marihuana is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
         (c)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
possession of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (4)   If the drug involved in the violation is hashish or a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance containing hashish, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of hashish. The penalty
for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(4)(b) or (C)(4)(c)
of this section, possession of hashish is a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds five grams
but is less than ten grams of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds one
gram but is less than two grams of hashish in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
         (c)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds ten grams
of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds two grams of hashish in a
liquid concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of
hashish is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and marihuana, one of the following applies:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(5)(b) of this
section, the offender is guilty of possession of marihuana and shall be
punished as provided in division (C)(3) of this section. Except as otherwise
provided in division (C)(5)(b) of this section, the offender is not guilty of
possession of a fentanyl-related compound under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) and shall
not be charged with, convicted of, or punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) for
possession of a fentanyl-related compound.
         (b)   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11).
      (6)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and any Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance that is
not a fentanyl-related compound, one of the following applies:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(6)(b) of this
section, the offender is guilty of possession of drugs and shall be punished as
provided in division (C)(2) of this section. Except as otherwise provided in
division (C)(6)(b) of this section, the offender is not guilty of possession of
a fentanyl-related compound under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) and shall not be
charged with, convicted of, or punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) for
possession of a fentanyl-related compound.
         (b)   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11).
   (D)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
   (E)    In addition to any prison term or jail term authorized or required by
division (C) of this section and R.C. §§ 2929.13, 2929.14, 2929.22, 2929.24,
and 2929.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and in
addition to any other sanction that is imposed for the offense under this
section, R.C. §§ 2929.11 through 2929.18, or R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, if applicable, the court
shall also do the following:
      (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
   (F)   (1)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
      (2)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (F) of this section, the
sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.11) (Prior Code, § 624.03)
Statutory reference:
   Felony drug possession offenses, see R.C. § 2925.11(C)
§ 138.04 POSSESSING DRUG ABUSE INSTRUMENTS.
   (A)    No person shall knowingly make, obtain, possess, or use any
instrument, article, or thing the customary and primary purpose of which is for
the administration or use of a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, when the
instrument involved is a hypodermic or syringe, whether or not of crude or
extemporized manufacture or assembly, and the instrument, article, or thing
involved has been used by the offender to unlawfully administer or use a
dangerous drug, other than marihuana, or to prepare a dangerous drug, other
than marihuana, for unlawful administration or use.
   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies,
and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719,
4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, and 4772.
      (2)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of this section when a person seeks or obtains medical assistance for
another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a person experiences a drug
overdose and seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or a person is the
subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that
overdose.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing drug abuse
instruments, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, violation of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (D)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (D)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.12) (Prior Code, § 624.04)
§ 138.05 PERMITTING DRUG ABUSE.
   (A)   No person who is the owner, operator, or person in charge of a
locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, shall knowingly permit the vehicle to be used for the commission of a
felony drug abuse offense.
   (B)   No person, who is the owner, lessee, or occupant, or who has custody,
control, or supervision of premises, or real estate, including vacant land,
shall knowingly permit his or her premises, or real estate, including vacant
land, to be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse offense by another
person.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting drug abuse.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, permitting
drug abuse is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Permitting drug abuse is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the felony drug abuse offense in question is a
violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, or 2925.04, or if the felony drug abuse
offense in question is a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 and the offender had
actual knowledge, at the time the offender permitted the vehicle, premises, or
real estate to be used as described in division (A) or (B) of this section,
that the person who assembled or possessed the chemicals in question in
violation of R.C. § 2925.041 had assembled or possessed them with the intent to
manufacture a controlled substance in Schedule I or Schedule II in violation of
R.C. § 2925.04.
   (D)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that
arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (D)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the clerk of
the court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the requirements of R.C. §
2925.03(F). The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as specified
in R.C. § 2925.03(F).
   (F)   Any premises or real estate that is permitted to be used in violation
of division (B) of this section constitutes a nuisance subject to abatement
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2925.13) (Prior Code, § 624.05)
§ 138.06 (RESERVED)
§ 138.07 ABUSING HARMFUL INTOXICANTS.
   (A)   Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental, or veterinary
purposes, no person, with purpose to induce intoxication or similar
physiological effects, shall obtain, possess, or use a harmful intoxicant.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abusing harmful
intoxicants, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, abusing harmful intoxicants is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to the September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (C)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.31) (Prior Code, § 624.07)
§ 138.08 ILLEGAL DISPENSING OF DRUG SAMPLES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly furnish a sample drug to another person.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to manufacturers,
wholesalers, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, licensed health professionals
authorized to prescribe drugs, and other persons whose conduct is in accordance
with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4725, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, and 4772.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal dispensing of
drug samples.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the offense is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II, with the
exception of marihuana, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the offense is a dangerous drug or a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule
IV or Schedule V, or is marihuana, the penalty for the offense shall be
determined as follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in the following division, illegal
dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
         (b)   If the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in
the vicinity of a juvenile, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (D)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that
arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (D)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the clerk of
the court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the requirements of R.C. §
2925.03(F). The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as specified
in R.C. § 2925.03(F).
(R.C. § 2925.36(A) - (D), (F)) (Prior Code, § 624.08)
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 2925.36(C)(2)
§ 138.09 FEDERAL PROSECUTION BAR TO MUNICIPAL PROSECUTION.
   No person shall be prosecuted for a violation of this chapter if the person
has been acquitted or convicted under the federal drug abuse control laws of
the same act or omission which, it is alleged, constitutes a violation of this
chapter.
(R.C. §§ 2925.50, 3719.11) (Prior Code, § 624.11)
§ 138.10 NITROUS OXIDE: IMPROPER DISPENSING OR DISTRIBUTION; POSSESSION IN A
MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   Improper dispensing or distribution.
      (1)   No person who dispenses or distributes nitrous oxide in cartridges
shall fail to comply with either of the following:
         (a)   The record-keeping requirements established under division (A)
(3) of this section.
         (b)   The labeling and transaction identification requirements
established under division (A)(4) of this section.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) of this section is
guilty of improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
      (3)   Beginning July 1, 2001, a person who dispenses or distributes
nitrous oxide shall record each transaction involving the dispensing or
distribution of the nitrous oxide on a separate card. The person shall require
the purchaser to sign the card and provide a complete residence address. The
person dispensing or distributing the nitrous oxide shall sign and date the
card. The person shall retain the card recording a transaction for one year
from the date of the transaction. The person shall maintain the cards at the
person’s business address and make them available during normal business hours
for inspection and copying by officers or employees of the State Board of
Pharmacy or of other law enforcement agencies that are authorized to
investigate violations of this code, R.C. Chapters 2925, 3719, or 4729, or
federal drug abuse control laws. The cards used to record each transaction
shall inform the purchaser of the following:
         (a)   That nitrous oxide cartridges are to be used only for purposes
of preparing food;
         (b)   That inhalation of nitrous oxide can have dangerous health
effects; and
         (c)   That it is a violation of state law to distribute or dispense
cartridges of nitrous oxide to any person under age 21, punishable as a felony
of the fifth degree.
      (4)   (a)   Each cartridge of nitrous oxide dispensed or distributed in
this municipality shall bear the following printed warning: “Nitrous oxide
cartridges are to be used only for purposes of preparing food. Nitrous oxide
cartridges may not be sold to persons under age 21. Do not inhale contents.
Misuse can be dangerous to your health.”
         (b)   Each time a person dispenses or distributes one or more
cartridges of nitrous oxide, the person shall mark the packaging containing the
cartridges with a label or other device that identifies the person who
dispensed or distributed the nitrous oxide and the person’s business address.
(R.C. § 2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G))
   (B)   Possession in a motor vehicle.
      (1)   As used in this section, MOTOR VEHICLE, STREET and HIGHWAY have the
same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      (2)   Unless authorized by this code or by state law, no person shall
possess an open cartridge of nitrous oxide in either of the following
circumstances:
         (a)   While operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on
a street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking.
         (b)   While being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on a street,
highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular traffic or parking.
      (3)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of possessing nitrous
oxide in a motor vehicle, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (4)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for
possessing nitrous oxide in a motor vehicle, the court may suspend for not more
than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit.
(R.C. § 2925.33) (Prior Code, §§ 624.073, 624.076)
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking in harmful intoxicants, see R.C. § 2925.32
§ 138.11 LABORATORY REPORT REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this chapter or
R.C. Chapters 2925 or 3719, a laboratory report from the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation or a laboratory operated by another law
enforcement agency, or a laboratory established by or under the authority of an
institution of higher education that has its main campus in this state and that
is accredited by the Association of American Universities or the North Central
Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, primarily for the purpose of
providing scientific service to law enforcement agencies, and signed by the
person performing the analysis, stating that the substance that is the basis of
the alleged offense has been weighed and analyzed and stating the findings as
to the content, weight, and identity of the substance and that it contains any
amount of a controlled substance and the number and description of unit
dosages, is prima facie evidence of the content, identity, and weight or the
existence and number of unit dosages of the substance. In any criminal
prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 or a violation of this chapter,
R.C. Chapter 2925 or R.C. Chapter 3719 that is based on the possession of
chemicals sufficient to produce a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance
included in Schedule I, II, III, IV, or V, a laboratory report from the Bureau
or from any laboratory that is operated or established as described in this
division that is signed by the person performing the analysis, stating that the
substances that are the basis of the alleged offense have been weighed and
analyzed and stating the findings as to the content, weight, and identity of
each of the substances, is prima facie evidence of the content, identity, and
weight of the substances.
      (2)   Attached to that report shall be a copy of a notarized statement by
the signer of the report giving the name of the signer and stating that the
signer is an employee of the laboratory issuing the report and that performing
the analysis is a part of the signer’s regular duties, and giving an outline of
the signer’s education, training, and experience for performing an analysis of
materials included under this section. The signer shall attest that
scientifically accepted tests were performed with due caution, and that the
evidence was handled in accordance with established and accepted procedures
while in the custody of the laboratory.
   (B)   The prosecuting attorney shall serve a copy of the report on the
attorney of record for the accused, or on the accused if the accused has no
attorney, prior to any proceeding in which the report is to be used against the
accused other than at a preliminary hearing or grand jury proceeding where the
report may be used without having been previously served upon the accused.
   (C)   The report shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents,
identity, and weight or the existence and number of unit dosages of the
substance if the accused or the accused’s attorney demands the testimony of the
person signing the report, by serving the demand upon the prosecuting attorney,
within seven days from the accused or the accused’s attorney’s receipt of the
report. The time may be extended by a trial judge in the interests of justice.
   (D)   Any report issued for use under this section shall contain notice of
the right of the accused to demand, and the manner in which the accused shall
demand, the testimony of the person signing the report.
   (E)   Any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or R.C.
Chapters 2925 or 3719 is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have a portion of the substance that is, or of each of the
substances that are, the basis of the alleged violation preserved for the
benefit of independent analysis performed by a laboratory analyst employed by
the accused person, or, if the accused is indigent, by a qualified laboratory
analyst appointed by the court. Such portion shall be a representative sample
of the entire substance that is, or of each of the substances that are, the
basis of the alleged violation and shall be of sufficient size, in the opinion
of the court, to permit the accused’s analyst to make a thorough scientific
analysis concerning the identity of the substance or substances. The
prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused’s analyst with the sample
portion at least 14 days prior to trial, unless the trial is to be held in a
court not of record or unless the accused person is charged with a minor
misdemeanor, in which case the prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused’s
analyst with the sample portion at least three days prior to trial. If the
prosecuting attorney determines that such a sample portion cannot be preserved
and given to the accused’s analyst, the prosecuting attorney shall so inform
the accused person, or the accused’s attorney. In such a circumstance, the
accused person is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have the accused’s privately employed or court appointed analyst
present at an analysis of the substance that is, or the substances that are,
the basis of the alleged violation, and, upon further written request, to
receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result from the analysis
and that can be used by an analyst in arriving at conclusions, findings, or
opinions concerning the identity of the substance or substances subject to the
analysis.
   (F)   In addition to the rights provided under division (E) of this section,
any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or R.C. Chapters 2925
or 3719 that involves a bulk amount of a controlled substance, or any multiple
thereof, or who is accused of a violation of R.C. § 2925.11 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, other than a minor misdemeanor violation, that
involves marihuana, is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have a laboratory analyst of the accused’s choice, or, if the
accused is indigent, a qualified laboratory analyst appointed by the court,
present at a measurement or weighing of the substance that is the basis of the
alleged violation. Also, the accused person is entitled, upon further written
request, to receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result from the
measurement or weighing and that can be used by an analyst in arriving at
conclusions, findings, or opinions concerning the weight, volume, or number of
unit doses of the substance subject to the measurement or weighing.
(R.C. § 2925.51)
   (G)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required under
R.C. §§ 2929.18 and 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required
under any provision of law, the court imposing sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a drug abuse offense may order the offender to
pay to the state, municipal, or county law enforcement agencies that handled
the investigation and prosecution all of the costs that the state, municipal
corporation, or county reasonably incurred in having tests performed under this
section or R.C. § 2925.51 or in any other manner on any substance that was the
basis of, or involved in, the offense to determine whether the substance
contained any amount of a controlled substance if the results of the tests
indicate that the substance tested contained any controlled substance. No court
shall order an offender under this section to pay the costs of tests performed
on a substance if the results of the tests do not indicate that the substance
tested contained any controlled substance. The court shall hold a hearing to
determine the amount of costs to be imposed under this section. The court may
hold the hearing as part of the sentencing hearing for the offender.
(R.C. § 2925.511) (Prior Code, § 624.10)
§ 138.12 COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly possess any counterfeit controlled
substance.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be guilty of
possession of counterfeit controlled substances, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2925.37(A), (G)) (Prior Code, § 624.06)
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking and other felony counterfeit controlled substance offenses, see
R.C. § 2925.37(H) - (M)
§ 138.13 USE, POSSESSION, OR SALE OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   As used in this section, DRUG PARAPHERNALIA means any equipment,
product, or material of any kind that is used by the offender, intended by the
offender for use, or designed for use, in propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the
human body, a controlled substance in violation of this chapter. The term
includes but is not limited to any of the following equipment, products, or
materials that are used by the offender, intended by the offender for use, or
designed by the offender for use, in any of the following manners:
      (1)   A kit for propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting any
species of a plant that is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived.
      (2)   A kit for manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, or preparing a controlled substance.
      (3)   Any object, instrument, or device for manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, or preparing methamphetamine.
      (4)   An isomerization device for increasing the potency of any species
of a plant that is a controlled substance.
      (5)   Testing equipment for identifying, or analyzing the strength,
effectiveness, or purity of, a controlled substance, except for those exempted
in division (D)(4) of this section;
      (6)   A scale or balance for weighing or measuring a controlled
substance.
      (7)   A diluent or adulterant, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose, or lactose, for cutting a controlled substance.
      (8)   A separation gin or sifter for removing twigs and seeds from, or
otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana.
      (9)   A blender, bowl, container, spoon, or mixing device for compounding
a controlled substance.
      (10)   A capsule, balloon, envelope, or container for packaging small
quantities of a controlled substance.
      (11)   A container or device for storing or concealing a controlled
substance.
      (12)   A hypodermic syringe, needle, or instrument for parenterally
injecting a controlled substance into the human body.
      (13)   An object, instrument, or device for ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing into the human body, marihuana, cocaine, hashish, or
hashish oil, such as a metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or
ceramic pipe, with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or
punctured metal bowl; water pipe; carburetion tube or device; smoking or
carburetion mask; roach clip or similar object used to hold burning material,
such as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be
held in the hand; miniature cocaine spoon, or cocaine vial; chamber pipe;
carburetor pipe; electric pipe; air driver pipe; chillum; bong; or ice pipe or
chiller.
   (B)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, the following:
      (1)   Any statement by the owner or by anyone in control of the
equipment, product, or material, concerning its use.
      (2)   The proximity in time or space of the equipment, product, or
material, or of the act relating to the equipment, product, or material, to a
violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2925.
      (3)   The proximity of the equipment, product, or material to any
controlled substance.
      (4)   The existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the
equipment, product, or material.
      (5)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of
anyone in control, of the equipment, product, or material, to deliver it to any
person whom he or she knows intends to use the equipment, product, or material
to facilitate a violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter
2925. A finding that the owner or anyone in control of the equipment, product,
or material is not guilty of a violation of any other provision of this chapter
or R.C. Chapter 2925 does not prevent a finding that the equipment, product, or
material was intended or designed by the offender for use as drug
paraphernalia.
      (6)   Any oral or written instruction provided with the equipment,
product, or material concerning its use.
      (7)   Any descriptive material accompanying the equipment, product, or
material and explaining or depicting its use.
      (8)   National or local advertising concerning the use of the equipment,
product, or material.
      (9)   The manner and circumstances in which the equipment, product, or
material is displayed for sale.
      (10)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of the sales of the
equipment, product, or material to the total sales of the business enterprise.
      (11)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the equipment,
product, or material in the community.
      (12)   Expert testimony concerning the use of the equipment, product, or
material.
   (C)   (1)   Subject to divisions (D)(2), (D)(3), and (D)(4) of this section,
no person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, drug
paraphernalia.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly sell, or possess or manufacture with
purpose to sell, drug paraphernalia, if he or she knows or reasonably should
know that the equipment, product, or material will be used as drug
paraphernalia.
      (3)   No person shall place an advertisement in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill, or other publication that is published and printed and circulates
primarily within this state, if he or she knows that the purpose of the
advertisement is to promote the illegal sale in this municipality or in this
state of the equipment, product, or material that the offender intended or
designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
   (D)   (1)    This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies,
and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, and 4772. This section shall not be construed to
prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C. §
3719.172.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a person’s use,
or possession with purpose to use, any drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a
product, or material of any kind that is used by the person, intended by the
person for use, or designed for use in storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body
marihuana.
      (3)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of division (C)(1) of this section when a person seeks or obtains
medical assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a
person experiences a drug overdose and seeks medical assistance for that
overdose, or a person is the subject of another person seeking or obtaining
medical assistance for that overdose.
      (4)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a person’s use,
or possession with purpose to use, any drug testing strips to determine the
presence of fentanyl or a fentanyl-related compound.
   (E)   Notwithstanding R.C. Chapter 2981, any drug paraphernalia that was
used, possessed, sold, or manufactured in violation of this section shall be
seized, after a conviction for that violation, shall be forfeited, and upon
forfeiture shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 2981.12(B).
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (C)(1) of this section is guilty of
illegal use or possession of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (F)(3) of this section, whoever
violates division (C)(2) of this section is guilty of dealing in drug
paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C)(2) of this section by selling drug
paraphernalia to a juvenile is guilty of selling drug paraphernalia to
juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (C)(3) of this section is guilty of
illegal advertising of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (G)   (1)    If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in
addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the
court immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33.
      (3)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (G)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.14)
   (H)   Illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia.
      (1)   As used in this division (H), DRUG PARAPHERNALIA has the same
meaning as in division (A) of this section.
      (2)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, all factors identified in division (B) of this
section.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, any
drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a product, or material of any kind that
is used by the person, intended by the person for use, or designed for use in
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body marihuana.
      (4)   This division (H) does not apply to any person identified in
division (D)(1) of this section, and it shall not be construed to prohibit the
possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C. § 3719.172.
      (5)   (a)   Division (E) of this section applies with respect to any drug
paraphernalia that was used or possessed in violation of division (H) of this
section.
         (b)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of this division (H) when a person seeks or obtains medical
assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a person
experiences a drug overdose and seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or
a person is the subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical
assistance for that overdose.
      (6)   (a)   Whoever violates division (H)(3) of this section is guilty of
illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia, a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   Arrest or conviction for a violation of division (H)(3) of this
section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the
person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s
criminal record, including any inquiries contained in any application for
employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with
the person’s appearance as a witness.
      (7)   (a)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender
for a violation of division (H) of this section, the court shall do the
following, if applicable:
            1.   If the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or
the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of
circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit for not more than five years.
            2.   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
         (b)   1.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under division (H)
of this section prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the
sentencing court requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an
offender who pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another
state or the United States that arose out of the same set of circumstances as
the violation for which the offender’s license or permit was suspended under
division (H) of this section shall not file such a motion.
            2.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (H)(7)(b) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.141) (Prior Code, § 624.14)
§ 138.14 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE OR PRESCRIPTION LABELS.
   (A)   Whenever a manufacturer sells a controlled substance, and whenever a
wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility sells a controlled substance in
a package the wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility has prepared, the
manufacturer or the wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility, as the
case may be, shall securely affix to each package in which the controlled
substance is contained a label showing in legible English the name and address
of the vendor and the quantity, kind, and form of controlled substance
contained therein. No person, except a pharmacist for the purpose of dispensing
a controlled substance upon a prescription shall alter, deface, or remove any
label so affixed. As used in this division, “repackager” and “outsourcing
facility” have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (B)   No person shall alter, deface or remove any label affixed pursuant to
R.C. § 3719.08 as long as any of the original contents remain.
(R.C. § 3719.08(A), (E))
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, or R.C. § 3719.07 or 3719.08, or a drug abuse offense, a violation of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the
violation involves the sale, offer to sell, or possession of a Schedule I or II
controlled substance, with the exception of marihuana, and if the offender, as
a result of the violation, is a major drug offender, then R.C. § 3719.99(D)
applies.
(R.C. § 3719.99(C))
(Prior Code, § 624.13)
§ 138.15 POSSESSION, SALE AND DISPOSAL OF HYPODERMICS.
   (A)   Possession of a hypodermic is authorized for the following:
      (1)   A manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in hypodermics, or
medication packaged in hypodermics, and any authorized agent of employee of
that manufacturer, distributor or dealer, in the regular course of business;
      (2)   A terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, in the regular course of
business;
      (3)   A person authorized to administer injections, in the regular course
of the person’s profession or employment;
      (4)   A person, when the hypodermic in his possession was lawfully
obtained and is kept and used for the purpose of self-administration of insulin
or other drug prescribed for the treatment of disease by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs;
      (5)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for legal research, clinical,
educational or medicinal purposes;
      (6)   A farmer, for the lawful administration of a drug to an animal;
      (7)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for lawful professional,
mechanical, trade or craft purposes.
   (B)   No manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics or
medication packaged in hypodermics, or their authorized agents or employees,
and no terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, shall display any hypodermic
for sale. No person authorized to possess a hypodermic pursuant to division (A)
of this section shall negligently fail to take reasonable precautions to
prevent any hypodermic in the person’s possession from theft or acquisition by
any unauthorized person.
(R.C. § 3719.172(A), (B))
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of division (B) of this section, R.C. § 3719.05, 3719.06,
3719.13, 3719.172(B), or 3719.31, or a drug abuse offense, a violation of
division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 3719.99(E))
(Prior Code, § 624.09)
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 3719.172(C) and (D)
§ 138.16 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE SCHEDULES.
   Controlled Substance Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as established in R.C.
§ 3719.41 and amended by R.C. §§ 3719.43 and 3719.44, are hereby adopted by
reference, and shall be treated as if set forth in full herein.
(Prior Code, § 624.12)
§ 138.17 UNLAWFUL FURNISHING OF PRESCRIPTION TO ENABLE PERSONS TO BE ISSUED
HANDICAPPED PARKING PLACARDS OR LICENSE PLATES.
   (A)   No physician or chiropractor shall do either of the following:
      (1)    Furnish a person with a prescription in order to enable the person
to be issued a standard removable windshield placard, temporary removable
windshield placard, permanent removable windshield placard, or license plates
under R.C. § 4503.44, knowing that the person does not meet any of the criteria
contained in R.C. § 4503.44(A)(1).
      (2)   Furnish a person with a prescription described in division (A)(1)
of this section and knowingly misstate on the prescription the length of time
the physician or chiropractor expects the person to have the disability that
limits or impairs the person’s ability to walk in order to enable the person to
retain a placard issued under R.C. § 4503.44 for a period of time longer than
that which would be estimated by a similar practitioner under the same or
similar circumstances.
(R.C. §§ 4731.481, 4734.161)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. §§ 4731.99(F), 4734.99(B))
Cross-reference:
   Parking privileges for persons with disabilities, see §
76.05
§ 138.18 SALE OF PSEUDOEPHEDRINE.
   (A)   Unlawful purchases.
      (1)   As used in divisions (A), (B), (C) and (D) of this section:
         CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or used by humans
and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only pursuant to a
prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or
salts of optical isomers.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products for sale
to the general public.
         SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 4729.01.
      (2)   (a)   1.    No individual shall knowingly purchase, receive, or
otherwise acquire an amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
that is greater than either of the following unless the pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product is dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist and the licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772:
               a.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The limits specified in divisions (A)(2)(a)1.a. and (A)(2)
(a)1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine or
base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The limits do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         (b)   It is not a violation of division (B)(1) of this section for an
individual to receive or accept more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product specified in division (A)(2)(a)1.a. or (A)(2)(a)1.b. of
this section if the individual is an employee of a retailer or terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   (a)    No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly
purchase, receive, or otherwise acquire a pseudoephedrine product, or ephedrine
product unless the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product is dispensed by
a pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist
and the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772.
         (b)   Division (A)(3)(a) of this section does not apply to an
individual under 18 years of age who purchases, receives, or otherwise acquires
a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product from any of the following:
            1.    A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to that individual and whose conduct is in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772;
            2.   A parent or guardian of that individual who provides the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person, as authorized by that individual’s parent or
guardian, who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            4.   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs who
provides the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to that individual if
the individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs and the individual receives or accepts from the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (4)   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly show or give
false information concerning the individual’s name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing, receiving, or otherwise acquiring
a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
      (5)   No individual shall knowingly fail to comply with the requirements
of R.C. § 3715.051(B).
      (6)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(a) of this section is guilty of
unlawful purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (A)(3)(a) of this section is guilty of
underage purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is guilty of using
false information to purchase a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the first degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (9)   Whoever violates division (A)(5) of this section is guilty of
improper purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2925.55)
   (B)   Unlawful retail sales.
      (1)   (a)   1.   Except as provided in division (B)(1)(b) of this
section, no retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee
of a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall knowingly sell,
offer to sell, hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide to any individual
an amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
               a.    Three and six-tenths grams within a period of a single
day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (B)(1)(a)1.a. and
(B)(1)(a)1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine
or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         (b)   1.    Division (B)(1)(a) of this section does not apply to any
quantity of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs if the conduct of the pharmacist and
the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772.
            2.   It is not a violation of division (B)(1)(a) of this section
for a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee of either
to provide to an individual more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product specified in division (B)(1)(a)1.a. or (B)(1)(a)1.b. of this
section under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the
retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a sealed container in
connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging,
loading, or unloading of the product;
               b.   A stop-sale alert is generated after the submission of
information to the national precursor log exchange under the conditions
described in R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(b) of this section, no
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall sell, offer to sell,
hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual who is under 18 years of age.
         (b)   Division (B)(2)(a) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
            1.    A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age and whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
4741, or 4772;
            2.   A parent or guardian of an individual under 18 years of age
who provides a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person who, as authorized by the individual’s parent or
guardian, dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age;
            4.   The provision by a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, or employee of either of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
in a sealed container to an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs who is under 18 years of age in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.051(A) or R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
      (4)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.052(A)(1).
      (5)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(a) of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (B)(2)(a) of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to a minor, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section is guilty of
improper sale of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a misdemeanor
of the second degree.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (B)(4) of this section is guilty of
failing to submit information to the national precursor log exchange, a
misdemeanor for which the offender shall be fined not more than $1,000 per
violation.
(R.C. § 2925.56)
   (C)   Transaction scans.
      (1)   As used in this division and division (D) of this section:
         CARD HOLDER. Means any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee
of a seller, to purchase or receive any pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product from the seller, agent, or employee.
         IDENTIFICATION CARD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2927.021.
         SELLER. Means a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs.
         TRANSACTION SCAN. Means the process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks by means of a transaction scan device the validity
of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card that is
presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving any pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product.
         TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2927.021.
      (2)   (a)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away, or otherwise distributing
to the card holder a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
         (b)   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (C)(2)(a) of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away, or otherwise distribute any
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the card holder.
         (c)   Division (C)(2)(a) of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller as a condition for selling, giving away, or
otherwise distributing a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the
person presenting the document from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or an identification card if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. §
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (C) and division (D) of this section.
      (4)   (a)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except the following:
            1.   The name, address, and date of birth of the person listed on
the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by
a card holder;
            2.   The expiration date, identification number, and issuing agency
of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by a card holder.
         (b)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (C)(4)(a) of this section except for
purposes of division (D) of this section, R.C. § 2925.58, or R.C. § 3715.052(A)
(1).
         (c)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (C)(2)(a) of this section.
         (d)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (D) of this section
or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (C) or division (D) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable state or federal laws or rules governing the
sale, giving away, or other distribution of pseudoephedrine products or
ephedrine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (C)(2)(b) or (C)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil penalty of
up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay each
collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the County
Treasury.
(R.C. § 2925.57)
   (D)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (B) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of a pseudoephedrine product is an
element of the alleged violation if the seller, agent, or employee raises and
proves as an affirmative defense that all of the following occurred:
         (a)   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive a
pseudoephedrine product presented a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
an identification card.
         (b)   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that
the license or card was valid.
         (c)   The pseudoephedrine product was sold, given away, or otherwise
distributed to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification
presented and the completed transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (D)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (B) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (B) of this
section. For purposes of division (D)(1)(c) of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         (a)   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away, or otherwise distributes a pseudoephedrine product is
18 years of age or older;
         (b)   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (D)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
deputy registrar who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50
through 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of
that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(R.C. § 2925.58)
   (E)   Retailer’s duties.
      (1)   As used in divisions (E) and (F) of this section:
         CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or used by humans
and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only pursuant to a
prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         DRUG. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. An officer or employee of any agency or
authority of the United States, a state, a territory, a political subdivision
of a state or territory, or an Indian tribe, who is empowered by the law to
investigate or conduct an official inquiry into a potential violation of law or
prosecute or otherwise conduct a criminal, civil, or administrative proceeding
arising from an alleged violation of law.
         LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         NATIONAL PRECURSOR LOG EXCHANGE or EXCHANGE. The electronic system for
tracking sales of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products on a national
basis that is administered by the National Association of Drug Diversion
Investigators or a successor organization.
         PHARMACIST. A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 to engage in the
practice of pharmacy.
         PHARMACY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         PRESCRIBER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         PROOF OF AGE. A driver’s license, a commercial driver’s license, a
military identification card, a passport, or an identification card issued
under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows a person is 18 years of age or
older.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or
salts of optical isomers.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products for sale
to the general public.
         SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         STOP-SALE ALERT. A notification sent from the national precursor log
exchange to a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs indicating
that the completion of a sale of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
would result in a violation of R.C. § 2925.56(A)(1) or federal law.
         TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same meanings as in
R.C. § 4729.01.
         WHOLESALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
      (2)   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs that sells,
offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers, or otherwise provides a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the public shall do all of the
following:
         (a)   Segregate pseudoephedrine products or ephedrine products from
other merchandise so that no member of the public may procure or purchase such
products without the direct assistance of a pharmacist or other authorized
employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
         (b)   With regard to each time a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product is sold or otherwise provided without a valid prescription:
            1.   Determine, by examination of a valid proof of age, that the
purchaser or recipient is at least 18 years of age;
            2.   a.   Using any information available, including information
from the national precursor log exchange if the information is accessible, make
a reasonable attempt to ensure that no individual purchases or receives an
amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
                  i.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single
day;
                  ii.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
               b.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (E)(2)(b)2.a.i.
and (E)(2)(b)2.a.ii. of this section apply to the total amount of base
pseudoephedrine or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product, respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s
overall weight.
         (c)   Maintain a log book of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product purchases, in accordance with R.C. § 3715.051;
         (d)   If required to comply with section R.C. § 3715.052, submit the
information specified in divisions (A)(1)(a) to (A)(1)(d) of that section to
the national precursor log exchange.
      (3)   Prescriptions, orders, and records maintained pursuant to this
section and stocks of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products shall be
open for inspection to federal, state, county, and municipal officers, and
employees of the State Board of Pharmacy whose duty it is to enforce the laws
of this state or of the United States relating to controlled substances. Such
prescriptions, orders, records, and stocks shall be open for inspection by the
State Medical Board and its employees for purposes of enforcing R.C. Chapter
4731.
(R.C. § 3715.05)
   (F)   Theft or loss; reporting requirements.
      (1)   Each retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy,
prescriber, or wholesaler that sells, offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers,
or otherwise provides any pseudoephedrine product and that discovers the theft
or loss of any pseudoephedrine product in an amount of more than nine grams per
incident of theft or loss shall notify all of the following upon discovery of
the theft or loss:
         (a)   The State Board of Pharmacy, by telephone immediately upon
discovery of the theft or loss;
         (b)   Law enforcement authorities. If the incident is a theft and the
theft constitutes a felony, the retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, pharmacy, prescriber, or wholesaler shall report the theft to the law
enforcement authorities in accordance with R.C. § 2921.22.
      (2)   Within 30 days after making a report by telephone to the State
Board of Pharmacy pursuant to division (F)(1)(a) of this section, a retailer,
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy, prescriber, or wholesaler
shall send a written report to the State Board of Pharmacy.
      (3)   The reports required under this section shall identify the product
that was stolen or lost, the amount of the product stolen or lost, and the date
and time of discovery of the theft or loss.
(R.C. § 3715.06)
(Prior Code, § 624.15)
§ 138.19 SALE OF PURE CAFFEINE PRODUCT.
   (A)   As used in this section, PURE CAFFEINE PRODUCT means:
      (1)   Subject to division (A)(2) of this section, a product that consists
solely or primarily of caffeine and is manufactured into a crystalline, liquid,
or powdered form.
      (2)   The phrase does not include any of the following that contains
caffeine and is formulated, manufactured, and labeled in accordance with the
laws and regulations enforced by the United States Food and Drug
Administration:
         (a)   Coffee, tea, any soft drink, any energy drink, or any other
caffeine-containing beverage;
         (b)   Any energy product.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, no person shall
knowingly sell or offer for sale a pure caffeine product.
   (C)   Division (B) of this section does not prohibit a person from selling
or offering for sale any product manufactured in a unit-dose form such as a
pill, tablet, or caplet, but only if each unit dose of the product contains not
more than 250 milligrams of caffeine.
   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits either of the following:
      (1)   Possession of a product described in division (C) of this section;
      (2)   Possession of a pure caffeine product by any of the following:
         (a)   A food processing establishment, as defined in R.C. § 3715.021;
         (b)   A manufacturer of a drug that is available without a
prescription;
         (c)   A laboratory that holds a current, valid category III terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs license issued by the state board of pharmacy
under R.C. § 4729.54;
         (d)   A laboratory of any agency or department of this state that
performs testing, analysis, and other laboratory services on behalf of the
state;
         (e)   A postal or delivery service that transports or delivers a pure
caffeine product to an entity specified in divisions (D)(2)(a) to (D)(2)(d) of
this section.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of illegal
sale of pure caffeine, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor
of the third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 2925.34) (Prior Code, § 624.16)
§ 138.20 SALE OF DEXTROMETHORPHAN.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      DEXTROMETHORPHAN. Means the dextrorotatory isomer of 3-methoxy-N-
methylmorphinan, including its salts, but not including its racemic or
levorotatory forms.
      EVIDENCE OF MAJORITY AND IDENTITY. Means a document issued by the federal
government or a state, county, or municipal government, or a subdivision or
agency of any of the foregoing, including a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, an identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52, a
military identification card, or any other form of identification that bears
the name, date of birth, description, and picture of the person identified.
      RETAILER. Means a place of business that offers consumer products for
sale to the general public, including a terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
that is licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 and operated as a pharmacy.
   (B)   No retailer or employee of a retailer shall knowingly supply, deliver,
give, or otherwise provide a drug, material, compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance containing any quantity of dextromethorphan through the sale of any
product to a person under 18 years of age, unless the person has been issued a
prescription for the product being purchased.
   (C)   For purposes of division (B) of this section, the person making the
sale of a product containing dextromethorphan shall require and obtain evidence
of majority and identity from the purchaser, unless from the purchaser’s
outward appearance the person making the sale would reasonably presume the
purchaser to be 25 years of age or older. Proof that the person making the sale
demanded, was shown, and acted in reasonable reliance on the purchaser’s
evidence of majority and identity is a defense to any charge of a violation of
division (B) of this section.
   (D)   A retailer or employee of a retailer is not liable for damages in a
civil action for injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly
arises from an act or omission associated with a failure to prevent the sale of
a product containing dextromethorphan to a person under 18 years of age, unless
the act or omission constitutes willful or wanton misconduct.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of illegally
selling dextromethorphan, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2925.62) (Prior Code, § 624.17)
§ 138.21 ADULT USE CANNABIS OPERATOR PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Pursuant to R.C. § 3780.25, as a business regulation and land use
matter, and for the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City of
Green, adult use cannabis operations are prohibited in all zoning districts
anywhere within the City of Green, Ohio.
   (B)   (1)   ADULT USE CANNABIS OPERATOR shall have the same meaning as in
R.C. § 3780.01(A)(2), effective December 7, 2023.
      (2)   No person or entity licensed as an adult use cannabis operator
under R.C. Chapter 3780 shall open, establish, or operate any business or
commercial enterprise of any kind within the corporate limits of the city.
      (3)   No zoning permit or other administrative approval shall be issued
by any administrative official of the city, nor shall any variance be approved
or granted to any person or entity for operation of a business or commercial
enterprise as an adult use cannabis operator within the corporate limits of the
city.
      (4)   Any use or condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of
any of the provisions of this section shall be and are declared to be a public
nuisance and may be abated by the city.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 2-25-2025)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
151.   BUILDING STANDARDS
      
152.   BUILDING ADMINISTRATION
      
153
.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
154.   FLOOD-PRONE AREAS AND FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
155.   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS
      
156.   ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEM
      
157.   PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT CODE
CHAPTER 150: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Roadway use, repair and maintenance agreement
Excavations
   
150.15   Permit required; exceptions
   
150.16   Permit application; bond; inspections; conditions
   
150.17   Operations
Roadway Ditch Enclosures
   
150.30   Compliance required
   
150.31   Materials and installation
   
150.32   Responsibilities of city
   
150.33   Responsibility of property owners
   
150.34   Contractor responsibilities and requirements
   
150.35   Permits and bonds
   
150.36   Roadway ditch enclosure/culvert pipe installation procedure
Driveways
   
150.50   Residential hard-surface driveway approaches
 
   
150.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Changing established grade, see R.C. § 727.07
   Ditches, see R.C. Ch. 6131 et seq.
   Excavation liability, see R.C. §§ 723.49 et seq.
   Municipal streets, see R.C. § 723.01
   Repair and reconstruction of ditches, see R.C. § 729.46
   Surface treatment, see R.C. §§ 723.23 and 723.31
   Openings by the municipality, see R.C. § 723.02
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 ROADWAY USE, REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT.
   (A)   Definition. ROADWAY, as used in this section, shall include, but not
be limited to, city highways, streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks, public
grounds, bridges, aqueducts and viaducts over which the city has the care,
supervision and control per R.C. § 723.01.
   (B)   Roadway use, repair and maintenance agreement when required. Where, in
the opinion of the City Engineer, a proposed activity will require frequent and
sustained use of a roadway by commercial trucks and similar vehicles,
regardless of whether the vehicles are overweight or oversized, the person or
business entity which will be engaging in the activity shall execute, prior to
using the roadway for the activity, a Roadway Use, Repair and Maintenance
Agreement (the “Agreement”) with the city. The Agreement shall be in a form
approved by the City Engineer, Service Director, Planning Director, Mayor and
Law Director. The following activities shall require execution of the
Agreement:
      (1)   Oil and natural gas drilling;
      (2)   Mining;
      (3)   Gravel pits or yards;
      (4)   Trucking terminals or trucking transfer stations;
      (5)   Installation/construction of oil and gas infrastructure, including
pipelines and related structures;
      (6)   Major earthmoving projects;
      (7)   Landfills;
      (8)   Wind farms; and
      (9)   Any other activity that, in the opinion of the City Engineer, would
require the city to incur additional costs to maintain a roadway as a result of
the activity.
   (C)   Roadway use, repair and maintenance agreement; when executed;
performance assurance bond. No person or business entity, or any employee,
agent or representative of a person or business entity, shall engage in any
activity set forth in divisions (B)(1) through (B)(9) of this section, except
where:
      (1)   The person or business entity has executed and delivered to the
city, the Agreement; and
      (2)   The person or business entity has secured and delivered to the city
a performance assurance bond in the amount of at least $300,000 of surety
coverage per mile of roadway.
(Prior Code, § 1020.01) (Ord. 2017-07, passed 4-11-2017)
EXCAVATIONS
§ 150.15 PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall dig, trench, excavate, grade, tunnel, cut an existing
curb or do any other work in, over or under any public street, avenue, alley,
lane, sidewalk or public grounds in the city without first obtaining the proper
permit therefor from the Director of Public Service or his or her appointee.
   (B)   A driveway culvert permit must be obtained prior to application for a
zoning permit for new construction which will require construction of a
driveway to access any public road with roadside ditches.
   (C)   No permit shall be required of any person performing work for or under
contract with the city or performing work on a new allotment or site
improvement shown on the plans and specifications approved by the city under
the provisions of the subdivision regulations of the city.
(Prior Code, § 1022.01) (Ord. 94-11, passed 10-11-1994)
§ 150.16 PERMIT APPLICATION; BOND; INSPECTIONS; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Application for a permit required by §
150.15 shall be made by the property owner or his or her authorized agent, to
the Director of Public Service or his or her appointee as enforcement officer,
on forms provided by the city.
   (B)   A $40 nonrefundable permit fee, to cover the cost of application
review and processing and inspection, shall be paid at the time an application
for a permit is submitted. A $50 nonrefundable permit fee, to cover the cost of
application review and processing and inspection, shall be paid at the time an
application for a special hauling permit is submitted. Each trip one-way shall
require a separate permit.
   (C)   A bond, if required, shall be determined by the Director of Public
Service or his or her appointee, based upon the scope and extent of excavation
required for each individual project. Such bond must be filed with the city
prior to issuance of any permit. The bond shall be in the form of a commercial
bond, certified check, cashier’s check or money order made payable to the city.
Cash will not be accepted. Bonds required in the amount of $1,000 or less must
be in the form of a certified check, cashier’s check or money order. The bond
shall be in force and shall be released upon satisfactory completion of
obligations set forth, as determined by the Director of Public Service or his
or her appointee. The maximum bonding period shall be one year. Utility
companies routinely working in the city may post one bond per year in an amount
established by the Director of Public Service or his or her appointee.
   (D)   The first hour of inspection shall be included in the permit fee.
Additional inspection time shall be billed to and paid by the permit holder.
All inspection fees must be paid before release of the bond.
   (E)   The Director of Public Service or his or her appointee may impose such
reasonable conditions or requirements upon issuance of a permit as he or she
deems necessary or proper to assure compliance with city regulations and
specifications.
(Prior Code, § 1022.02) (Ord. 94-11, passed 10-11-1994)
§ 150.17 OPERATIONS.
   All work shall be conducted in conformance with the rules, regulations,
procedures, standards and fee schedules as established by the Mayor or his or
her appointee. Noncompliance will cause the city to stop work until
requirements have been met.
(Prior Code, § 1022.03) (Ord. 94-11, passed 10-11-1994)
ROADWAY DITCH ENCLOSURES
§ 150.30 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   Any property owner who desires to enclose the roadway ditch along his or her
frontage shall do so only in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1024.01) (Ord. 92-8, passed 6-9-1992)
§ 150.31 MATERIALS AND INSTALLATION.
   (A)   The diameter of the proposed pipe shall not be less than the diameter
of the existing downstream pipe. Where no downstream pipe exists, or if the
city deems the size of the downstream pipe to be inadequate, then the city
shall determine the appropriate pipe size. The minimum pipe size shall be 12
inches in diameter.
   (B)   Acceptable pipe material shall be as follows:
      (1)   Corrugated, polyethylene pipe with smooth interior liner (two
walls) (ASTM F405). Single wall polyethylene pipe is not acceptable;
      (2)   Vitrified clay pipe (ASTM C700);
      (3)   Reinforced concrete pipe (ASTM C76); and
      (4)   Nonreinforced concrete pipe (ASTM C14).
   (C)   Installation shall be as shown and noted on approved standard
installation drawings indicating typical ditch sections and inlet spacings are
adequate.
(Prior Code, § 1024.02) (Ord. 92-8, passed 6-9-1992; Ord. 01-12, passed 7-10-
2001)
§ 150.32 RESPONSIBILITIES OF CITY.
   (A)   The city shall determine if the existing ditch has sufficient size and
depth to accept the proposed pipe. If the ditch cannot meet these criteria,
then the city may refuse permission to enclose the ditch.
   (B)   The city shall issue the necessary permit(s), bond(s) and approved
standard installation drawings indicating typical ditch sections and inlet
spacings are adequate.
(Prior Code, § 1024.03) (Ord. 92-8, passed 6-9-1992; Ord. 01-12, passed 7-10-
2001)
§ 150.33 RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNERS.
   (A)   If the city determines that the driveway pipe is in substandard or
poor condition or at an elevation that does not coincide with the proposed
ditch enclosure pipe, the property owner shall replace the driveway culvert
with new pipe to match the type of pipe used for the ditch enclosure.
   (B)   The property owner shall obtain and pay for the necessary permit(s)
and bond(s) required by the city.
   (C)   Any property owner who has enclosed a roadway ditch disregarding any
or all of the requirements contained in this subchapter shall remove or correct
the enclosure pipe and appurtenances as determined by the city. Failure to
comply shall constitute cause for removal of the enclosure by the city, at the
property owner’s expense, in addition to the penalty set forth in §
150.99.
(Prior Code, § 1024.04) (Ord. 01-12, passed 7-10-2001)
§ 150.34 CONTRACTOR RESPONSIBILITIES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)    Contractors proposing to perform ditch enclosure and/or drainage work
within the city are required to register with the Department of Public Service.
No fees are associated with registration.
   (B)   The contractor must provide a certificate of insurance in the minimum
amount of $350,000. The certificate of insurance must be issued by an agent
licensed to operate within the state.
   (C)   Registered contractors may post an annual bond in the amount of $5,000
or bond individual projects as provided in §
150.35.
   (D)   Acceptable bond forms shall include commercial bond, cashier’s check
or money order payable to the city.
   (E)   The annual registration and bonding period shall begin the first
working day of March each year.
   (F)   The Department of Public Service may discontinue issuing permits to a
contractor until prior project commitments have been completed.
(Prior Code, § 1024.05) (Ord. 01-12, passed 7-10-2001)
§ 150.35 PERMITS AND BONDS.
   (A)   Permits.
      (1)   A drainage permit must be obtained in the name of the property
owner or contractor prior to closure of a roadside drainage ditch within the
jurisdiction of the city, through the Department of Public Service.
      (2)   The nonrefundable permit fee shall be $40. Acceptable forms of
payment shall be a check or money order made payable to the city. The permit
shall be valid for 60 days from the date of issue.
   (B)   Performance bonds.
      (1)   A performance bond must be posted prior to issuance of a road
opening or drainage permit.
      (2)   The bond amount shall be determined by the Director of Public
Service or his or her designee. The minimum bond amount shall be $500.
      (3)   Acceptable bond forms shall include cashier’s check or money order
made payable to the city.
      (4)   The bond will be held pending final inspection or approval of the
ditch enclosure by the Department of Public Service or City Engineer’s office.
(Prior Code, § 1024.06) (Ord. 01-12, passed 7-10-2001)
§ 150.36 ROADWAY DITCH ENCLOSURE/CULVERT PIPE INSTALLATION PROCEDURE.
   All roadway ditch enclosures performed by the city shall be done in
accordance with one of the following two procedures.
   (A)   Enclosures/culvert pipe installation performed by the property owner.
      (1)   Prior to commencing any drainage work within the city right-of-way,
the property owner or property owner’s contractor shall be required to obtain a
storm water drainage permit, as provided in §
150.16, from the City Storm Water Division; provided the ditch qualifies under
the city’s right-of-way construction regulations.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a drainage permit, but prior to the commencement of
any work, the property owner or property owner’s contractor shall submit a copy
of the permit and plans of the proposed drainage work to the Storm Water
Superintendent or City Engineer for approval.
      (3)   Upon signature of the plans by the Storm Water Superintendent or
the City Engineer, the property owner or contractor shall obtain a performance
bond, as provided in §
150.16, equal to the value and scope of the proposed work.
      (4)   Upon completion of work, but prior to backfilling, an inspection of
the property owner’s and/or property owner’s contracted work will be made by
the Storm Water Superintendent or City Engineer. This inspection process will
include both pre-backfilling and post-backfilling inspections. Upon final
inspection of grading within the right-of-way, the site shall be seeded and
mulched.
      (5)   Upon completion, all pipe and other drainage components shall
remain the property of the city.
   (B)   Enclosures/culvert pipe installation performed by the city.
      (1)   The city will perform ditch enclosures, culvert pipe installation
and culvert replacements at the property owner’s request and at the property
owner’s expense; provided the ditch qualifies under the city’s right-of-way
construction regulations.
      (2)   The property owner must pay the city in advance for all necessary
materials, including pipe, catch basins and other material deemed necessary.
      (3)   The property owner must pay the city in advance for labor and
equipment to excavate and install drainage material, including backfill.
      (4)   The city will waive fees for permits and bonds.
      (5)   The property owner will be subject to the scheduling, installation
decisions and priority of work established by the Storm Water Superintendent.
      (6)   The property owner is responsible for landscaping, including fine-
grading and seeding, upon final completion of the drainage work.
      (7)   The pipe and other drainage components shall remain the property of
the city.
      (8)   This policy only applies to requests for road and right-of-way
drainage improvements that exceed maintenance and repair the city is required
to perform under the Ohio Revised Code.
(Prior Code, § 1024.07) (Ord. 01-12, passed 7-10-2001; Ord. 05-11, passed 6-14-
2005)
DRIVEWAYS
§ 150.50 RESIDENTIAL HARD-SURFACE DRIVEWAY APPROACHES.
   (A)   A permit shall be required for construction of a hard-surface driveway
approach to be constructed of concrete, asphalt, brick or other paving stone.
An application for a hard-surface driveway permit shall be made to the Director
of Public Service or his or her appointee.
   (B)   Hard-surface driveway approaches must be constructed in compliance
with city regulations and specifications.
   (C)   No person shall construct a concrete driveway in the city without
first obtaining a permit therefor from the city. The fee for such permit shall
be $25. The Mayor or his or her appointee shall establish regulations,
specifications and fee schedules for hard-surface driveway approach
construction.
   (D)   A driveway approach that is installed without a permit or that is not
constructed in compliance with city regulations shall be subject to removal by
the city, at the property owner’s expense, in addition to the penalty provided
in §
150.99.
(Prior Code, § 1026.01) (Ord. 94-12, passed 10-11-1994)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree and shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more
than 60 days, or both, for each offense.
(Prior Code, §§ 1022.99, 1024.99, 1026.99)
CHAPTER 151: BUILDING STANDARDS
Section
Ohio Basic Building Code
   
151.001   Current edition adopted
   
151.002   Purpose
   
151.003   Application
   
151.004   Compliance; violations
   
151.005   Enforcement
   
151.006   File and distribution copies
   
151.007   Conflict of laws
International One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code
   
151.020   Current edition adopted
   
151.021   Purpose
   
151.022   File and distribution copies
   
151.023   Conflict of laws
   
151.024   Amendments
Ohio Plumbing Code
   
151.035   Current edition adopted
   
151.036   Purpose
   
151.037   Application
   
151.038   File and distribution copies
   
151.039   Conflict of laws
National Electrical Code
   
151.050   Current edition adopted
   
151.051   Purpose
   
151.052   File and distribution copies
Exterior Property Maintenance Code
   
151.065   Purpose
   
151.066   Definitions
   
151.067   Administration and enforcement
   
151.068   Enforcement officials
   
151.069   Appeals
   
151.070   Prosecution
   
151.071   Abatement of nuisance by city and cost recovery
   
151.072   Transfer of ownership
   
151.073   Abandonment of construction project
   
151.074   Residential property maintenance standards
   
151.075   Commercial exterior property maintenance standards
   
151.076   Industrial exterior property maintenance standards
 
   
151.999   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Abandoned service stations, see R.C. §§ 3791.12 et seq.
   Adoption of technical codes by reference, see R.C. § 731.231
   Application, see R.C. §§ 3781.06, 3781.061, 3781.10(A) and 3781.11(A)
   Dead bolt locks in apartment buildings, see R.C. § 3781.103
   Enforcement, see R.C. §§ 3781.03, 3781.031, 3781.10(E), 3781.102 and 3781.19
   Final jurisdiction, see R.C. § 3781.04
   Power to enact further and additional regulations, see R.C. § 3781.01
   Power to enforce State Building Code relating to sanitary construction, see
R.C. § 3781.03
   Power to license electricians, see R.C. § 715.27
   Regulations to control house sewers and connections to sewerage system, see
R.C. § 729.51
   Removal of unsafe structures, see R.C. §§ 715.26(B) and 715.261
   Safety standards for refuse containers, see R.C. § 3791.21
   Smoke detection system for apartments and condominiums, see R.C. § 3781.104
   Submission of plans, see R.C. § 3791.04
   Use of public buildings by persons with a disability, see R.C. § 3781.111
OHIO BASIC BUILDING CODE
§ 151.001 CURRENT EDITION ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to R.C. § 731.231, the city shall adopt the most current edition of
the Ohio Building Code (OBC) as adopted by the Ohio Board of Building
Standards, Department of Industrial Relations, and as published in O.A.C.
Division 4101:2, save and except such portions of such code as may be amended
or deleted. Each time the Ohio Board of Building Standards, the Department of
Industrial Relations, updates and adopts a new edition of the Ohio Building
Code, that edition shall automatically be applicable and enforceable in the
city.
(Prior Code, § 1420.01) (Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-11-2014)
§ 151.002 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Ohio Basic Building Code, as adopted in §
151.001, is to:
   (A)   Provide uniform minimum standards and requirements for the erection,
construction, repair, alteration and maintenance of buildings, including
construction of industrialized units, such standards relating to the
conservation of energy, safety and sanitation of buildings for their intended
use and occupancy;
   (B)   Formulate such standards and requirements, so far as is practical, in
terms of performance objectives, so as to make adequate performance for the use
intended the test of acceptability;
   (C)   Permit, to the fullest extent feasible, the use of materials and
technical methods, devices and improvements, including the use of
industrialized units, which tend to reduce the cost of construction and
erection without affecting minimum requirements for the health, safety and
security of the occupants or users of buildings or industrialized units and
without preferential treatment of types or classes of materials or products or
methods of construction; and
   (D)   Encourage, so far as may be practical, the standardization of
construction practices, methods, equipment, material and techniques, including
methods employed to produce industrialized units.
(O.A.C. 4101:2-1-05)
(Prior Code, § 1420.02)
§ 151.003 APPLICATION.
   The Ohio Basic Building Code (“OBBC”) applies to all buildings except as
follows:
   (A)   Single-family, two-family and three-family dwelling houses which are
not constructed of industrialized units, except for the energy conservation
provisions;
   (B)   Buildings owned by and used for a function of the United States
government;
   (C)   Existing buildings where their location, parts, equipment and other
items do not constitute a serious hazard, unless otherwise regulated by the
provisions of Ch. 34, Existing Structures of the OBBC, being O.A.C. 4101:1-34;
   (D)   Buildings constructed in accordance with plans which have been
approved prior to the effective date of the OBBC;
   (E)   Buildings or structures which are incident to the use for agricultural
purposes of the land on which said buildings or structures are located;
provided such buildings or structures are not used in the business of retail
trade. For the purposes of this section, a building or structure is not
considered used in the business of retail trade if 50% or more of the gross
income received from sales of products in the building or structure by the
owner or operator is from sales of products produced or raised in a normal crop
year on farms owned or operated by the seller (see R.C. §§ 3781.06 and
3781.061);
   (F)   Agricultural labor camps as defined in R.C. § 3733.41;
   (G)   Single-family, two-family and three-family detached dwelling houses
for which applications have been submitted to the Ohio Director of Human
Services pursuant to R.C. § 5104.03 for the purposes of operating TYPE A FAMILY
DAY CARE HOMES as defined in R.C. § 5104.01; or
   (H)   Buildings or structures which are designed, constructed and maintained
in accordance with federal standards and regulations, and are used primarily
for federal and state military purposes where the U.S. Secretary of Defense,
pursuant to 10 U.S.C. Part IV - SERVICE, SUPPLY AND PROPERTY, Chapter 131 -
Planning and Coordination (§§ 2001 - 2229b); Chapter 133 - Facilities for
Reserve Components (§ 2231); Chapter 134 - Miscellaneous Administrative
Provisions (§§ 2241 - 2264):
      (1)   Acquired, by purchase, lease or transfer, and constructs, expands,
rehabilitates or corrects and equips, such buildings or structures as he or she
determines to be necessary to carry out the purposes of U.S.C. Ch. 133;
      (2)   Contributed to the state such amounts for the acquisition,
construction, expansion, rehabilitation and conversion by the state of such
additional buildings or structures as he or she determines to be required
because of the failure of existing facilities to meet the purposes of U.S.C.
Ch. 133; or
      (3)   Contributed to the state such amounts for the construction,
alteration or rehabilitation of arms storage rooms as he or she determines to
be required to meet a change in U.S. Department of Defense standards relating
to the safekeeping of arms.
(Prior Code, § 1420.03)
§ 151.004 COMPLIANCE; VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   No owner or any other person shall construct, erect, build or equip
any building or structure to which the Ohio Basic Building Code is applicable,
or make any addition thereto or alteration thereof, except in the case of
repairs or maintenance that does not affect the construction, sanitation,
safety or any other vital feature of such building or structure, without
complying with this chapter, R.C. Ch. 3781 and Ch. 3791 or the Ohio Basic
Building Code, or fail to comply with any lawful order issued pursuant thereto.
(R.C. §§ 3791.01, 3791.02)
   (B)   No architect, builder, engineer, plumber, carpenter, mason,
contractor, subcontractor, foreperson or employee shall violate or assist in
violating any of the provisions of this chapter, R.C. Ch. 3781 and Ch. 3791 or
the Ohio Basic Building Code, or fail to comply with any lawful order issued
pursuant thereto.
(R.C. §§ 3791.01, 3791.03)
   (C)   No owner or any other person shall proceed with the construction,
erection, alteration or equipment of any building or structure to which the
Ohio Basic Building Code is applicable without complying with this chapter and
the plan and specification submission and processing requirements of the
municipality, and until plans or drawings, specifications and data have been
approved or the industrialized unit has been inspected at the point of origin.
(R.C. § 3791.04)
(Prior Code, § 1420.04)
§ 151.005 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   When the municipality finds that work or equipment is contrary to this
chapter, approved plans therefor or the Ohio Basic Building Code, notice in
writing shall be sent to the owner of the building involved or his or her
agent. The notice shall state where and in what respect the work or equipment
does not conform to such lawful requirements and shall specify a reasonable
period of time in which to conform.
   (B)   Prior to enforcement of R.C. Ch. 3781 and Ch. 3791, or any rules
adopted pursuant thereto, including the Ohio Basic Building Code, as adopted in
§
151.001, by any remedy, civil or criminal, the municipality shall issue an
adjudication order within the meaning of R.C. §§ 119.06 to 119.13 or a stop
work order.
   (C)   Every adjudication order shall cite the law or rules directly involved
and shall specify what appliances, site preparations, additions or alterations
to structures, plans, materials, assemblages or procedures are necessary for
the same to comply with R.C. Ch. 3781 and Ch. 3791, and/or any rules adopted
pursuant thereto, including the provisions of the Ohio Basic Building Code
adopted in §
151.001.
   (D)   The order shall include notice to the party of the procedure for
appeal and right to a hearing if requested within 30 days of the mailing of the
notice. The notice shall also inform the party that at the hearing he or she
may be represented by counsel, present his or her arguments or contentions
orally or in writing, and present evidence and examine witnesses appearing for
or against him or her.
   (E)   Upon the issuance of any order provided for herein, the person
receiving such order shall cease work upon the site preparations or structure
to be constructed, or, in the case of an industrialized unit, the installation
of the unit, or shall cease using the appliance, materials, assemblages or
manufactured product identified in the order until such time as the appeal
provided for in accordance with the provisions of R.C. § 3781.19, and all
appeals from such hearing, have been completed, or the order herein has been
released.
   (F)   Failure to cease work after receipt of a stop work order is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 1420.06)
§ 151.006 FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   At least one copy of the codes adopted in §
151.001 are on file with the city for inspection by the public. At least one
copy of such codes are also on file in the County Law Library.
(Prior Code, § 1420.07) (Ord. 01-26, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 151.007 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   (A)   Whenever a provision of the Ohio Basic Building Code, as adopted in §
151.001, conflicts with a provision of the Ohio Fire Code or any other order,
standard or rule of the Ohio Department of Commerce, Division of State Fire
Marshal, the provision of the Ohio Basic Building Code shall control, except
that rules adopted and orders issued by the Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. Ch.
3743 prevail in the event of a conflict.
(R.C. § 3781.11(B))
   (B)   Whenever a provision of the Ohio Basic Building Code, as adopted in §
151.001, conflicts with a provision of any other standard technical code
adopted by the municipality, other than as provided in division (A) of this
section, or any ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of Council, the
stricter standard shall control.
   (C)   When a special provision is made in a use group classification of the
Ohio Basic Building Code and is inconsistent with a general provision of the
Ohio Basic Building Code relating to buildings generally, the special provision
governs, unless it appears that the provisions are cumulative.
(Prior Code, § 1420.08)
INTERNATIONAL ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING CODE
§ 151.020 CURRENT EDITION ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to R.C. § 731.231, the city shall adopt the most current edition of
the Residential Code of Ohio prepared and promulgated by the International Code
Council, save and except such portions as may be amended or deleted. Each time
the Ohio Board of Building Standards Department of Industrial Relations updates
and adopts a new edition of the Residential Code of Ohio, that edition shall
automatically be applicable and enforceable in the city.
(Prior Code, § 1422.01) (Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-11-2014)
§ 151.021 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the International One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, as
adopted in §
151.020, is to provide minimum standards for the protection of life, limb,
health, property and the environment, and for the safety and welfare of the
consumer, the general public and the owners and occupants of residential
buildings regulated by such Code.
(Prior Code, § 1422.02)
§ 151.022 FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   At least one copy of the International One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, as
adopted in §
151.020, is on file with the city for inspection by the public. At least one
copy is also on file in the County Law Library.
(Prior Code, § 1422.03) (Ord. 01-26, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 151.023 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of the
International One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, as adopted in §
151.020, and a provision of any other standard technical code adopted by the
city, the stricter standard shall prevail. In the event of a conflict between
any of the provisions of the International One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code
and any local ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation, the local ordinance,
resolution, rule or regulation shall control.
(Prior Code, § 1422.04)
§ 151.024 AMENDMENTS.
   The International One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, as adopted in §
151.020, is hereby amended as follows: International Part V-PLUMBING (Chapters
29 through 32) is hereby repealed.
(Prior Code, § 1422.05)
OHIO PLUMBING CODE
§ 151.035 CURRENT EDITION ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to R.C. § 731.231, the city shall adopt the most current edition of
the Ohio Plumbing Code, being Chs. 4101:3-1 to 4101:3-15 of the Ohio Basic
Building Code, save and except such portions as may be amended or deleted. Each
time the Ohio Board of Building Standards, Department of Industrial Relations,
updates and adopts a new edition of the Ohio Plumbing Code, that edition shall
automatically be applicable and enforceable in the city.
(Prior Code, § 1424.01) (Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-11-2014)
 § 151.036 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Ohio Plumbing Code, as adopted in §
151.035, is to provide uniform standards for the installation of all plumbing
devices, equipment and facilities in the city.
(Prior Code, § 1424.02)
§ 151.037 APPLICATION.
   The Ohio Plumbing Code, as adopted in §
151.035, is hereby made expressly applicable to all buildings, structures and
occupancies in the city, including nonindustrialized one-, two- and three-
family dwellings, and their appurtenant and accessory structures, and including
mercantile, industrial and institutional occupancies.
(Prior Code, § 1424.03)
§ 151.038 FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   At least one copy of the Ohio Plumbing Code, as adopted in §
151.035, is on file with the city for inspection by the public. At least one
copy is also on file in the County Law Library.
(Prior Code, § 1424.04) (Ord. 01-26, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 151.039 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of the Ohio
Plumbing Code, as adopted in §
151.035, and a provision of any other standard technical code adopted by the
city, or of any local ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation, the stricter
standard shall control.
(Prior Code, § 1424.05)
NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE
§ 151.050 CURRENT EDITION ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to R.C. § 731.231, the city shall adopt the most current edition of
the National Electrical Code, as recommended by the National Fire Protection
Association, save and except such portions as may be amended or deleted. Each
time the Ohio Board of Building Standards Department of Industrial Relations
updates and adopts a new edition of the National Electrical Code, that edition
shall automatically be applicable and enforceable in the city.
(Prior Code, § 1426.01) (Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-11-2014)
§ 151.051 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the National Electrical Code, as adopted in §
151.050, is to provide uniform standards for electrical materials and
installations in all structures in the city.
(Prior Code, § 1426.02)
§ 151.052 FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   At least one copy of the National Electrical Code, as adopted in §
151.050, is on file with the city for inspection by the public. At least one
copy is also on file in the County Law Library.
(Prior Code, § 1426.03) (Ord. 01-26, passed 11-13-2001)
EXTERIOR PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 151.065 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Exterior Property Maintenance Code for the city is to
protect the public health, safety and general welfare as it pertains to
premises and buildings used for residential, commercial and industrial
purposes. This protection is provided by:
   (A)   Establishing minimum standards for maintaining residential, commercial
and industrial environmental quality to preserve and to achieve an acceptable
appearance for existing structures and premises; avoiding blighting effects of
the substandard maintenance of structures and premises and its negative impact
on the value of surrounding properties; and eliminating hazardous conditions;
   (B)   Fixing the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants of
structures and their premises; and
   (C)   Providing for administration, enforcement and penalties.
(Ord. 2022-06A, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 151.066 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED. Approved by the Code Inspector.
   BASEMENT. The portion of a building which is partly or completely below
grade.
   BLIGHT. A property or structure which by reason of deterioration of site or
other improvements, unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the existence of
conditions which endanger life or property by fire or other causes, or any
combination of such factors and are detrimental to the public health, safety,
morals or welfare in its present condition or use.
   BUILDING CODE. The most current edition of the State Building Code, the
County Building Department’s standardized code or such other code as may be
officially designated by the city for the regulation of construction,
alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and
maintenance of all buildings and structures.
   CODE INSPECTOR. The official who is in charge with the compliance and
enforcement of this Code or any duly authorized representative.
   COMPOST. A mixture of decayed organic material that is intended for
fertilizer or conditioning of land.
   CONDEMN. To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
   EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS. The open space on the premises and on adjoining
property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
   GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, consumption of food and food packaging.
   GUARD. A building component or a system of building components located at or
near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility
of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.
   IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening
injury or death at any time.
   JUNK OR INOPERABLE OR UNLICENSED VEHICLE. Those vehicles that fit the
criteria set forth in §
130.07.
   OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as
a unit.
   PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or
structures thereon.
   PRESENTABLE APPEARANCE. That which is reasonable and acceptable and in
compliance with this Code.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Includes the following:
      (1)   The physical condition or use of any premises regarded as a public
nuisance at common law;
      (2)   Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its
appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including, but not
limited to, junk, inoperable or unlicensed vehicles, abandoned wells, shafts,
basements, excavations, abandoned appliances and unsafe fences or structures;
      (3)   Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation or use;
      (4)   Any premises, which is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard or
is manifestly unsafe or unsecured as to endanger life, limb or property;
      (5)   Any premises which is littered with rubbish or garbage; or
      (6)   Any structure or building that is in a state of dilapidation,
deterioration or decay; open, vacant or abandoned; damaged by fire to the
extent as not to provide shelter, in danger of collapse or failure; and is
dangerous to anyone on or near the premises.
   RUBBISH. Both combustible and non-combustible waste materials, including,
but not limited to, car parts, motors and abandoned appliances. The term shall
also include rags, cartons, boxes, lumber, rubber, leather, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery, excessive yard waste, chronic dust conditions
and other similar materials, as well as the residue from the burning of wood,
coal and other combustible materials, but not to include compost.
   STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal
proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It
is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited,
or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.
   STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
   WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level,
square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.
   YARD. An open space on the same lot with a structure.
(Ord. 2022-06A, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 151.067 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Application of Exterior Property Maintenance Code. This Code shall
apply to all premises and structures within the city used for or in conjunction
with human habitation, commercial purposes or industrial purposes which are now
or may become in the future substandard with respect to structure, maintenance
or other similar conditions which otherwise constitute a public nuisance. The
existence of such conditions, factors or characteristics adversely affects
public safety, general welfare and leads to the continuation, extension and
aggravation of blight and its attendant negative effect on surrounding property
values. Adequate protection of neighboring properties and the general public
requires the establishment of these property maintenance standards.
   (B)   Compliance required. Every portion of a building or premises used or
intended to be used for residential, commercial or industrial purposes, shall
comply with the provisions of this Exterior Property Maintenance Code,
irrespective of when such building has been constructed, altered or repaired,
or premises occupied, except as hereinafter provided.
   (C)   Conflict of laws. In any case where a provision of this Code conflicts
with any other provision of the codified ordinances or other regulation of the
city, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and
protection of the safety and health of the people, the more restrictive
provision, shall control.
   (D)   Existing remedies. Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to abolish,
impair or prevent the execution of any existing remedies of the city or its
officers or agents related to the abatement of a public nuisance. The
provisions in this Code shall not be construed to abolish or impair existing
remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the
removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous or unsafe.
   (E)   Separability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase of this Code is declared invalid for any reason, such declaration
shall not affect the remaining portions of this Code, which shall continue in
full force and effect, and to this end, the provisions of this Exterior
Property Maintenance Code are deemed severable.
   (F)   Savings clause. This Code shall not affect violations of any other
resolution, ordinance, code or regulation existing prior to the effective date
of this Exterior Property Maintenance Code, and any violations of such shall be
governed and shall continue to be punishable to the full extent of the law
under the provisions of those ordinances, codes or regulations in effect at the
time the violation was committed.
   (G)   Historic buildings. The provisions of this Code shall not be mandatory
and may not be applicable for existing buildings or structures designated by
the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or
structures are judged by the Code Inspector to be safe and in the public
interest of health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 2022-06A, passed 11-8-2022)
 § 151.068 ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS.
   (A)   Duties.
      (1)   The Director of Planning, which Department includes the Zoning and
Code Inspection Division, shall oversee and assign the duties of administering
and enforcing this Code to the Code Inspector.
      (2)   The Code Inspector will respond to resident complaints and/or
apparent violations observed by the Code Inspector, under the direction of the
Director of Planning. The Code Inspector may call upon any department, division
or contractor of the city for any assistance necessary to abate a violation of
this Code.
      (3)   The Law Director will assist with any and all legal action that may
become necessary due to noncompliance with this Code. All requests for legal
action to be taken must be forwarded to the Director of Law by the Code
Inspector and/or the Director of Planning. No citation for violation shall be
presented for prosecution without the approval of the Director of Law.
   (B)   Inspections. In response to resident complaints and/or apparent
violations observed by the Code Inspector, the Code Inspector will attempt to
contact the property owner for the purposes of scheduling a mutually agreeable
time to inspect the property by correspondence through mail or by door hanger.
The Code Inspector will also visit the site and view the exterior of the
property from the road right-of-way, or other property where the Code Inspector
has explicit permission to enter. For the purpose of making such inspections,
and upon showing appropriate identification, the Code Inspector is authorized
to enter upon, examine and survey during regular weekly business hours all
commercial and industrial property in the city, but not residential property
unless provided express permission to enter.
   (C)   Notice of violation. When the Code Inspector determines that there is
a violation of the provisions of this Code, they may give notice of such
violation to the owner and order compliance. Such notice and order shall:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification;
      (3)   Include a statement of the violation(s) and the reason for issuing
the notice;
      (4)   Include a correction order allowing a clearly identified time for
the repairs and improvements required to bring the property into compliance
with the provisions of this Code;
      (5)   State the right of the violator to file an appeal of the notice
within 21 days of receipt of the notice as required pursuant to division (D) of
this section; and
      (6)   State that if no acknowledgment by the property owner is received
upon the 21st day of delivery of the notification, and the violation is not
corrected within the reasonable time stated in the violation, a citation to
court may be issued unless there is good cause to extend the time to respond.
   (D)   Service. A notice of violation shall be deemed to be properly served
if one or more of the following methods are used:
      (1)   By personal delivery to the owner or occupant of the premises or by
leaving the notice at the premises with a person of suitable age and
discretion;
      (2)   By certified mail deposited in the United States post office, or
commercial carrier service utilizing any form of delivery requiring a signed
receipt, addressed to the person or persons responsible at his, her or their
last known address, with return receipt requested. If a certified mail envelope
is returned with endorsement showing that the envelope is unclaimed, then
service shall be sent by ordinary mail and the mailing shall be evidenced by a
certificate of mailing which shall be filed by the Code Inspector. Service
shall be deemed complete when the fact of mailing is entered of record;
provided that the ordinary mail envelope is not returned by the postal
authorities with an endorsement showing failure of delivery; or
      (3)   Upon proof of failure of service by division (D)(1) and (D)(2) of
this section, by posting a copy of the notice form in a conspicuous place on
the premises found in violation and publishing a legal notice in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city. The legal notice shall identify the owners of
the property, the last address, if known, of the owners, and parcel
identification, the location and nature of the violation.
(Ord. 2022-06A, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 151.069 APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeals Board. For purposes of this Code, the Board of Zoning Appeals
(“Board”) shall hear and decide all appeals permitted by this Code.
      (1)   Board. Board composition and appointment shall be in accordance
with Charter, Article VII, § 7.6.
      (2)   Procedure. The Board shall follow its written rules of procedure
for hearings and may adopt other rules of procedure not inconsistent with this
Code. No member of the Board shall take part in any hearing or determination in
which he or she has a personal or financial interest. Three members of the
Board in attendance at any meeting shall constitute a quorum.
      (3)   Authority. The Board shall hear all appeals relative to the
enforcement of this Code, and by a concurring vote of the majority of its
members may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision
appealed from, and shall make such order or determination as in its opinion
ought to be made. Failure to secure such concurring votes shall be deemed a
confirmation of the decision of the Code Inspector.
   (B)   Hearings.
      (1)   Any person(s) served with a notice of violation has the right to
appeal such notice to the Board. Such appeal must be filed on forms provided by
the city and must be filed within 14 days of service of the violation notice.
      (2)   Upon receipt of appeal, the Board shall set a time and place for
hearing before the Board and shall give the petitioner written notice by first-
class mail postmarked no less than ten days prior to the hearing. At such
hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show
cause why any items appearing on such notice and order should be modified, or
withdrawn. The failure of the petitioner or his or her representative to appear
and state his case at such hearing shall have the same effect as if no appeal
were filed.
   (C)   Findings. Prior to sustaining any violation and compliance order, the
Board shall make the following findings:
      (1)   The violator was served with a notice of violation and/or citation
as provided for in §
151.068;
      (2)   The notice of violation that was served stated the specific nature
of the violation; corrective action needed to be taken to abate the violation;
and a specific time period for abatement of the violation;
      (3)   Within the time period stipulated in the notice of violation, the
violator failed to comply with the notice of violation by not abating the
violation, and/or by not bringing the use into compliance with the Exterior
Property Maintenance Code; and
      (4)   Upon expiration of the date indicated for compliance in the notice
of violation, the property was being maintained in violation of specific
provisions of the Exterior Property Maintenance Code and/or conditions imposed
by the Board as a prerequisite to the modification of a previous compliance
order.
   (D)   Authority of Appeals Board. Within 30 days the hearing, the Board
shall render a decision sustaining, modifying or withdrawing any item appearing
on the notice and order. The petitioner shall be notified of the decision in
writing and served by certified mail or commercial carrier service. No fines or
assessments shall be imposed against the violator during the appeals process.
(Ord. 2022-06A, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 151.070 PROSECUTION.
   Any notice of violation not promptly complied with per §§
151.068 and
151.069 , shall be forwarded to the Director of Law for legal action who may
take legal action to collect all fines due and to assure compliance for
abatement of the nuisance.
(Ord. 2022-06A, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 151.071 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY CITY AND COST RECOVERY.
   After following the foregoing process and providing sufficient opportunity
to the owner to abate the nuisance, should the nuisance not be abated at the
expiration of the time stated in the notice or order of the Code Inspector or
any extensions granted or such additional time as the Appeals Board may grant,
the Law Director may obtain a warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction to
permit entry to take such action as deemed appropriate to abate the nuisance,
in addition to any remedies provided elsewhere in this Exterior Property
Maintenance Code. In abating such nuisance, the Code Inspector may provide the
owner with a list of available local resources, call on any department of the
city for any assistance necessary to abate the nuisance or may, by contract,
abate such nuisance and the cost of the contract will be paid for from city
funds. All costs incurred to abate a nuisance may be recovered in the following
manner.
   (A)   The owner(s) shall be billed directly by certified mail deposited with
the United States post office, or commercial carrier service utilizing any form
of delivery requiring a signed receipt. In the event the certified envelope is
returned with endorsement showing that the envelope is unclaimed, then service
shall be sent by ordinary mail and the mailing shall be evidenced by a
certificate of mailing which shall be filed by the Code Inspector.
   (B)   If the costs are not so recovered within 30 days of receipt of the
mailing described in division (A) of this section, the city may collect the
cost in accordance with the applicable provision of the Ohio Revised Code or as
otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. 2022-06A, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 151.072 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   The Law Director may file an affidavit with the County Recorder’s
Office for any property for which a notice of violation has been properly
served, which shall contain the following:
      (1)   The legal description of the property;
      (2)   The name of the owner(s);
      (3)   The department where the owners may obtain copies of the records
concerning the Exterior Property Maintenance Code violation;
      (4)   The violation of the Exterior Property Maintenance Code, with
specifics; and
      (5)   If costs have been occurred pursuant to §
151.071, a statement setting forth the exact amount of costs that have not yet
been collected.
   (B)   Upon completion of the corrective measures required to bring the
property into compliance and payment in full of any fees or assessments, the
Law Director shall file an affidavit of compliance with the County Recorder’s
Office.
   (C)   Noncompliance without remediation or abatement shall attach to the
property for a period of seven years, or until the Law Director files an
affidavit of compliance, whichever is earlier.
   (D)   During the attachment period, transfer of ownership must include an
affidavit from the transferee acknowledging the responsibility of making the
repairs, to be delivered to the Law Director.
(Ord. 2022-06A, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 151.073 ABANDONMENT OF CONSTRUCTION PROJECT.
   Any building or structure for which a building permit has been issued, and
except for circumstances beyond the property owner’s control (e.g., labor
strikes, inclement weather and the like), all construction work shall be
diligently pursued to completion. The code inspectors may request documentation
showing the cause for any delays. Any construction project, upon which no
substantial work has been undertaken for a period of six months, shall be
deemed abandoned. Upon any construction project being deemed abandoned, all
buildings or structures not completed to the degree such buildings or
structures have been indicated on the plans submitted in support of a building
permit, and all building materials and construction equipment shall be removed
from the site. The code inspectors may also require the structures to be
secured from the elements.
(Ord. 2022-06A, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 151.074 RESIDENTIAL EXTERIOR PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
   The following standards are applicable to all residential structures,
dwelling units, residential portions of mixed use structures and all dwelling
units located in commercial buildings.
   (A)   Structural soundness and maintenance of dwellings. Every foundation,
exterior wall and roof of every dwelling shall be so maintained and be kept in
good repair and in safe condition so as to make all occupied rooms and other
interior areas weather-tight, water-tight, rodent-proof and so as to be fit for
human habitation and so as to not adversely affect the neighborhood in which
they are located. Good repair, maintenance and safe condition shall include,
but is not limited to the following.
      (1)   Foundations. Foundations shall support the building at all points
and shall be free of all holes and cracks which admit rodents or lessen the
capability of the foundation to support the building.
      (2)   Exterior walls and surfaces. Exterior walls and other exterior
surface materials shall be free of holes, cracks, loose or rooting boards and
timbers or any other condition which might admit rodents, rain or dampness to
the interior of the dwelling.
      (3)   Windows. Windows shall be fully supplied with window glass or an
approved substitute which is glazed and is without open cracks or holes, shall
have sashes in good condition which fit within frames and maintained so as to
exclude adverse weather elements from entering the structure.
      (4)   Exterior doors. Doors shall be maintained so as to be structurally
sound, fit within frames so as to be weatherproof, windproof and waterproof and
be provided with door hinges and door latches which are in good working
condition.
      (5)   Roof. Roof members, covering and flashing shall be structurally
sound and right so as to prevent the entrance of moisture and be maintained by
renewal, repair, waterproofing or other suitable means. Roof drainage shall be
adequate to prevent rain water from being discharged in a manner that creates a
public nuisance or adversely affects adjacent properties. Roof drainage shall
be discharges to the storm sewer system when practicable.
      (6)   Gutters. Rain gutters, downspouts, leaders or other means of water
diversion shall be provided to collect/conduct and discharge all water from the
roof and maintained so as not to leak or cause dampness in the walls, ceiling
or basements or adversely affect adjacent properties. Downspout discharges that
tie to storm sewer system must have a cleanout installed prior to the entering
the road right-of-way or drainage easement.
      (7)   Sump pumps. Sump pumps if required are to be discharged into the
approved system. They cannot adversely affect adjacent properties.
      (8)   Pools. Pools may be drained onto natural ground at a metered rate
as to allow the water percolate into the soils. However, if it is adversely
affecting adjacent properties, then the pool must be discharged directly to the
storm sewer. Such discharge shall only be permitted when the chlorine residual
is below the lowest measurable value of the typical home test kit (usually 0.5
mg/L chlorine).
      (9)   Chimneys. Chimneys shall be free of cracks, holes or missing
portions and maintained in sound condition.
      (10)   Porch. Every porch shall be so maintained so as to be free of
missing, defective, rotting or deteriorated foundations, support, floors, other
members and stops thereto, so as to be safe to use and kept in sound condition
and in good repair.
      (11)   Structural member. Any structural member of a structure which has
become deteriorated or damaged to the extent that it does not serve the purpose
as originally intended shall be renewed, restored, repaired or replaced as is
necessary to serve the purpose as originally intended.
      (12)   Exterior surfaces. Except for materials that have been designed or
manufactured to remain untreated, all exterior wood, composition or metal
surfaces shall be protected from the elements by paint or other protective
covering. Surfaces shall be maintained so as to be kept clean and free of
flaking, loose or peeling paint or covering.
      (13)   Basement. Basement or cellar hatchways shall be so constructed and
maintained as to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage
into the dwelling.
   (B)   Exterior property and structure exteriors. All buildings and the
exterior of all premises shall be properly maintained to achieve a presentable
appearance and to avoid blighting effects and hazardous conditions.
      (1)   Maintenance. The exterior of all premises and every structure
thereon including, but not limited to, walls, roofs, cornices, chimneys,
drains, towers, porches, landings, fire escapes, stairs, signs, windows, doors,
awnings and all surfaces thereof, shall be maintained so as to avoid any
blighting effects on neighboring properties and shall be painted or protected
where necessary for the purpose of preservation. All canopies, signs, awnings,
exterior stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts, porches, balconies
and similar overhanging extensions, where exposed to public view, shall be
maintained in good condition and shall not show evidence of ripping, tearing or
deterioration.
      (2)   Fences and walls. All fences or similar structures shall always be
in the state of good structural repair. If any fences, retaining wall or
similar structure is found not to be in the state of good structural repair, it
shall be removed, replaced or repaired as required. Except when constructed of
materials that have been designed or manufactured to remain untreated, all
fences shall be treated periodically with paint or chemicals so as to retard
deterioration.
      (3)   Hazards. Hazards and unsanitary conditions shall be eliminated.
      (4)   Storage. Outside storage is permitted only in accordance with the
provisions of codified ordinances and in compliance with this subchapter.
      (5)   Drainage swales. Swales are to be maintained by the owners of the
parcels on which they are located, and at no time will anyone plant shrubs and/
or trees, or discharge, empty or place any material, fill or waste into any
swale so as to divert or impede drainage flow. Smaller swales can be mowed as
part of the yard. Larger swales in meadow situations should be mowed less
frequently in order to allow grasses to grow taller to retard runoff and
prevent erosion. Swales in woodland areas should be left in their natural
condition leaving understory growth to retard runoff and prevent erosion.
   (C)   Exterior stairways. All exterior stairways on all residential premises
shall be in accordance with the following provisions.
      (1)   Stairways shall be maintained free of holes, grooves and cracks
which constitute a safety hazard.
      (2)   Stairways shall be maintained free of rotted or deteriorated
supports.
      (3)   Stairways shall have treads of uniform width and risers of uniform
height.
      (4)   Stairway handrails and/or railings shall be firmly fastened and
maintained in good condition. Where the absence of handrails and/or railings
create a hazardous condition, the Code Inspector may require their installation
in accordance with the provisions of the Building Code.
   (D)   Accessory structures. All structures accessory to the dwellings,
including detached garages, shall be maintained structurally sound, neatly
maintained and in good repair or shall be razed to grade level and debris
removed from the premises.
(Ord. 2022-06A, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 151.075 COMMERCIAL EXTERIOR PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   General provisions. The following commercial exterior property
maintenance standards are applicable to all commercial structures, commercial
units and portions of mixed use structures which are devoted to commercial use,
including all exterior and structural requirements, soundness and maintenance.
   (B)   Structural soundness and maintenance of commercial structures. Every
foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof of every commercial structure shall
be so constructed and maintained and be kept in good repair and in safe
condition so as to make all occupied rooms and other interior areas
weathertight, watertight, rodentproof and so as to be fit for human use and so
as to not adversely affect the neighborhood in which they are located. Good
repair, maintenance and safe condition shall include, but is not limited to the
following.
      (1)   Foundations. Foundations shall support the building at all points
and shall be free of all holes and cracks which admit rodents, water or
dampness to the interior of the building or lessen the capability of the
foundation to support the building.
      (2)   Exterior walls and surfaces. Exterior walls and other exterior
surface materials shall be free of holes, cracks, loose or rotting boards and
timbers or any other condition which might admit rodents, rain or dampness to
the interior of the dwelling.
      (3)   Windows. Windows shall be fully supplied with window glass or an
approved substitute which is glazed and is without open cracks or holes, shall
have sashes in good condition which fit within frames and be maintained so as
to exclude adverse weather elements from entering the structure.
      (4)   Exterior doors. Doors shall be maintained so as to be structurally
sound, fit within frames so as to be weatherproof, wind-proof and waterproof
and be provided with door hinges and door latches which are in good working
condition.
      (5)   Roof. Roof members, covering and flashing shall be structurally
sound and tight so as to prevent the entrance of moisture and be maintained by
renewal, repair, waterproofing or other suitable means. Roof drainage shall be
adequate to prevent rain water from causing dampness in the interior portion of
the building or adversely affect adjacent properties.
      (6)   Gutters. Rain gutters, downspouts, leaders or other means of water
diversion shall be provided to collect/conduct and discharge all water from the
roof and be maintained so as not to lead or cause dampness in the walls,
ceiling or basements or adversely affect adjacent properties.
      (7)   Chimneys. Chimneys shall be free of cracks, holes or missing
portions and be maintained in sound condition.
      (8)   Porch. Every porch shall be constructed and maintained so as to be
free of missing, defective, rotting or deteriorated foundations, supports,
floors, other members and steps thereto, so as to be safe to use and be kept in
sound condition and in good repair.
      (9)   Structural member. Any structural member of a structure which has
become deteriorated or damaged to the extent that is does not serve the purpose
originally intended shall be repaired or replaced as is necessary to serve the
purpose as originally intended.
      (10)   Exterior surface. Except for materials that have been designed or
manufactured to remain untreated, all exterior wood, composition or metal
surfaces shall be protected from the elements by paint or other protective
covering. Surfaces shall be maintained so as to be kept clean and free of
flaking, loose or peeling paint or covering.
      (11)   Basement. Basement or cellar hatchways shall be so constructed and
maintained as to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage
into the structure.
   (C)   Exterior property and structure exteriors. All buildings and the
exterior of all premises shall be properly maintained to achieve a presentable
appearance and to avoid blighting effects and hazardous conditions.
      (1)   Maintenance. The exterior of all premises and every structure
thereon including, but not limited to, walls, roofs, cornices, chimneys,
drains, towers, porches, landings, fire escapes, stairs, store fronts, signs,
windows, doors, awnings, marquees and all surfaces thereof, shall be maintained
so as to avoid any blighting effects on neighboring properties and shall be
painted or protected where necessary for the purpose of preservation. All
canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, exterior stairways, fire escapes,
standpipes, exhaust ducts, porches, balconies and similar overhanging
extensions, and their supporting structures were exposed to public view, shall
be maintained in good condition and shall not show evidence of ripping, tearing
or deterioration. Prohibited and obsolete signs shall be removed or replaced
pursuant to applicable sections of the codified ordinances.
      (2)   Fences and walls. All fences, retaining walls or similar structures
shall be anchored firmly in the ground, shall be constructed in a workmanlike
manner and maintained in that same manner so that such approved fences,
retaining walls or similar structures shall always be in the state of good
structural repair. If any fence, retaining wall or similar structure is found
not to be in the state of good structural repair, it shall be removed, replaced
or repaired as required. Except when constructed of materials that have been
designed or manufactured to remain untreated, all fences shall be treated
periodically with paint or chemicals so as to retard deterioration.
      (3)   Hazards. Hazards and unsanitary conditions shall be eliminated.
      (4)   Drainage swales. Swales are to be maintained by the owners of the
parcels on which they are located, and at no time will anyone plant shrubs and/
or trees or discharge, empty or place any material fill or waste into any swale
so as to impede or divert drainage flow. Smaller swales can be mowed as part of
the yard. Larger swales in meadow situations should be mowed less frequently in
order to allow grasses to grow taller to retard runoff and prevent erosion.
Swales in woodland areas should be left in their natural condition leaving
understory growth to retard runoff and prevent erosion.
      (5)   Traffic markings. All traffic markings such as directional arrows,
lane division lines, parking space lines, stop signs and the like shall be
maintained so as to be clearly visible and easily recognized.
      (6)   Conduct of business. All storage of trash and garbage containers
and/or dumpsters shall be effectively screened from view.
      (7)   Exterior light fixtures. Exterior lighting fixtures over steps,
paths, walkways, courts, drives and parking lots shall be neatly maintained in
operable condition and lighted for sufficient periods of time before and after
business hours to provide for pedestrian and employee safety and properly aimed
so as not to shine on adjacent properties.
      (8)   Exterior stairways. All exterior stairways on all commercial
premises shall be in accordance with the following provisions.
         (a)   Stairways shall be maintained free of holes, grooves and cracks
which constitute a safety hazard.
         (b)   Stairways shall be maintained free of rotted or deteriorated
supports.
         (c)   Stairways shall have treads of uniform width and risers of
uniform height.
         (d)   Stairway handrails and/or railings shall be firmly fastened and
maintained in good condition. Where the absence of hand rails and/or railings
create a hazardous condition, the Code Inspector may require their installation
in accordance with the provisions of the Building Code.
   (D)   Accessory structures. All structures accessory to commercial use,
including signs and detached storage buildings, shall be maintained
structurally sound, neatly maintained and in good repair or shall be razed to
grade level and debris removed from the premises.
(Ord. 2022-06A, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 151.076 INDUSTRIAL EXTERIOR PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   General provisions. The following industrial exterior property
maintenance standards are applicable to all industrial structures, industrial
uses and portions of mixed use structures which are devoted to industrial use,
including all exterior and structural requirements, soundness and maintenance.
   (B)   Structural soundness and maintenance of industrial structures. Every
foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof of every industrial structure shall
be so constructed and maintained and be kept in good repair and in safe
condition so as to make all interior areas weather-tight, water-tight, rodent-
proof and so as to be fit for human use and so as to not adversely affect the
neighborhood in which they are located. Good repair, maintenance and safe
condition shall include but is not limited to the following.
      (1)   Foundations. Foundations shall support the building at all points
and shall be free of all holes and cracks which admit rodents, water or
dampness to the interior of the building or lessen the capability of the
foundation to support the building.
      (2)   Exterior walls and surfaces. Exterior walls and other exterior
surface materials shall be free of holes, cracks, loose or rotting boards and
timbers or any other condition which might admit rodents, rain or dampness to
the interior of the building.
      (3)   Windows. Windows shall be fully supplied with window glass or an
approved substitute which is glazed and is without open cracks or holes, shall
have sashes in good condition which fit within frames, and be maintained so as
to exclude adverse weather elements from entering the structure.
      (4)   Exterior doors. Doors shall be maintained so as to be structurally
sound, fit within frames so as to be weatherproof, windproof and waterproof and
be provided with door hinges and door latches which are in good working
condition.
      (5)   Roof. Roof members, covering and flashing shall be structurally
sound and tight so as to prevent the entrance of moisture and be maintained by
renewal, repair, waterproofing or other suitable means. Roof drainage shall be
adequate to prevent rain water from causing dampness in the interior portion of
the building or adversely affect adjacent properties.
      (6)   Gutters. Rain gutters, downspouts, leaders or other means of water
diversion shall be provided to collect/conduct and discharge all water from the
roof and be maintained so as not to leak or cause dampness in the walls,
ceiling or basements or adversely affect adjacent properties.
      (7)   Chimneys. Chimneys shall be free of cracks, holes or missing
portions and be maintained in sound condition.
      (8)   Structural member. Any structural member of a structure which has
become deteriorated or damaged to the extent that is does not serve the purpose
as originally intended shall be repaired or replaced as is necessary to serve
the purpose as originally intended.
      (9)   Exterior surface. Except for materials that have been designed or
manufactured to remain untreated, all exterior wood, composition or metal
surfaces shall be protected from the elements by paint or other protective
covering. Surfaces shall be maintained so as to be kept clean and free of
flaking, loose or peeling paint or covering.
   (C)   Exterior property and structure exteriors. All buildings and the
exterior of all premises shall be properly maintained to achieve a presentable
appearance and to avoid blighting effects and hazardous conditions.
      (1)   Maintenance.
         (a)   The exterior of all premises and every structure thereon,
including but not limited to, walls, roofs, cornices, chimneys, drains, towers,
fire escapes, stairs, fronts, signs, windows, doors, awnings, marquees and all
surfaces thereof, shall be maintained so as to avoid any blighting effects on
neighboring properties and shall be painted or protected where necessary for
the purpose of preservation.
         (b)   All canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, exterior stairways, fire
escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts and similar overhanging extensions,
including their supporting structures were exposed to public view, shall be
maintained in good condition and shall not show evidence of ripping, tearing or
deterioration. Prohibited and obsolete signs shall be removed or replaced
pursuant to the applicable sections of the codified ordinances.
      (2)   Fences and walls.
         (a)   All fences, retaining walls or similar structures shall be
anchored firmly in the ground, shall be constructed in a workmanlike manner and
maintained in that same manner so that such approved fences, retaining walls or
similar structures shall always be in the state of good structural repair. If
any fence, retaining wall or similar structure is found not to be in the state
of good structural repair, it shall be removed, replaced or repaired as
required.
         (b)   Except when constructed of materials that have been designed or
manufactured to remain untreated, all fences shall be treated periodically with
paint or chemicals so as to retard deterioration.
      (3)   Hazards. Hazards and unsanitary conditions shall be eliminated.
      (4)   Drainage swales. Swales are to be maintained by the owners of the
parcels on which they are located, and at no time will anyone plant shrubs and/
or trees or discharge, empty or place any material fill or waste into any swale
so as to impede or divert drainage flow. Smaller swales can be mowed as part of
the yard. Larger swales in meadow situations should be mowed less frequently in
order to allow grasses to grow taller to retard runoff and prevent erosion.
Swales in woodland areas should be left in their natural condition leaving
understory growth to retard runoff and prevent erosion.
      (5)   Traffic markings. All traffic markings such as directional arrows,
lane division lines, parking space lines, stop signs and the like shall be
maintained so as to be clearly visible and easily recognized.
      (6)   Conduct of business. All storage of trash and garbage containers
and/or dumpsters shall be effectively screened from view in a manner approved
by the appropriate boards and commissions or the Code Inspector.
      (7)   Exterior light fixtures. Exterior lighting fixtures over steps,
paths, walkways, courts, drives and parking lots shall be neatly maintained in
operable condition and lighted for sufficient periods of time before and after
business hours to provide for pedestrian and employee safety and properly aimed
so as not to shine on adjacent properties.
      (8)   Exterior stairways. All exterior stairways on all industrial
premises shall be in accordance with the following provisions.
         (a)   Stairways shall be maintained free of holes, grooves and cracks
which constitute a safety hazard.
         (b)   Stairways shall be maintained free of rotted or deteriorated
supports.
         (c)   Stairways shall have treads of uniform width and risers of
uniform height.
         (d)   Stairway handrails and/or railings shall be firmly fastened and
be maintained in good condition. Where the absence of handrails and/or railings
create a hazardous condition, the Code Inspector may require their installation
in accordance with the provisions of the Building Code.
   (D) Accessory structures. All structures accessory to industrial use
including signs, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair or
shall be razed to grade level and debris removed from the premises.
(Ord. 2022-06A, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 151.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Ohio Basic Building Code.
      (1)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of
§§
151.001 through
151.007, including any provision of the Ohio Basic Building Code adopted in §
151.001, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not
more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both, for each
offense. Unless otherwise provided, a separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or
continues.
      (2)   The application of the penalty provided in division (A)(1) of this
section shall not be deemed to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions, or the application of any other equitable remedy, including
abatement of the nuisance referred to in §
151.005(F).
(Prior Code, § 1420.99)
   (B)   International One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code.
      (1)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of
the International One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, as adopted in §
151.020, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both, for each offense.
Unless otherwise provided, a separate offense shall be deemed committed each
day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
      (2)   The application of the penalty provided in division (B)(1) of this
section shall not be deemed to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions, or the application of any other equitable remedy.
(Prior Code, § 1422.99)
   (C)   Ohio Plumbing Code.
      (1)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of
the Ohio Plumbing Code, as adopted in §
151.035, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both, for each offense.
Unless otherwise provided, a separate offense shall be deemed committed each
day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
 
      (2)   The application of the penalty provided in division (C)(1) of this
section shall not be deemed to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions, or the application of any other equitable remedy.
(Prior Code, § 1424.99)
   (D)   National Electrical Code.
      (1)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of
the National Electrical Code, as adopted in §
151.050, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both, for each offense.
Unless otherwise provided, a separate offense shall be deemed committed each
day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
      (2)   The application of the penalty provided in division (D)(1) of this
section shall not be deemed to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions, or the application of any other equitable remedy.
(Prior Code, § 1426.99)
   (E)   Exterior Property Maintenance Code.
      (1)   Whoever violates §§
151.065 through
151.076 shall be fined not more than:
         (a)   One hundred dollars for the first offense;
         (b)   Two hundred dollars for the second offense; and
         (c)   Four hundred dollars for the third offense within a one-year
period. Subsequent offenses shall be referred directly to the Director of Law
for legal action.
      (2)   The application of the penalty provided in division (E)(1) of this
section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions.
      (3)   No person shall violate any provision or fail to comply with any of
the requirements of this Exterior Property Maintenance Code or fail to comply
with any order made thereunder.
      (4)   Whoever violates §§
151.065 through
151.076 shall be subject to the following penalties.
         (a)   Whosoever violates any section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
for each offense. Each day an offense occurs constitutes a separate offense.
         (b)   If within one year of the date of the offense, the offender has
been convicted or pleads guilty to another violation under §§
151.065 through
151.076, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (5)   The application of the penalty provided in division (D)(4) of this
section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of all civil remedies available
for the enforcement of §§
151.065 through
151.076 in the abatement of the nuisance and/or the enforced removal of
prohibited conditions.
(Ord. 2022-06A, passed 11-8-2022)
CHAPTER 152: BUILDING ADMINISTRATION
Section
Building Department
   
152.01   Establishment; authority
BUILDING DEPARTMENT
§ 152.01 ESTABLISHMENT; AUTHORITY.
   There is hereby established in and for the city a Building Department. Such
Department shall have full authority to enforce all ordinances, statutes and
regulations as provided and authorized in the Ohio Revised Code and the Ohio
Administrative Code pursuant to the certification approved by the Ohio Board of
Building Standards.
(Prior Code, § 1440.01) (Ord. 92-12, passed 5-26-1992)
CHAPTER 153: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Demolition of Buildings
   
153.001   Purpose
   
153.002   Permit required; exceptions
   
153.003   Permit application
   
153.004   Permit and inspection fees
   
153.005   Safety precautions
   
153.006   Demolition standards
   
153.007   Time limitation
   
App. A   Technical specifications for demolitions
Riparian Setbacks
   
153.020   Purpose
   
153.021   Compliance and violations
   
153.022   Conflicts with other regulations and severability
   
153.023   Definitions
   
153.024   Establishment of a riparian setback
   
153.025   Uses permitted
   
153.026   Uses prohibited
   
153.027   Nonconforming structures or uses
   
153.028   Boundary interpretation and appeals procedure
   
153.029   Variances with riparian setback
   
153.030   Inspection
   
App. B   Woody plants suitable for riparian areas
Numbering of Buildings
   
153.045   Identification required; numbering specifications
   
153.046   Surveys by Fire and Public Service Departments; noncompliance;
enforcement
   
153.047   Defacing of numbers
Sustainable Building Practices
   
153.060   Standards to be met
   
153.061   Definitions
   
153.062   Exemptions
   
153.063   Encouraged registration and certification
Unsafe Buildings and Structures
   
153.075   Repair or removal
   
153.076   Inspection and report; notice to owner; securing vacant structure
   
153.077   Order to vacate; closing streets, sidewalks and the like
   
153.078   Failure to comply with notice or order to remove, repair or vacate
   
153.079   Emergency work
   
153.080   Recovery of costs
   
153.081   Fire-damaged structures; recovery of insurance proceeds
   
153.082   Monitoring of rotary fund
   
153.083   Delegation of powers and duties
   
153.084   Certification by Clerk of Council
Dangerous Buildings
   
153.095   Zoning division
   
153.096   Dangerous building defined
   
153.097   Dangerous buildings; nuisances
   
153.098   Unsafe conditions; reports
   
153.099   Structures vacant and open entry
   
153.100   Agreement to repair or remove
   
153.101   Authority to examine premises
   
153.102   Remedial order; notice
   
153.103   Posting of signs
   
153.104   Permits
   
153.105   Right to demolish
   
153.106   Failure to act; remedy by city; costs certified as lien
   
153.107   Enforcement
   
153.108   Appeal to Board of Zoning Appeals
 
   
153.999   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Injunctions for noncompliance with building regulations, see R.C. § 715.30
   Power to regulate building numbering, see R.C. § 715.26
   Recovery from owner of building of total cost of correcting hazardous
condition or abating nuisance, see R.C. § 715.261
DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS
§ 153.001 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish guidelines for the safe and
orderly demolition of buildings located in the city to ensure the promotion of
public health, safety, comfort and welfare of the residents of the city.
(Prior Code, § 1462.01) (Ord. 98-24, passed 1-26-1999)
§ 153.002 PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall demolish any building(s) within the city without first
obtaining a permit from the Service Department.
   (B)   Any building that is not more than one story in height and not more
than 500 square feet in area shall be exempt from the permit process. This
exception would normally refer to garages and other small accessory buildings.
(Prior Code, § 1462.02) (Ord. 98-24, passed 1-26-1999)
§ 153.003 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Before a permit to demolish a building is issued, the following must be done
and proof of the same must be submitted to the city.
   (A)   Application form. The submitted application shall address the
following:
      (1)   The address of the building(s) to be demolished;
      (2)   The name and address of the building owner;
      (3)   The name and address of the persons engaged to perform actual
demolition work;
      (4)   The approximate date of commencement of demolition and the
estimated length of time to complete the work; and
      (5)   The characteristics of the building(s) to be demolished, including
the type of construction, the use of the building and the approximate year the
building was built.
   (B)   Utility release. The owner of the building(s) to be demolished, or his
or her agent, shall notify all utilities having service connections such as
water, gas, electric and telephone. A release must be obtained from the
utilities involved, stating that their respective service connections and
related equipment have been removed or sealed and plugged in a safe manner.
   (C)   Bond. A certificate showing that public liability insurance in the
amount of $250,000 for personal bodily injury and $50,000 for property damage
must be obtained by the applicant.
   (D)   Deposit.
      (1)   The applicant shall deposit, in the form of a cashier’s check, with
the city, the following sums to ensure that the property is in a proper and
safe condition after such demolition. Cashier’s checks shall be returned to the
applicant upon satisfactory completion of the demolition.
         (a)   Residential building (single-family, duplex or triplex): $300;
         (b)   Commercial, industrial or multi-family residential (4 + units):
$600; and
         (c)   Garage, barn or other accessory structure (greater than 500
square feet): $150.
      (2)   As used in this division (d), PROPER AND SAFE CONDITION means that
all debris is cleared away and the site is restored per specifications provided
for in §
153.006.
   (E)   Notice to city. The applicant shall agree to notify the city 24 hours
before starting demolition work. This is to allow for an inspection of the site
to ensure that all utilities are off and that the sanitary sewer/septic system
is plugged by the contractor.
   (F)   Landmarks. No person shall cause the demolition of any historic
building or structure which is a designated landmark or which lies within a
historic district without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from
the Historic Preservation Commission.
(Prior Code, § 1462.03) (Ord. 98-24, passed 1-26-1999)
§ 153.004 PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES.
   (A)   The following fees shall be collected for a demolition permit. Site
inspection costs are included in the fees.
      (1)   Residential building (single-family, duplex or triplex): $50;
      (2)   Commercial, industrial or multi-family residential (4 + units):
$100; and
      (3)   Garage, barn or other accessory structure (greater than 500 square
feet): $25.   
   (B)   Where more than one building is being demolished on the same lot or
contiguous lots for the same owner, a single permit shall be required for each
building. The permit fee shall be based upon the classification of each
building to be demolished. No permit is required for any structure that is 500
square feet or less.
   (C)   The permit holder shall notify the city upon completion of the
demolition. The city will conduct an inspection of the site within 48 hours. If
the city finds that such property has been put into the proper and safe
condition, as provided for in §
153.006, the city shall return the applicant’s deposit. If the site is not
cleared, or put into a safe condition, or work has not commenced to do so,
within ten days of the completion of the demolition, the city shall proceed
with the work, and the cost of such work shall be deducted from the deposit. If
any amount is left from such deposit after the city has performed the work,
such balance shall be returned to the person who deposited it. If the cost of
the work exceeds the collected deposit amount, the balance shall be charged
against the real estate upon which the building was located and shall be a lien
upon such real estate.
(Prior Code, § 1462.04) (Ord. 98-24, passed 1-26-1999)
§ 153.005 SAFETY PRECAUTIONS.
   (A)   No building shall be demolished in such a manner as to endanger
persons using the public streets and sidewalks, nor shall any debris be
permitted to remain upon a public street or sidewalk. Extreme caution shall be
used in demolition to prevent damage to adjoining properties. The contractor
shall be responsible for any damage/injury occurring on adjoining public/
private property that results from the contractor’s negligence.
   (B)   Whenever a building is being demolished within 15 feet of a public
street or sidewalk, barricades shall be erected and lights provided at such
barricades at night. Barricades shall be six feet in height and of solid
construction in order to protect the public from the work site.
   (C)   The contractor shall adhere to all safety precautions as provided for
in §
153.006.
(Prior Code, § 1462.05) (Ord. 98-24, passed 1-26-1999)
§ 153.006 DEMOLITION STANDARDS.
   The contractor shall adhere to all standards and specifications as
enumerated in the city technical specifications for demolition, following the
text of this chapter as
App. A. A copy of this document will be provided to the applicant at the time
of application for permit. This document provides basic specifications for
demolition, debris removal and disposal, site restoration, safety, and the
handling of any special conditions (e.g., asbestos).
(Prior Code, § 1462.06) (Ord. 98-24, passed 1-26-1999)
§ 153.007 TIME LIMITATION.
   Demolition work shall be completed within 30 days from the date of permit
issuance, except that in the case of unusual conditions prohibiting completion,
the city may allow an additional 30 days for the work to be completed.
(Prior Code, § 1462.07) (Ord. 98-24, passed 1-26-1999)
APPENDIX A: TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS FOR DEMOLITIONS
Demolition and Removal Procedures:
1.   The contractor shall remove the entire building, including all walls,
floors, ceiling and foundation supports of all kinds to the basement level. The
existing ground level shall be considered to be a straight line drawn between
the front highest present elevation and the rear lot line elevation.
2.   Unless otherwise specified, no building shall be removed from the premises
as a whole.
3.   In cases where basements exist, the contractor shall break up the basement
floor in such a manner as to permit the drainage of water. Basement walls, both
exterior and interior, shall be removed to the basement floor level or broken
up in pieces not larger than six inches in diameter and incorporated with
suitable fill material. Basements shall be backfilled with clean fill material.
The contractor shall furnish the required amount of fill material for
completing and filling in of basements.
4.   All vault spaces shall be filled with material which shall consist of
sound durable crushed limestone, crushed slag, crushed gravel or slacker
aggregate. The material shall be such that it will compact to the satisfaction
of the city. The crushed aggregate shall be thoroughly compacted to a depth of
six inches to 100% of maximum dry density. The contractor shall not remove,
damage, or destroy vaults of private or public utilities.
5.   All metal storage tanks found underground are to be removed and disposed
of. All masonry structures underground are to be broken and filled with clean
earth. In the case of cisterns or cesspools, the contractor shall notify the
city of the existence of the same prior to the removal thereof, and upon
obtaining approval, shall break up such cisterns and/or cesspools and cause the
voids or cavities to be filled with clean earth.
6.   Where basements or excavations are located within five feet of the
straight line, as defined in Number 1, a fence shall be erected along the
street line and extended five feet beyond such basement or excavation.
7.   Demolition work shall be done in strict accordance with all applicable
laws, ordinances, and codes of the City of Green.
8.   In addition to other restrictions, the burning of any materials or rubble
on the site is not permitted without approval by the City of Green Fire Chief
and the Ohio EPA. A fire extinguisher shall be present, or water line shall be
laid at all points where burning torches are used for cutting.
9.   The contractor shall dispose of all rubble and debris in a licensed
facility. All trucks used for hauling must use tailgates and will be required
to use approved city truck routes. Any material dropped from the trucks must be
picked up. It shall be the responsibility of the contractor to clean daily the
hauling route of all materials dropped from the haul trucks. The condition of
the haul route shall at all times meet the approval of the city. The contractor
will be required to maintain streets and clean daily from them any dirt and
debris falling from the hauling trucks or from tires. If streets are not kept
clean daily by the contractor the city will clean the same and deduct the cost
thereof from the deposit placed with the city.
10.   If any building or part thereof which is being razed or demolished
contains asbestos in quantities or under circumstances subjecting such asbestos
to federal and/or state asbestos removal regulations, the removal of such
asbestos shall be performed only by a person, firm or corporation certified by
the applicable federal and/or state approval authorities for such removal and
shall be performed in accordance with the methods and procedures required by
applicable federal and/or state statutes and regulations. If there is any
question or uncertainty regarding the existence of asbestos subject to federal
or state asbestos removal regulations, no permit shall be issued and no work
shall be commenced until a determination of the need for special asbestos
removal procedures has been determined by the County Health Department.
11.   The use of explosives to perform the work is prohibited.
12.   Prior to the demolition of any building, the contractor shall have a
licensed exterminator inspect and, if necessary, treat the building for insects
and rodents. A copy of the inspection report and treatment, if performed, must
be filed with the City of Green Service Department.
13.   Prior to commencing any demolition on any parcel, the contractor shall
prepare the work in such a manner as to keep dust at a minimum. Dust shall also
be controlled during all loading and hauling operations.
14.   The contractor shall furnish and erect all temporary sidewalks,
barricades, covers, and other temporary structures for the proper and safe
conduct of the work as required by law, and shall remove all such temporary
structures upon the completion of the work.
Cleaning the Site:
   The contractor shall remove all equipment and debris from the completed
parcels and leave the grounds in a neat condition free from stones, rubbish, or
debris of any nature.
Treatment of Abandoned Water Wells:
   According to the Rules of the Ohio Department of Health Public Health
Council Private Water Systems, Chapter 3701-28, effective January 1, 1981,
amended January 1, 1984, abandonment of a water well “means the complete
filling with grout of a well in order to seal the aquifer to prevent the
contamination of ground water. In the case of cisterns, abandonment includes
emptying the cistern and filling it with an inert solid material. In the case
of a spring or pond, abandonment means the disconnection of all piping from the
source to the point of discharge.”
   All water wells will be considered abandoned unless otherwise specified.
   All cisterns, springs or ponds will be considered abandoned.
   Water wells to be permanently abandoned shall be completely filled with
grout in order to seal the aquifer to prevent contamination of ground water.
   Cisterns to be permanently abandoned shall be emptied and completely filled
with an inert solid material.
Treatment of Abandoned Household Sewage Disposal Systems (Septic Systems):
   According to § 816.04(c) of the Environmental Health Code of the Summit
County General Health District, an abandoned sewage disposal system shall be
cleaned and filled to the surface of the surrounding ground with suitable
material.
   All underground tanks or other voids shall be pumped, crushed, and filled
with suitable material.
(Prior Code, Ch. 1462, App. A)
RIPARIAN SETBACKS
§ 153.020 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The city has determined that the system of streams within the city
contributes to the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the
city. The purpose of this subchapter is to protect and preserve the water
quality within streams of the city and to protect residents of the city from
property loss and damage because of flooding and other impacts of the stream.
The city will implement this subchapter by controlling uses and developments
within a riparian setback that would impair the ability of the riparian area
to:
      (1)   Reduce flood impacts by absorbing peak flows, slowing the velocity
of flood waters and regulating base flow;
      (2)   Stabilize the banks of streams to reduce bank erosion and the
downstream transport of sediments eroded from stream banks;
      (3)   Reduce pollutants in streams during periods of high flows by
filtering, settling and transforming pollutants already present in streams or
in runoff before they enter streams;
      (4)   Provide areas for natural meandering and lateral movement of stream
channels;
      (5)   Reduce the presence of aquatic nuisance species to maintain diverse
and connected riparian vegetation;
      (6)   Provide high quality stream habitats with shade and food to a wide
array of wildlife by maintaining diverse and connected riparian vegetation; and
      (7)   Benefit the city economically by minimizing encroachment on stream
channels and reducing the need for costly engineering solutions, such as dams
and riprap, to protect structures and reduce property damage and threats to the
safety of watershed residents, and by contributing to the scenic beauty and to
the environment of the city, the quality of life of the residents of the city,
and corresponding property values.
   (B)   This subchapter has been enacted to protect these services of riparian
areas by providing reasonable controls governing structures and uses in
riparian setbacks.
(Prior Code, § 1468.01) (Ord. 03-11, passed 10-28-2003)
§ 153.021 COMPLIANCE AND VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   No preliminary plan or zoning approvals shall be issued by the city
without full compliance with the terms of these regulations where applicable.
   (B)   Any person or organization who violates §
153.026 shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
subject to punishment as provided in §
130.99, and shall be required to restore the riparian setback through a plan
approved by the County SWCD.
   (C)   The provisions of this subchapter may be enforced through civil or
criminal proceedings brought by the city or county prosecutor on behalf of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 1468.02) (Ord. 03-11, passed 10-28-2003)
§ 153.022 CONFLICTS WITH OTHER REGULATIONS AND SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   Where this subchapter imposes a greater restriction upon land than is
imposed or required by any other provision of law, regulation, contract or
deed, the provisions of this subchapter shall control.
   (B)   These regulations shall not limit or restrict the application of other
provisions of law, regulation, contract or deed, or the legal remedies
available thereunder, except as provided in division (A) of this section.
   (C)   If any clause, section or provision of these regulations is declared
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, validity of
the remainder shall not be affected.
(Prior Code, § 1468.03) (Ord. 03-11, passed 10-28-2003)
§ 153.023 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   100-YEAR FLOODPLAIN. Any land susceptible to being inundated by water from a
base flood, which is the flood that has a 1% or greater chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year. For the purposes of these regulations, the 100-
YEAR FLOODPLAIN shall be defined by FEMA and subject to review and approval per
Ordinance 2002-02.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Conservation practices or protection
measures which reduce impacts from a particular land use. BEST MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES for construction are outlined in Rainwater and Land Development,
Ohio’s Standard for Storm Water Management, Land Development, and Urban Stream
Protection prepared by the Ohio Department of Natural Resources.
   DAMAGED OR DISEASED TREES. Trees that have split trunk, broken tops, heart
rot, insect or fungus problems that will lead to imminent death, undercut root
systems that put the tree in imminent danger of falling, lean as a result of
root failure that puts the tree in imminent danger of falling, or any other
condition that puts the tree in imminent danger of being uprooted or falling
into or along a stream or onto a structure.
   DEFINED CHANNEL. A natural or human-made depression in the terrain which is
maintained and altered by the water and sediment it carries.
   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA). The agency with overall
responsibility for administering the national flood insurance program.
   FINAL PLAT. A final tracing of all or a phase of a subdivision and its
complete survey information.
   IMPERVIOUS COVER. Any surface that cannot effectively absorb or infiltrate
water. This may include roads, streets, parking lots, rooftops, sidewalks and
other areas not covered by vegetation.
   NATURAL SUCCESSION. A gradual and continuous replacement of one kind of
plant and animal group by a more complex group. The plants and animals present
in the initial group modify the environment through their life activities,
thereby making it unfavorable for themselves. They are gradually replaced by a
different group of plants and animals better adapted to the new environment.
   NOXIOUS WEED. Any plant defined as PROHIBITED NOXIOUS WEEDS in O.A.C. 901:5-
37-01 and any of the following: Goldenrod, Poison Hemlock, Poison Ivy, Poison
Oak, Ragweed, Stinging Nettle and other plants capable of causing skin
reactions upon contact or producing severe allergic respiratory reactions.
   OHIO RAPID ASSESSMENT METHOD. A multi-parameter qualitative index
established by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency to evaluate wetland
quality and function.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK. The point of the bank or shore to which the
presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a district
marked by erosion, destruction or prevention of woody terrestrial vegetation,
predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized characteristic.
The ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK defines the channel of a stream.
   POLLUTION. Any contamination or alteration of the physical, chemical or
biological properties of any waters that will render the waters harmful or
detrimental to: public health, safety or welfare; domestic, commercial,
industrial, agricultural, recreational or other legitimate beneficial uses; or
livestock or wildlife, including birds, fish or other aquatic life.
      (1)   POINT SOURCE POLLUTION. Traceable to a discrete point or pipe.
      (2)   NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION. Generated by various land use
activities, rather than from an identifiable or discrete source, and is
conveyed to waterways through natural processes, such as rainfall, storm runoff
or ground water seepage rather than direct discharge.
   PRELIMINARY PLAN. A drawing of a major subdivision for the purpose of study
and which, if approved, permits proceeding with the preparation of the final
plat.
   RIPARIAN AREA. A transitional area between flowing water and terrestrial
ecosystems which provides a continuous exchange of nutrients and woody debris
between land and water. This area is at least periodically influenced by
flooding. RIPARIAN AREAS, if appropriately sized and managed, help to stabilize
banks, limit erosion, reduce flood size flows and/or filter and settle out
runoff pollutants, or perform other functions consistent with the purposes of
these regulations.
   RIPARIAN SETBACK. The area set back from each bank of a stream to protect
the riparian area and stream from impacts of development, and streamside
residents from impacts of flooding and land loss through erosion. RIPARIAN
SETBACKS are those lands within the city that fall within the area defined by
the criteria set forth in these regulations.
   SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION DISTRICT (SWCD). An entity organized under R.C.
§
940.06 referring to either the Soil and Water Conservation District Board or
its designated employees, hereinafter referred to as the County SWCD.
   SOIL-DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Clearing, grading, excavating, filling or other
alteration of the earth’s surface where natural or human-made ground cover is
destroyed, and which may result in, or contribute to, erosion and sediment
pollution.
   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). The plan which describes all
the elements of the storm water strategy implemented during and after
construction. The plan addresses erosion control and storm water quality.
   STORM WATER QUALITY TREATMENT. The removal of pollutants from urban runoff
and improvement of water quality, accomplished largely by disposition and
utilizing the benefits of natural processes.
   STREAM. A surface watercourse with a well-defined bed and bank, either
natural or artificial, which confines and conducts continuous or periodical
flowing water in such a way that terrestrial vegetation cannot establish roots
within the channel.
   VARIANCE. A modification of the enforcement of this chapter which will not
be contrary to the public interest and where, due to conditions peculiar to
this property and not the result of the action of the applicant, a literal
enforcement of this chapter would result in undue hardship to the applicant.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial waterway, such as a stream or river,
with a defined bed and channel and a definite direction of course that is
contained within, flows through or borders the community.
   WATERSHED. An area of land that drains into a particular watercourse,
usually defined by topography.
   WETLANDS. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground
water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life
in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar
areas.
(Prior Code, § 1468.04) (Ord. 03-11, passed 10-28-2003)
§ 153.024 ESTABLISHMENT OF A RIPARIAN SETBACK.
   (A)   Riparian setbacks are established as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   Streams addressed by this chapter are those which meet the definition
of STREAM in §
153.023 and are indicated on at least one of the following maps:
      (1)   USGS topographical map;
      (2)   County riparian setback map;
      (3)   Soils maps located in the soil survey for the county, USDA or NRCS;
or
      (4)   Riparian setback map.
   (C)   Widths of setbacks are measured as horizontal map distances outward
from the ordinary high water mark on each side of a stream, and are established
as follows:
      (1)   A minimum of 300 feet on each side of all streams draining an area
greater than 300 square miles;
      (2)   A minimum of 100 feet on each side of all streams draining an area
greater than 20 square miles and up to 300 square miles;
      (3)   A minimum of 75 feet on each side of all streams draining an area
greater than one-half square mile (320 acres) and up to 20 square miles;
      (4)   A minimum of 50 feet on each side of all streams draining an area
greater than 0.05 square mile (32 acres) and up to one-half square mile (320
acres); and
      (5)    A minimum of 30 feet on each side of all streams draining an area
less than 0.05 square mile (32 acres).
   (D)   The following are exempt from the terms and protection of this
chapter: grassy swales, roadside ditches, drainage ditches created at the time
of a subdivision to convey storm water to another system, tile drainage systems
and stream culverts.
   (E)   The following shall apply to the riparian setback.
      (1)   Where the 100-year floodplain is wider than the riparian setback on
either or both sides of the stream, the riparian setback shall be extended to
the outer edge of the 100-year floodplain. The 100-year floodplain shall be
defined by FEMA and subject to review and approval per Ordinance 2002-02.
      (2)   (a)   Because the gradient of the riparian corridor significantly
influences impacts on the stream, the following adjustment for steep slopes
will be integrated into the riparian setback formulae for width determination:
 
Average Percent Slope Width of Setback
15% to 20%            Add 25 feet
21% to 25%            Add 50 feet
>25%                  Add 100 feet
 
         (b)   Average stream bank slope is to be calculated using methodology
outlined in The Ohio Supplement to Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds,
Technical Release Number 55 (TR-55) by USDA, NRCS.
      (3)   Where wetlands protected under federal or state law are identified
within the riparian setback, the riparian setback shall consist of the full
extent of the wetlands, plus the following additional setback widths:
         (a)   A 50-foot setback extending beyond the outer boundary of a
Category 3 wetlands;
         (b)   A 30-foot setback extending beyond the outer boundary of a
Category 2 wetlands; and
         (c)   No additional setback will be required adjacent to Category 1
wetlands.
      (4)   Wetlands shall be delineated by a qualified professional under
guidelines established by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency and the delineation approved by the appropriate
agencies. All wetland delineations shall also include the latest version of the
Ohio Rapid Assessment Method for wetland evaluation approved at the time of
application of these regulations.
      (5)   The applicant shall be responsible for delineating the riparian
setback, including any expansions or modifications as required by divisions (B)
through (D) of this section, and identifying this setback on all subdivisions,
land development plans, and/or building permit applications. This delineation
shall be done at the time of application of the preliminary plans, or all plans
that are required, or at the time of submission of any permit applications.
This delineation shall be subject to review and approval by the County SWCD. As
the result of this review, the County SWCD may require further studies from the
applicant.
      (6)   Prior to any soil-disturbing activity, the riparian setback shall
be clearly delineated with construction fencing or other suitable material by
the applicant on site, and such delineation shall be maintained throughout
soil-disturbing activities. The delineated area shall be maintained in an
undisturbed state, unless otherwise permitted by these regulations. All fencing
shall be removed when a development project is completed.
      (7)   No approvals or permits shall be issued by the city prior to
delineation of the riparian setback in conformance with these regulations.
      (8)   Upon completion of an approved subdivision, the riparian setback
shall be permanently recorded on the plat records for the city.
(Prior Code, § 1468.05) (Ord. 03-11, passed 10-28-2003)
§ 153.025 USES PERMITTED.
   (A)   The following uses are permitted by right within the riparian setbacks
without prior approval.
      (1)   Open space uses. Open space uses that are passive in character
shall be permitted in the riparian setback, including, but not limited to,
those listed in divisions (A)(2) through (A)(4) of this section. No use
permitted under these regulations shall be construed as allowing trespass on
privately-held lands. Alteration of this natural area is strictly limited.
Except as otherwise provided in these regulations, the riparian setback shall
be preserved in its natural state.
      (2)   Recreational activity. Passive recreational uses, as permitted by
federal, state and local laws, such as hiking, nonmotorized bicycling, fishing,
hunting, picnicking, and similar uses and associated structures, including
boardwalks, pathways constructed of pervious material, picnic tables and
wildlife viewing areas.
      (3)   Removal of damaged or diseased trees. Damaged or diseased trees may
be removed. Because of the potential for felled logs and branches to damage
downstream properties and/or block ditches or otherwise exacerbate flooding,
logs and branches resulting from the removal of damaged or diseased trees that
are greater than six inches in diameter shall be anchored to the shore or
removed from the 100-year floodplain.
      (4)   Revegetation and/or reforestation. The revegetation and/or
reforestation of the riparian setback shall be allowed without approval of the
County SWCD. Species of shrubs and vines recommended for stabilizing flood-
prone areas along streams within the city are listed in the Appendix of this
chapter.
   (B)   The following uses are permitted by right within the riparian setbacks
with prior approval of the design.
      (1)   Stream bank stabilization/erosion control measures. Best management
practices (BMPs) for stream bank stabilization or erosion control may be
allowed if such practices are within permitted uses by the local, state and
federal government regulations, and are ecologically compatible and emphasize
the use of natural materials and native plant species where practical and
available. Such stream bank stabilization/erosion control practices shall only
be undertaken upon approval of a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP
or SWP3) by the County SWCD.
      (2)   Crossings. In reviewing plans for stream crossings, the city may
confer with the County SWCD, the Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division
of Natural Areas; the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Surface
Water; the County Engineer; the Department of Environmental Services of the
county; the County Health Department; or other technical experts as necessary.
         (a)   Limited crossings of designated streams through the riparian
setback by vehicles, storm sewers, sewer and/or water lines, and public utility
lines will be per the approval of local, county and state governing agencies
and as a part of the regular subdivision review process.
         (b)   One driveway crossing per stream per tax parcel will be allowed
for individual landowners.
         (c)   Roadway crossings for major and minor subdivisions, open space
subdivisions or any other nonsingle-family residential use shall be designed
and constructed per the city’s design standards and as approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission. If more than two crossings per 1,000 linear feet of
stream center are required for these areas, the applicant must apply for a
variance.
         (d)   All roadway crossings shall be perpendicular to the stream flow
and shall minimize disturbance to the riparian setback and shall mitigate any
necessary disturbances.
      (3)   Placement of storm water retention or detention facilities may be
considered within the riparian setback if:
         (a)   Storm water quality treatment that is consistent with current
state standards is incorporated into the basin; or
         (b)   The storm water quality treatment basin is located at least 50
feet from the ordinary high water mark of the stream.
      (4)   Dredging may be permitted; provided the city or property owner
obtains all necessary permits that may be required, and notification and
presentation of the plan are provided to the Engineering Department for review
and approval.
(Prior Code, § 1468.06) (Ord. 03-11, passed 10-28-2003)
§ 153.026 USES PROHIBITED.
   The following uses are specifically prohibited within the riparian setback.
   (A)   Construction. There shall be no structures of any kind, except as
permitted under these regulations.
   (B)   Dredging or dumping. There shall be no drilling for petroleum or
mineral products, mining activity, filling or dredging of soil, spoils, or any
material (natural or human-made) except as permitted under these regulations.
   (C)   Roads or driveways. There shall be no roads or driveways, except as
permitted under these regulations.
   (D)   Motorized vehicles. There shall be no use of motorized vehicles of any
kind, except as permitted under these regulations.
   (E)   Modification of natural vegetation. Modification of the natural
vegetation shall be limited to conservation maintenance that the landowner
deems necessary to control noxious weeds; for such plantings as are consistent
with these regulations; for such disturbances as are approved under these
regulations; and for the passive enjoyment, access and maintenance of
landscaping or lawns existing at the time of passage of these regulations.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring a landowner to plant or
undertake any other activities in the riparian setback; provided the landowner
allows for natural succession.
   (F)   Parking lots. There shall be no parking lots or other human-made
impervious cover, except as permitted under these regulations.
   (G)   New surface and/or subsurface sewage disposal or treatment area.
Riparian setbacks shall not be used for the disposal or treatment of sewage
except for:
      (1)   Undeveloped parcels that have received site evaluation approval
and/or permit approval prior to the enactment of this chapter;
      (2)   Dwellings served by disposal/treatment systems existing at the time
of passage of these regulations when such systems are properly sited (approved
site evaluation) and permitted or in accordance with the County Health
Department and/or the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency. Existing failing
systems which are located within the riparian setback can be upgraded with
approval of the County Health Department and/or the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency; and
      (3)   Sanitary sewer systems, either public or private, that may need to
be sited along riparian corridors to provide for flows and are commensurate
with an approved sanitary system approved by the Ohio Environmental Protection
Agency.
(Prior Code, § 1468.07) (Ord. 03-11, passed 10-28-2003)
§ 153.027 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES OR USES.
   (A)   Structures and uses within the riparian setback, existing at the time
of passage of these regulations, that are not permitted under these regulations
may be continued, but shall not be expanded except as set forth in this
subchapter.
   (B)   If damaged or destroyed, these structures or uses may be repaired or
restored within two years from the date of damage/destruction or the adoption
of these regulations, whichever is later, at the property owners’ own risk.
   (C)   A residential structure or use within the riparian setback existing at
the time of passage of these regulations may be expanded subject to the
following provisions:
      (1)   The expansion conforms to existing zoning regulations;
      (2)   The expansion must not impact the stream channel or the 100-year
floodplain; and
      (3)   The expansion must not exceed an area of 15% of the total footprint
of existing structure or use that lies within the riparian setback. Expansions
exceeding 15% of the total footprint within the riparian setback must be
obtained through the variance process.
   (D)   Nonresidential structure or use expansions will be permitted only
through the variance process.
(Prior Code, § 1468.08) (Ord. 03-11, passed 10-28-2003)
§ 153.028 BOUNDARY INTERPRETATION AND APPEALS PROCEDURE.
   (A)   When an applicant disputes the boundary of the riparian setback or the
ordinary high water mark of a stream, the applicant shall submit evidence to
the Planning Department and the County SWCD that describes the boundary,
presents the applicant’s proposed boundary and presents all justification for
the proposed boundary change.
   (B)   The Planning Department and County SWCD shall evaluate all materials
submitted and shall make a written recommendation to the Planning and Zoning
Commission within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 60 days. A copy of
this recommendation shall be submitted to the applicant. If during this
evaluation, the city or County SWCD requires further information to complete
this evaluation, the applicant may be required to provide additional
information.
   (C)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall decide such boundary
disputes. The party contesting the location of the riparian setback or the
ordinary high water mark of the streams as determined by these regulations
shall have the burden of proof in case of any such appeal.
(Prior Code, § 1468.09) (Ord. 03-11, passed 10-28-2003)
§ 153.029 VARIANCES WITHIN RIPARIAN SETBACK.
   (A)   Applications for a hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission
for variances to the provisions of this subchapter shall be submitted to the
Planning Department.
   (B)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may consult with representatives
from the County SWCD; the Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of
Natural Areas; the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Surface
Water; the County Engineer; the Department of Environmental Services of the
county; the County Health Department; or other technical experts as necessary
to provide the necessary data for the Planning and Zoning Commission to
consider variance requests.
   (C)   Expansions of residential structures or uses exceeding 15% of the
footprint area and expansions of all nonresidential structures or uses are
subject to the following:
      (1)   The expansion conforms to the existing zoning regulations;
      (2)   The expansion must not impact the stream channel or the 100-year
floodplain;
      (3)   The expansion of a nonresidential structure or use must not affect
upstream or downstream hydrologic conditions which could cause damage from
flooding or stream bank erosion to landowners in those areas. A hydrologic
study must be completed by nonresidential applicants only as a process of the
variance application; and
      (4)   The expansion of a nonresidential structure or use will not exceed
25% of the footprint area. The 25% expansion limit is per the portion of the
structure or use that lies within the riparian setback.
   (D)   Requests for variances for subdivisions will be considered for the
following:
      (1)   An additional stream crossing or crossings for a subdivision or
open space development which is necessary for the health, welfare and safety of
the residents of the subdivision; and
      (2)   A reduction of the setback width, not to exceed 10% of the
prescribed riparian setback width.
   (E)   No variances shall be granted for expansion of the following
structures or uses:
      (1)   Facilities which use, store, distribute or sell petroleum-based
products or any hazardous materials. Such facilities include, but are not
limited to, asphalt plants, dry cleaners, gasoline service stations and road
maintenance facilities; or
      (2)   Facilities which use, store, distribute or sell products which may
contribute higher than acceptable concentrations of dissolved or particulate
matter to storm water runoff around the facility. Such facilities include, but
are not limited to, landfills or transfer stations, junk yards, recycling
facilities, quarries and borrow pits, sand and gravel extraction operations,
and road salt storage barns.
   (F)   In reviewing whether to grant variances, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall consider the following:
      (1)   The extent to which the requested variance impairs the functions of
the riparian area. This determination shall be based on sufficient technical
and scientific evidence as provided by the applicant and the agencies listed in
divisions (A) through (E) of this section;
      (2)   The soil type and natural vegetation of the parcel, as well as the
percentage of the parcel that is in the 100-year floodplain; and
      (3)   The degree of hardship these regulations place on the applicant and
the availability of alternatives to the proposed activity.
(Prior Code, § 1468.10) (Ord. 03-11, passed 10-28-2003)
§ 153.030 INSPECTION.
   (A)   The riparian setback shall be inspected by the County SWCD:
      (1)   When a preliminary subdivision plat or other land development plan
is submitted to the city;
      (2)   When a building or zoning permit is requested; and
      (3)   Prior to any soil-disturbing activity to inspect the delineation of
the riparian setback as required under these regulations.
   (B)   The riparian setback shall also be inspected annually or as time
permits by the County SWCD or approved monitoring entity for compliance with
any approvals under these regulations or at any time evidence is brought to the
attention of the County SWCD that uses or structures are occurring that may
reasonably be expected to violate the provisions of these regulations.
   (C)   Violations of these regulations will be handled as noted in §
153.021.
(Prior Code, § 1468.11) (Ord. 03-11, passed 10-28-2003)
APPENDIX B: WOODY PLANTS SUITABLE FOR RIPARIAN AREAS
Flood Tolerance* Shade Tolerance ** Common Name
Flood Tolerance*                  Shade Tolerance ** Common Name
High Flood Tolerance
Aronia arbutifolia                3                  Red chokeberry
Aronia melanocarpa                3                  Black chokeberry
Cephalanthus occidentalis         5                  Common buttonbush
Clethra alnifolia                 2                  Summersweet clethra ***
Cornus amomum                     4                  Silky dogwood
Cornus stolonifera (sericea)      5                  Redosier dogwood
Hamamelis vernalis                3                  Vernal witchhazel ***
Ilex decidua                      3                  Possumhaw ***
Ilex glabra                       2                  Inkberry ***
Ilex verticillata                 3                  Common winterberry
Itea virginica                    1                  Virginia sweetspire ***
Magnolia virginiana               2                  Sweetbay magnolia ***
Myrica pensylvanica               4                  Northern bayberry
Parthenocissus quinquefolia       1                  Virginia creeper (vine)
Physocarpus opulifolius           4                  Common ninebark
Potentilla fruticosa              4                  Bush cinquefoil
Sambucus canadensis               1                  American elderberry
Salix x cotteti                   5                  Bankers willow ***
Salix exigua                      5                  Sandbar willow
Salix purpurea                    5                  Streamco willow ***
Viburnum cassinoides              2                  Witherod viburnum
Moderate Flood Tolerance*
Calycanthus floridus              1                  Common sweetshrub
Hypericum kalmianurn              5                  Kalm St. John’s wort
Viburnum dentatum                 2                  Arrowwood viburnum
Xanthorhiza simplicissima         1                  Yellowroot ***
Intermediate Flood Tolerance*
Aesculus pavia                    2                  Red buckeye ***
Aesculus parviflora               2                  Bottlebush buckeye ***
Campsis radicans                  3                  Trumpetcreeper (vine)
Cornus racemosa                   2                  Gray dogwood
Corylus americana                 2                  American filbert
Diervilla lonicera                1                  Dwarf bushhoneysuckle
Fothergilla gardeni               1                  Dwarf fothergilla ***
Fothergilla major                 1                  Large fothergilla ***
Hydrangea quericifolia            1                  Oakleaf hydrangea ***
Hydrangea arborescens             1                  Smooth hydrangea
Lindera benzoin                   1                  Common spicebush
Lonicera dioica                   2                  Limber honeysuckle (vine)
Mahonia aquifolium                1                  Oregongrape holly ***
Rosa carolina                     4                  Carolina rose
Rosa setigera                     4                  Prairie rose
Rubus odoratus                    1                  Fragrant thimbleberry
Vaccinium stamineum               2                  Common deerberry
Low Flood Tolerance*
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi           4                  Bearberry
Cornus rogusa                     1                  Roundleaf dogwood
Corylus americana                 2                  American filbert
Diervilla lonicera                1                  Dwarf bushhoneysuckle
Fothergilla gardeni               1                  Dwarf fothergilla ***
Fothergilla major                 1                  Large fothergilla ***
Hydrangea arborescens             1                  Smooth hydrangea
Hydrangea quericifolia            1                  Oakleaf hydrangea ***
Mahonia aquifolium                1                  Oregongrape holly ***
Rosa carolina                     4                  Carolina rose
Rubus odoratus                    1                  Fragrant thimbleberry
Symphoricarpos albus              1                  Common snowberry
Vaccinium stamineum               2                  Common deerberry
No Flood Tolerance*
Amorpha canescens                 5                  Leadplant ***
Ceanothus americanus              3                  New Jersey tea
Comptonia peregrina               2                  Sweetfern
Dirca palustris                   1                  Leatherwood
Hypericum frondosum               5                  Golden St. John’s wort
Juniperus communis                5                  Common juniper
Juniperus horizontalis            5                  Creeping juniper ***
Rhus aromatica                    5                  Fragrant sumac
Sambucus pubens                   1                  Scarlet elder
Symphoricarpos albus              1                  Common snowberry
*High flood tolerance: Generally lowland wet species surviving when flooded or
exposed to high water table more than 40% of the growing season
*Moderate flood tolerance: Generally lowland wet species surviving when
flooded or exposed to high water table more than 30% of the growing season but
less than 40%
*Intermediate flood tolerance: Generally lowland wet-mesic species surviving
occasional inundation or elevated water table between 20% and 30% of the
growing season
*Low flood tolerance: Generally upland mesic and mesic-dry species rarely
inundated or exposed to an elevated water table for periods of short duration,
between 5% and 20% of the growing season
*No flood tolerance: Generally upland dry species exhibiting immediate and
rapid decline frequently culminating in death if inundated or exposed to
elevated water table for more than 5% of the growing season
Table 1224-1: Summary Table of Development Review Procedures
H = Public Hearing Required
M = Public MeetingR = Review and Recommendation
D = Decision
Appeals                           157.055            H-D[3]
Certificate of use and compliance 157.057            D
Conditional use permit            157.052            H-DR
Land disturbance permit           157053             R-D
Major subdivision - preliminary   157.050            M-DR
plan
Major subdivision - final plat    157.050            M-DM-RR
Minor subdivision                 157.049            M-D [1]R-DR [2]
Site plan review (including all   157.051            M-DRR
freestanding signs)
Text or map amendment             157.048            H-DM-RR
Variance - general                157.054            H-DR
Variance of land development      157.050(16)        H-DR
standards (major subdivisions)
Zoning permit                     157.056            D
[1]   The PZC shall review and decide on minor subdivisions upon referral from
the Planning Director, otherwise the Planning Department may authorize minor
subdivisions in compliance with this Code.
[2]   The Zoning Division shall provide a secondary signature on minor
subdivisions.
[3]   The Zoning Division, or the department whose decision is being appealed,
shall provide all information related to the appealed decision as part of the
record.
 
(Prior Code, § 1224.02) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
§ 153.045 IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED; NUMBERING SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   All permanent buildings and tenements in and upon the streets,
shopping centers, driveways and parking areas of the city, whether residential,
commercial or industrial, shall be adequately and properly identified for the
purpose of facilitating the rendering of public services by the Fire, Police
and Public Service Departments.
   (B)   All buildings and structures shall display a street address number,
posted near the entrance door or walkway facing the street. All figures shall
be at least three inches in height on a contrasting background so as to be
clearly visible and legible from the streets, driveways and parking areas upon
which the house, building or tenement abuts. In addition to the street address
numbers near the entrance door, every building unit located more than 75 feet
from the street shall also display a set of clearly visible street address
numbers, as herein prescribed, near the driveway entrance to the building unit.
In the event of special circumstances due to the location of the building unit,
entrance or driveway, the Fire Chief shall determine where the street address
numbers shall be displayed to facilitate ready location of the building unit.
In the event that script numbers are used, an additional set of block-type
Arabic numerals shall appear in a conspicuous place. The numerals shall be at
least three inches in height and sufficient in width so as to be readily
discernible from the street.
   (C)   It shall be mandatory for a newly constructed building that the
numbers be on display, as required in this section, on completion of the
building.
(Prior Code, § 1472.01) (Ord. 94-1, passed 5-10-1994)
§ 153.046 SURVEYS BY FIRE AND PUBLIC SERVICE DEPARTMENTS; NONCOMPLIANCE;
ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Fire Department shall survey, from time to time, business,
commercial, industrial and multi-family structures in the city, to ensure
compliance with this chapter. The Director of Public Service or his or her
designee shall survey, from time to time, one- and two-family residential
structures in the city to ensure compliance with this subchapter.
   (B)   No person shall fail to identify, within 180 days after the effective
date of this subchapter, any house, building or other structure occupied by him
or her, as provided in §
153.045.
   (C)   A notice shall be mailed to each addressee who fails to comply with
this subchapter. Failure to so comply within a 30-day period following the
mailing of such notice shall be deemed a violation of this subchapter,
punishable as provided in §
153.999.
   (D)   The Fire Chief or his or her designee is empowered to determine the
existence of any violations of this subchapter at business, commercial,
industrial or multi-family structures in the city and to cause notifications
and citations to be issued, or to initiate such other administrative or legal
actions as are needed to address such violations. The Director of Public
Service or his or her designee is empowered to determine the existence of any
violations of this subchapter at one- and two-family residential structures in
the city, and to cause notifications and citations to be issued, or to initiate
such other administrative or legal actions as are needed to address such
violations.
(Prior Code, § 1472.02) (Ord. 94-1, passed 5-10-1994)
§ 153.047 DEFACING OF NUMBERS.
   No person shall purposely or knowingly deface, remove, obliterate or
obstruct any building, suite or house numbering in the city.
(Prior Code, § 1472.03) (Ord. 94-1, passed 5-10-1994)
SUSTAINABLE BUILDING PRACTICES
§ 153.060 STANDARDS TO BE MET.
   All covered buildings constructed after January 1, 2008 shall meet a minimum
LEED certified, silver, gold or platinum rating or green building initiative
standards.
(Prior Code, § 1474.01) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-28-2007)
§ 153.061 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICABLE BUILDING. Any city-owned construction project constructing or
renovating 5,000 gross square feet or more of occupied space, and that has an
estimated construction cost exceeding $200,000, that is constructed after the
effective date established in this legislation.
   BUILDING COMPLIANCE OFFICIAL. The Planning Director or any competent
individual in city administration so appointed by the Mayor.
   CONSTRUCTION. The building or renovation of any new or existing applicable
building.
   LEED RATING SYSTEM. The most recent version, including future updates, of
the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design Standards Green Building
Rating System approved by the United States Building Council. The Green
Building Compliance Official shall maintain the most recent version of the LEED
rating system at all times.
(Prior Code, § 1474.02) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-28-2007)
§ 153.062 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   City-owned projects or structures deemed historic under any federal,
state or local law are exempt from, but encouraged to comply with, the
requirements of this legislation whenever feasible.
   (B)   If, due to specific economic circumstances, compliance with this
legislation would defeat the intent or create an unreasonable burden on the
city or project, a request for exemption shall be submitted in writing to City
Council along with the request for appropriation for the project. The exemption
request must explain the hardship or infeasibility, including detail of the
burden and a life-cycle cost analysis.
      (1)   If individual project appropriation will not be necessary, the
Green Building Compliance Official will submit the request for exemption to the
Mayor, who will then make the final determination.
      (2)   If a waiver is granted by City Council, the project design will
reflect as many LEED credits as reasonably achievable.
(Prior Code, § 1474.03) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-28-2007)
§ 153.063 ENCOURAGED REGISTRATION AND CERTIFICATION.
   (A)   LEED registration and certification through the United States Green
Building Council are encouraged but not required under §
153.062(B).
   (B)   All residents and builders are encouraged to use their best efforts to
incorporate as many green building measures as feasible from the LEED rating
system and to pursue LEED registration and certification.
(Prior Code, § 1474.04) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-28-2007)
UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
§ 153.075 REPAIR OR REMOVAL.
   (A)   A building or structure that may be, or has become, an unsafe building
or structure, shall, unless made safe and secure, be taken down and removed
when so ordered by the Fire Chief.
 
   (B)   All buildings or structures that are or hereafter become unsafe, a
nuisance, unsanitary, or deficient in adequate exit way facilities, or which
constitute a fire hazard or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public
welfare, shall be deemed unsafe buildings or structures. All unsafe structures
shall be taken down and removed or made safe and secure, as the Fire Chief may
deem necessary and as provided in this section. A vacant building, unguarded or
open at a door or window, shall be deemed a fire hazard and unsafe within the
meaning of this Building and Housing Code.
(Prior Code, § 1476.01) (Ord. 98-3, passed 2-10-1998)
§ 153.076 INSPECTION AND REPORT; NOTICE TO OWNER; SECURING VACANT STRUCTURE.
   (A)   The Fire Chief shall examine every building or structure reported as
dangerous, vacant, unsafe structurally or constituting a fire hazard. The Fire
Chief shall cause a report to be filed in a docket of unsafe structures. The
report shall include the nature and estimated amount of damage, if any, caused
by collapse or failure.
   (B)   Upon making a determination that a building or structure is unsafe,
the Fire Chief shall issue an order to the owner or owners of the unsafe
building or structure, at their last known address, notifying the owner or
owners that the building or structure is unsafe and that the owner or owners
must secure the building or structure in accordance with the order of the Fire
Chief.
    (C)   (1)   All owners of vacated structures which have been deemed by the
Fire Chief to be detrimental to the health and safety of all persons in or
about such structures, and who have been notified of such determination, shall
comply with the orders of the Fire Chief and shall cause all floors, walls and
roofs to remain in a sound condition and to be repaired to current code
specifications with respect to fire resistance and strength, and shall cause
all exterior doors and windows to be locked and secured at all times in order
to prevent entrance to such vacant buildings by any trespasser.
      (2)   The term SECURE, as used in this section, means that a covering
shall be placed over all doors and windows which are within 15 feet of the
exterior grade, consisting of half-inch thick plywood attached to the framing
of all such doors and windows by wood screws of a minimum length of one and
one-half inches, placed 12 inches on center. Such plywood shall be painted with
a minimum of two coats of exterior oil-based paint. Such paint shall be
approved by the Fire Chief.
    (D)   If the person or persons to whom any notice and order under this
chapter is addressed cannot be found after diligent search, then such notice
and order shall be sent by certified mail to the last known address of such
person. A copy of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
premises to which it relates. Such mailing and posting shall be deemed adequate
service.
   (E)   The Fire Chief, in the enforcement of this section, may invoke all of
the powers delegated to him or her as are set forth in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1476.02) (Ord. 98-3, passed 2-10-1998)
 § 153.077 ORDER TO VACATE; CLOSING STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   (1)   When, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, there is actual and
immediate danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure or any part
thereof which would endanger life, or when any structure or part of a structure
has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the building or
structure, the Fire Chief is hereby authorized and empowered to order and
require the occupants to vacate the same forthwith. The Fire Chief shall cause
to be posted at each entrance to such building a notice reading as follows:
   “This structure is unsafe and its use or occupancy has been prohibited by
the Fire Chief. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such building or
structure except for the purpose of making the required repairs or demolishing
the same.”
      (2)   Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs are made
or until the building or structure is razed. No person, other than an employee
of the Fire Department properly authorized to do so, shall remove or cause to
be removed such notice without written permission from the Fire Chief.
    (B)   The Fire Chief, when it is deemed necessary for the public safety,
may temporarily close sidewalks, streets, buildings, structures and places
adjacent to such building or structure and prohibit the same from being used.
(Prior Code, § 1476.03) (Ord. 98-3, passed 2-10-1998)
§ 153.078 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE OR ORDER TO REMOVE, REPAIR OR VACATE.
   (A)   If the person served with a notice or order to remove or repair an
unsafe building or structure should fail, within the time stated in the notice
or order, to comply with the requirements thereof, the Director of Law shall be
advised of all the facts in the case, and shall institute an appropriate action
in the courts to compel compliance.
    (B)   If any person, when ordered by the Fire Chief to vacate an unsafe
building or structure, should fail to comply with the order, the County
Sheriff’s Department shall be advised of all the facts in the case and it shall
be the duty of the County Sheriff’s Department to compel such person to vacate
such building or structure.
(Prior Code, § 1476.04) (Ord. 98-3, passed 2-10-1998)
§ 153.079 EMERGENCY WORK.
   (A)   In case there shall be, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, actual and
immediate danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure or any part
thereof so as to endanger life or property, the Fire Chief shall cause the
necessary work to be done to render the building or structure or part thereof
temporarily safe. If the building or structure is in such a state of decay that
it is impracticable to repair such building or structure, the Fire Chief may
order the building or structure razed or demolished. Action may be taken
whether the procedure prescribed elsewhere in this subchapter has been
instituted or not.
    (B)   For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this section, the
Fire Chief may employ such supervisors, workers, equipment and materials as may
be deemed necessary.
(Prior Code, § 1476.05) (Ord. 98-3, passed 2-10-1998)
§ 153.080 RECOVERY OF COSTS.
   When the Fire Chief has found it necessary to cause work to be performed as
provided in §§
153.076 or
153.079, all costs thereby incurred in the performance of such work and the
furnishing of materials, including advertising of notice, shall be promptly
paid by the owner. If, within 30 days after the emergency work is performed,
the owner fails, neglects or refuses to pay the total cost of such work, the
cost shall be paid out of the city treasury. In addition to the actual costs of
such work, an interest rate equal to the current rate of interest charged by
the city on special assessments shall be imposed by the city for the life of
the assessment, added to all charges previously incurred for said razing and
collected as hereinafter stated. The Director of Finance shall then certify the
amount so paid by the city, including interest, to the County Auditor. The
County Auditor shall enter the amount on the tax duplicate of the county as a
special assessment against the real estate on which the building or structure
which required such emergency work or razing is or was situated, and such
assessment shall be collected, with interest, as other taxes and assessments
and, when collected, shall be paid over to the city.
(Prior Code, § 1476.06) (Ord. 98-3, passed 2-10-1998)
§ 153.081 FIRE-DAMAGED STRUCTURES; RECOVERY OF INSURANCE PROCEEDS.
   (A)   No insurance company doing business in the state shall pay a claim of
named insureds for fire damage to a structure located within the city where the
amount recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all insurance
policies exceeds $5,000 and is greater than or equal to 60% of all fire
insurance policy monetary limitations, unless there is compliance with the
following procedures.
      (1)   When the loss agreed to between the named insured or insureds and
the insurance company or insurance companies equals or exceeds 60% of the
aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies covering the building or
structure, the insurance company or companies, in accordance with R.C. § 715.26
(F), shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the Director of Finance in
the aggregate amount of $2,000 for each $15,000 and each fraction of that
amount of a claim, or, if at the time of a proof of loss agreed to between the
named insured or insureds and the insurance company or companies, the named
insured or insureds have submitted a contractor’s signed estimate of the cost
of removing, repairing, or securing the building or other structure, shall
transfer from the insurance proceeds the amount specified in the estimate.
         (a)   Such transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all
companies insuring the building or structure. Policy proceeds remaining after
the transfer to the city may be disbursed in accordance with the policy terms.
         (b)   The named insured or insureds may submit a contractor’s signed
estimate of the cost of removing, repairing, or securing the building or other
structure after the transfer, and the Finance Director, after notifying the
Fire Chief, shall return the amount of the fund in excess of the estimate to
the named insured or insureds; provided that the city has not commenced to
remove, repair, or secure the building or other structure.
      (2)   (a)   Upon receipt of proceeds by the city as authorized by this
section, the Finance Director shall place the proceeds in a separate fund to be
used solely as security against the total cost of removing, repairing, or
securing the building or other structure incurred by the city pursuant to R.C.
§ 715.261.
         (b)   When transferring the fund as required in division (A)(1) of
this section, an insurance company shall provide the city with the name and
address of the named insured or insureds, whereupon the city shall contact the
named insured or insureds, certify that the proceeds have been received by the
city and notify them that the following procedures will be followed.
         (c)   The fund shall be returned by the Finance Director to the named
insured or insureds when the repairing, removing or securing of the building or
other structure has been completed, and the required proof is received by the
Fire Chief; provided that the city has not incurred any costs for such repair,
removal or securing. Such costs of the city shall be paid from the fund and, if
excess funds remain, the city shall transfer the remaining funds to the named
insured or insureds after such repair, rebuilding or removal has been
completed. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of
the city to recover any deficiency under R.C. § 715.261.
    (B)   Nothing in this section or R.C. § 3929.86(C) and (D), as adopted
herein, shall be construed to prohibit the city and the named insured or
insureds from entering into an agreement that permits the transfer of funds to
the named insured or insureds if some other reasonable disposition of the
damaged property has been negotiated.
    (C)   The Finance Director is hereby designated as the officer authorized
to carry out the duties of this section; provided that no funds so held under
this section shall be released without notification of such intent to the Fire
Chief.
(Prior Code, § 1476.07) (Ord. 98-3, passed 2-10-1998)
§ 153.082 MONITORING OF ROTARY FUND.
   The Director of Finance shall closely monitor the rotary fund from which
monies for razings or demolitions are advanced and report quarterly to Council
the sums and amounts of money expended and received into the rotary fund, and
the balance of funds currently on hand.
(Prior Code, § 1476.08) (Ord. 98-3, passed 2-10-1998)
§ 153.083 DELEGATION OF POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prohibit the Fire
Chief from delegating his or her duties or powers hereunder to any other
employee of the Fire Department.
    (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prohibit the Fire
Chief, with the written consent of the Mayor, from delegating his or her duties
or powers hereunder to another department or employee of the city.
(Prior Code, § 1476.09) (Ord. 98-3, passed 2-10-1998)
§ 153.084 CERTIFICATION BY CLERK OF COUNCIL.
   The Clerk of Council is hereby directed to send a certified copy of this
chapter to the Superintendent of Insurance for the state.
(Prior Code, § 1476.10) (Ord. 98-3, passed 2-10-1998)
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
§ 153.095 ZONING DIVISION.
   The Zoning Division shall have the same description and responsibilities as
outlined in §
157.032.
(Ord. 2022-16, passed 11-22-2022)
§ 153.096 DANGEROUS BUILDING DEFINED.
   All buildings or structures which have any of the following defects may be
deemed dangerous buildings:
   (A)   Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list,
lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center
of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base;
   (B)   Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33% or more of damage
or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or 50% of damage or
deterioration of the non-supporting enclosing or outside walls or covering;
   (C)   Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs
or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be
reasonably safe for the purpose used;
   (D)   Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe,
unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to
decent living that they are unfit for human habitation;
   (E)   Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate
to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human beings who
live or may live therein;
   (F)   Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or
panic, or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other
means of communication;
   (G)   Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may
fall and injure members of the public or property;
   (H)   Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, unsanitary or
dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the occupants of
the city;
   (I)   Those buildings existing in violation of any provisions of the County
Building Code that give rise to support a determination of a dangerous building
violation, any provision of the Fire Prevention Code and other ordinances of
the city or County Building Code;
   (J)   Those buildings which are vacant and unguarded open and unsecured at
the doors or windows;
   (K)   Those buildings which have been condemned by the County Building
Department; and
   (L)   Those buildings which are the site of a clandestine drug lab and the
damage from such drug lab is found to be so severe that clean-up alone is
impractical or ineffective to reduce the associated health and safety risks.
(Ord. 2022-16, passed 11-22-2022)
§ 153.097 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS; NUISANCES.
   As used in this subchapter, all dangerous buildings, within the terms of §
157.032 are hereby declared and shall be deemed to be public nuisances by
reason of the condition in which the same are permitted to be or remain, and
which shall or may endanger the health, life, limb or property, or cause any
hurt, harm, inconvenience, discomfort, damage or injury to any one or more
persons in the city, including, but not limited to, any one or more of the
following particulars:
   (A)   Being a nuisance to the general health of the community;
   (B)   Being a fire hazard;
   (C)   Being unsafe for occupancy or use on, in, upon, about or around the
aforesaid premises; or
   (D)   Being a nuisance, because of long-continued vacancy, lack of
reasonable or adequate maintenance of structures and/or premises adjacent
thereto, thereby depreciating the enjoyment and use of property in the
immediate vicinity to such an extent that it is harmful to the community in
which such structure is situated.
(Ord. 2022-16, passed 11-22-2022)
§ 153.098 UNSAFE CONDITIONS; REPORTS.
   Any owner, manager, lessee or occupant of a building who discovers or who
has reason to believe that there exists, on the premises, a condition which may
endanger other property or the life or limb of any person, and such condition
cannot be immediately remedied so as to remove any danger therefrom, shall,
within 24 hours after such discovery, report the existence of such dangerous
condition to the Zoning Division, who shall forthwith take such steps as may be
necessary to protect the public safety and welfare. No person who is an owner,
manager, lessee or occupant of a building on which premises such a dangerous
condition exists and who knows or should know of such dangerous condition shall
fail to make such report to Zoning Division within 24 hours after such
knowledge is obtained or should have been obtained.
(Ord. 2022-16, passed 11-22-2022)
§ 153.099 STRUCTURES VACANT AND OPEN ENTRY.
   (A)   Responsibility. The record titled owner(s) of any parcel located
within the city on which there is a principal structure that has been
voluntarily vacant for at least six months shall provide the Zoning Division
the name, address and contact information of the person(s) responsible for the
maintenance of the property during vacancy. In the event that a principal
structure becomes involuntarily vacant by court order, foreclosure or other
reason, the titled owner(s) shall provide the Zoning Division, within ten days
of such involuntary vacancy with:
      (1)   The titled owner(s) current address; and
      (2)   A copy of the court order, notice, statement or other document that
terminated rights to possession and/or control of the property.
   (B)   Zoning Division to secure. Whenever the Zoning Division finds a vacant
structure open to entry at doors, windows or other points accessible to the
general public, the Zoning Division may cause the structure to be secured at
those points of entry. The Zoning Division shall be authorized at any time to
enter upon the premises and secure the structure in order to lessen the
severity of risk caused by the dangerous building. In securing such structure,
the Zoning Division may call upon any department, division or bureau of the
city or whatever assistance may be necessary, or may, by private contract,
secure such structures. Such securing shall not abate the necessity to repair
or remove the dangerous building. The notice of violation shall include the
fact that the Zoning Division has found it necessary to take appropriate action
to secure the structures.
(Ord. 2022-16, passed 11-22-2022)
§ 153.100 AGREEMENT TO REPAIR OR REMOVE.
   The record title holders and lienholders of the property may enter into an
agreement with the city to perform the repair or removal of an unsafe building.
(Ord. 2022-16, passed 11-22-2022)
§ 153.101 AUTHORITY TO EXAMINE PREMISES.
   The Zoning Division shall be empowered to examine or cause to be examined
any building or dwelling within the city, to determine whether such building or
dwelling is dangerous, unsafe or constitutes a nuisance, as provided by this
subchapter, and may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an
administrative search warrant to enter said premises for inspection.
(Ord. 2022-16, passed 11-22-2022)
§ 153.102 REMEDIAL ORDER; NOTICE.
   (A)   If the Zoning Division examines or causes to be examined a building or
structures or portion thereof and determines it to be a dangerous building, the
Zoning Division shall provide notice to the owner and lienholders of the
property.
   (B)   Notice of violation and order:
      (1)   The Zoning Division shall give written notice to the record title
owner(s) and lienholder(s) of the property by regular first class U.S. mail and
post signs on the dangerous building in accordance with §
153.103 of the Zoning Division’s condemnation order and/or designation of the
building as a dangerous building. The violation and order notice must include
the Zoning Division’s intention to either require repair or demolish the
dangerous building under §
153.105. The violation and order notice must also include the name, address and
phone number of the office of the Zoning Division, the address of the dangerous
building, the name and last known address of the record title owner of the
dangerous building, and the date by which the record title owner(s) must
contact the Zoning Division in writing. If the Zoning Division order requires
repair of the dangerous building, the notice must include a list of repairs to
be made and a date by which the repairs must be completed. The notice of
violation shall include written notice of any action taken pursuant to §
153.099.
      (2)   Unless another deadline is established under this chapter or by the
written notice of violation and order, the record title owner(s) shall contact
the Zoning Division in writing within 14 days of the date the notice of
violation and order is mailed.
      (3)   Unless another deadline is established under this chapter or by the
written notice of violation and order, the record title owner(s) shall comply
with the notice of violation and order requirement(s) to either repair or
demolish the dangerous building within 35 days of the date the notice of
violation and order is mailed.
      (4)   If any emergency exists, written notice may be given by other means
15 days prior to demolition.
      (5)   If the record title owner(s) fails to contact the Zoning Division
by the date provided on the written notice, or the notice of violation and
order is returned undeliverable by the United States Postal Service (USPS), the
Zoning Division shall cause the notice of violation and order to be made by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. The
publication shall be published at least once a week for three successive weeks
and shall contain the name, address, and phone number of the office of the
Zoning Division, the address of the dangerous building, the name and last known
address of the record title owner of the dangerous building, the name and last
known address of any and all lienholders of the dangerous building, a summary
statement that the building has been determined to be dangerous and that the
building must be repaired or demolished, and that the record title owner is
required to contact the Zoning Division and comply with the notice of violation
and order within 15 days after the last publication.
      (6)   The Zoning Division may grant an extension of time for compliance
with the notice of violation and order upon the record title owner's written
request and for good cause shown.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure
who has received a notice pursuant to division (B) of this section, or whom a
notice of violation has been served, to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or
otherwise dispose of property to another until the provisions of the notice of
violation and order have been complied with, or until such owner shall first
furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt
of such notice of violation issued by the Zoning Division, and furnish the
Zoning Division with a signed and notarized statement from the grantee,
transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such notice of
violation and fully accepting the responsibility, without condition unless
agreed to by the Zoning Division, for making the corrections or repairs
required by such notice of violation.
(Ord. 2022-16, passed 11-22-2022)
§ 153.103 POSTING OF SIGNS.
   The Zoning Division shall cause to be posted at each entrance to or
conspicuous place on a dangerous building or structures or portion thereof a
notice to read: “Condemned. Do not enter. Unsafe to occupy. Building code
regulation, City of Green, Ohio.” Such notice shall include the date of posting
and a deadline as established in §
153.102. Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs are made or
demolition is completed. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove such
notice without permission from the Zoning Division or for any person to enter
the building, except for the purpose of making the required repairs or
demolishing the same. Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises and any
owner or any person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a
placarded premises shall be liable for the penalties provided by this code.
(Ord. 2022-16, passed 11-22-2022)
§ 153.104 PERMITS.
   In all cases of construction or repair pursuant to orders of the Zoning
Division, permits covering such work shall be obtained as required by law.
(Ord. 2022-16, passed 11-22-2022)
§ 153.105 RIGHT TO DEMOLISH.
   In case the record title owner(s), or the purchaser under a land contract if
that be the case, shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the notice to
repair, rehabilitate or demolish and remove said dangerous building or
structures or portion thereof, such party, either the record title owner(s) or
the purchaser under land contract, shall be subject to the penal provisions of
this Building Code and the Zoning Division may proceed to have the building or
structures or portion thereof demolished and removed from the premises, leaving
the premises in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. When any structure has
been ordered to be demolished, the governing body or other designated officer
under said contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell or
offset cost of demolition the salvage and valuable materials at the highest
price obtainable.
(Ord. 2022-16, passed 11-22-2022)
§ 153.106 FAILURE TO ACT; REMEDY BY CITY; COSTS CERTIFIED AS LIEN.
   (A)   Any and all costs incurred under this subchapter shall be paid by the
record title owner(s) of such building or structures. The record title owner(s)
shall reimburse the city all expenses, including, but not limited to, the cost
of securing, boarding, vacating, repairing or demolishing the dangerous
building.
   (B)   If any person fails to comply with any lawful order of the Zoning
Division within the time limit specified in such order, the Zoning Division
shall cause such building to be secured, effectively boarded, vacated, repaired
or demolished, as the facts may warrant, under the standards provided for in
this subchapter. If record title owner(s) fails to pay the cost to secure,
board, vacate, repair and/or demolish the dangerous building within 30 days
after notice of the amount of the expense, the Zoning Division shall certify
the same to the appropriate County Auditor to be placed upon the tax duplicate
and collected as other taxes are collected according to law.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the power and authority to certify a lien, set forth
in this section, nothing shall abrogate nor limit any other right of recovery
the city may have. The Director of Law shall take any action necessary to
collect the costs incurred under this subchapter from the record title owner(s)
or other responsible party.
(Ord. 2022-16, passed 11-22-2022)
§ 153.107 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Zoning Division which may include, but is not limited to, the County
Building Department officials, have full authority to apply for warrants, issue
orders, compel repair or demolition, and any other act called for by this
subchapter or by law. The city may use the remedies detailed in this subchapter
and/or any other remedies available under the law.
(Ord. 2022-16, passed 11-22-2022)
§ 153.108 APPEAL TO BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeals Board. For purposes of this Code, the Board of Zoning Appeals
(“Board”) shall hear and decide all appeals permitted by this Code.
      (1)   Board. Board composition and appointment shall be in accordance
with Charter, Article VII, § 7.6.
      (2)   Procedure. The Board shall follow its written rules of procedure
for hearings and may adopt other rules of procedure not inconsistent with this
Code. No member of the Board shall take part in any hearing or determination in
which he or she has a personal or financial interest. Three members of the
Board in attendance at any meeting shall constitute a quorum.
      (3)   Authority. The Board shall hear all appeals relative to the
enforcement of this Code, and by a concurring vote of the majority of its
members may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision
appealed from, and shall make such order or determination as in its opinion
ought to be made. Failure to secure such concurring votes shall be deemed a
confirmation of the decision of the Code Inspector.
   (B)   Hearings.
      (1)   Any person(s) served with a notice of violation has the right to
appeal such notice to the Board. Such appeal must be filed on forms provided by
the city and must be filed within 14 days of the postmark or date of service on
the violation notice.
      (2)   Upon receipt of appeal, the Board shall set a time and place for
hearing before the Board and shall give the petitioner written notice by first-
class mail postmarked no less than ten days prior to the hearing. At such
hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show
cause why any items appearing on such notice and order should be modified, or
withdrawn. The failure of the petitioner or his representative to appear and
state his case at such hearing shall have the same effect as if no appeal were
filed.
   (C)   Findings. Prior to sustaining any violation and compliance order, the
Board shall make the following findings:
      (1)   The violator was served with a notice of violation and/or citation
as provided for in §
153.098.
      (2)   The notice of violation that was served stated the specific nature
of the violation: corrective action needed to be taken to abate the violation:
and a specific time period for abatement of the violation;
      (3)   Within the time period stipulated in the notice of violation, the
violator failed to comply with the notice of violation by not abating the
violation, and/or by not bringing the use into compliance with the Dangerous
Buildings Code; and
      (4)   Upon expiration of the date indicated for compliance in the notice
of violation, the property was being maintained in violation of specific
provisions of the Dangerous Buildings Code and/or conditions imposed by the
Board as a prerequisite to the modification of a previous compliance order.
   (D)   Authority of Appeals Board. Within 30 days the hearing, the Board
shall render a decision sustaining, modifying, or withdrawing any item
appearing on the notice and order. The petitioner shall be notified of the
decision in writing. No fines or assessments shall be imposed against the
violator during the appeals process.
(Ord. 2022-16, passed 11-22-2022)
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Demolition of buildings. Whoever violates any provision of §§
153.001 through
153.007 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100
for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 1462.99)
   (B)   Numbering of buildings. Whoever violates or fails to comply with any
of the provisions of §§
153.045 through
153.047 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100
for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 1472.99)
   (C)   Dangerous buildings.
      (1)   The owner of any dangerous building who fails to comply with any
notice or order to repair, vacate or demolish such building, given by any
person authorized by §§
153.095 through
153.108 to give such notice or order, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree for each offense. Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a
separate offense.
      (2)   Any owner of a dangerous building who sells, transfers, mortgages,
leases or otherwise disposes of property to another without compliance with §
153.102(C) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   The occupant or lessee in possession who fails to comply with any
notice to vacate, as provided in §§
153.095 through
153.108, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree for each
offense. Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense.
      (4)   Whoever violates §
153.103 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree for each offense.
Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense.
      (5)   Whoever violates any other section of §§
153.095 through
153.108 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for each offense. Each day of
noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 94-1, passed 5-10-1994; Ord. 98-24, passed 1-26-1999; Ord. 2022-16,
passed 11-22-2022)
CHAPTER 154: FLOOD-PRONE AREAS AND FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
Flood-Prone Areas
   
154.01   Assurance to Federal Emergency Management Agency
   
154.02   Authority of Director of Planning
   
154.03   Certificates of floodproofing and information on lowest floor
elevation
   
154.04   Additional actions
Flood Damage Prevention
   
154.15   Statutory authorization
   
154.16   Findings of fact
   
154.17   Statement of purpose
   
154.18   Methods of reducing flood loss
   
154.19   Lands to which these regulations apply
   
154.20   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
   
154.21   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
154.22   Interpretation
   
154.23   Warning, disclaimer of liability and severability
   
154.24   Definitions
   
154.25   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
   
154.26   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
154.27   Floodplain development permits
   
154.28   Application required
   
154.29   Review and approval of a floodplain development permit application
   
154.30   Inspections
   
154.31   Post-construction certifications required
   
154.32   Revoking a floodplain development permit
   
154.33   Exemption from filing a development permit
   
154.34   Map maintenance activities
   
154.35   Data use and flood map interpretation
   
154.36   Substantial damage determinations
   
154.37   Use and development standards for flood hazard reduction
   
154.38   Appeals Board established
   
154.39   Powers and duties
   
154.40   Appeals
   
154.41   Variances
   
154.42   Procedure at hearings
   
154.43   Appeal to the court
   
154.44   Compliance required
   
154.45   Notice of violation
 
   
154.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Flood control by soil conservation district supervisors, see R.C. § 940.06
   Flood insurance, see R.C.§ 3925.34(C)
   Water supply, sanitation and ditches, see R.C. §§ 6101.01 et seq.
FLOOD-PRONE AREAS
§ 154.01 ASSURANCE TO FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY.
   The city assures the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) that it will
enact as necessary, and maintain in force in those areas having flood hazards,
adequate land use and control measures with effective enforcement provisions
consistent with the criteria set forth in §
60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, being 44 C.F.R. §
60.3.
(Prior Code, § 1464.01) (Res. 94-R38, passed 5-24-1994)
§ 154.02 AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR OF PLANNING.
   Council hereby vests the Director of Planning with the responsibility,
authority and means to:
   (A)   Assist the Administrator, at his or her request, in his or her
delineation of the limits of the area having special flood hazards;
   (B)   Provide such information as the Administrator may request concerning
present uses and occupancy of the flood plain areas;
   (C)   Cooperate with federal, state and local agencies and private firms
which undertake to study, survey, map and identify floodplain areas, and
cooperate with neighboring communities with respect to the management of
adjoining floodplain areas in order to prevent aggravation of existing hazards;
   (D)   Submit, on the anniversary date of the community’s initial
eligibility, an annual report to the Administrator on the progress made during
the past year within the community in the development and implementation of
floodplain management measures; and
   (E)   Upon occurrence, notify the Administrator in writing whenever the
boundaries of the community have been modified by annexation or whenever the
community has otherwise assumed or no longer has, the authority to adopt and
enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. So that all
flood hazard boundary maps and flood insurance rate maps will accurately
represent the community’s boundaries, the Director of Planning shall include,
within such notification, a copy of a map of the community suitable for
reproduction, clearly delineating the new corporate limits or the new area for
which the community has assumed or relinquished floodplain management
regulatory authority.
(Prior Code, § 1464.02) (Res. 94-R38, passed 5-24-1994)
§ 154.03 CERTIFICATES OF FLOODPROOFING AND INFORMATION ON LOWEST FLOOR
ELEVATION.
   Council hereby appoints the Director of Planning to maintain for public
inspection and to furnish upon request, for the determination of applicable
flood insurance risk premium rates within all areas having special flood
hazards identified on a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map,
certificates of floodproofing and information on the elevation (in relation to
mean sea level) of the level of the lowest floor (including the basement) of
all new or substantially improved structures, whether or not such structures
contain a basement, and, if the structure has been floodproofed, the elevation
(in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was floodproofed.
(Prior Code, § 1464.03) (Res. 94-R38, passed 5-24-1994)
§ 154.04 ADDITIONAL ACTIONS.
   The city hereby agrees to take such other official action as may be
reasonably necessary to carry out the objectives of the program.
(Prior Code, § 1464.04) (Res. 94-R38, passed 5-24-1994)
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§ 154.15 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   Article XVIII, § 3 of the Ohio Constitution grants municipalities the legal
authority to adopt land use and control measures for promoting the health,
safety and general welfare of its citizens.
(Prior Code, § 1466.01) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.16 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   The city has special flood hazard areas that are subject to periodic
inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and government services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base.
Additionally, structures exist in the city that are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the
flood loss. In order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the
purposes set forth in this subchapter, these regulations are adopted.
(Prior Code, § 1466.02) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.17 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare, and to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the proper use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to protect property and
minimize future flood blight areas;
   (G)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions;
   (H)   Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within and
near flood-prone areas;
   (I)   Ensure that the flood storage and conveyance functions of the
floodplain are maintained;
   (J)   Minimize the impact of development on the natural, beneficial values
of the floodplain;
   (K)   Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or environmentally
incompatible; and
   (L)   Me et community participation requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
(Prior Code, § 1466.03) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.18 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSS.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, these regulations include methods and
provisions for:
   (A)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
   (D)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, excavating and other
development which may increase flood damage; and
   (E)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers, which
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
(Prior Code, § 1466.04) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.19 LANDS TO WHICH THESE REGULATIONS APPLY.
   These regulations shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within
the jurisdiction of the city as identified in §
154.20, including any additional areas of special flood hazard annexed by the
city.
(Prior Code, § 1466.05) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.20 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   (A)   For the purposes of these regulations, the following studies and/or
maps are adopted:
      (1)   Flood Insurance Study Summit County, Ohio and Incorporated Areas
and Flood Insurance Rate Map Summit County, Ohio and Incorporated Areas both
effective July 20, 2009;
      (2)   Other studies and/or maps, which may be relied upon for
establishment of the flood protection elevation, delineation of the 100-year
floodplain, floodways or delineation of other areas of special flood hazard;
and
      (3)   Any hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis authored by a
registered professional engineer in the state which has been approved by the
city as required by §
154.37(C).
   (B)   Any revisions to the aforementioned maps and/or studies are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations. Such maps
and/or studies are on file at the city administrative offices.
(Prior Code, § 1466.06) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.21 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   These regulations are not intended to repeal any existing ordinances
including subdivision regulations, zoning or building codes. In the event of a
conflict between these regulations and any other ordinance, the more
restrictive shall be followed. These regulations shall not impair any deed
restriction covenant or easement but the land subject to such interests shall
also be governed by the regulations.
(Prior Code, § 1466.07) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.22 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   In the interpretation and application of these regulations, all
provisions shall be:
      (1)   Considered as minimum requirements;
      (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
      (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
   (B)   Where a provision of these regulations may be in conflict with a state
or federal law, such state or federal law shall take precedence over these
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 1466.08) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.23 WARNING, DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY AND SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions.
Flood heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. These
regulations do not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or
uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage.
These regulations shall not create liability on the part of the city, any
officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for
any flood damage that results from reliance on these regulations or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
   (B)   Should any section or provision of these regulations be declared by
the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the regulations as a whole, or any part thereof other than the
part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Prior Code, § 1466.09) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
 
§ 154.24 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure on the same lot with, and of a nature
customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure.
   APPEAL. A request for review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of these regulations or a request for a
variance.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. The BASE FLOOD may also be referred to as the 1% chance annual
flood or 100-year flood.
   BASE (100-YEAR) FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The water surface elevation of the
base flood in relation to a specified datum, usually the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, and
usually expressed in feet mean sea level (MSL). In Zone AO areas, the BASE
FLOOD ELEVATION is the natural grade elevation plus the depth number (from one
to three feet).
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   ENCLOSURE BELOW THE LOWEST FLOOR. See LOWEST FLOOR. 
   EXECUTIVE ORDER 11988 (FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT). Issued by President Carter in
1977, this order requires that no federally assisted activities be conducted in
or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard areas, unless
there is no practicable alternative.
   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA). The agency with the overall
responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
   FILL. A deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). Usually the initial map, produced by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, or U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development, for a community depicting approximate special flood hazard areas.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has delineated the areas of special flood hazard.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RISK ZONES. Zone designations on FHBMs and FIRMs that
indicate the magnitude of the flood hazard in specific areas of a community.
Following are the zone definitions:
      (1)   ZONE A. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood;
base flood elevations are not determined.
      (2)   ZONES A1-30 and ZONE AE. Special flood hazard areas inundated by
the 100-year flood; base flood elevations are determined.
      (3)   ZONE AO. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood; with flood depths of one to three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping
terrain); average depths are determined.
      (4)   ZONE AH. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood; flood depths of one to three feet (usually areas of ponding); base flood
elevations are determined.
      (5)   ZONE A99. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood to be protected from the 100-year flood by a federal flood protection
system under construction; no base flood elevations are determined.
      (6)   ZONE B and ZONE X (SHADED). Areas of 500-year flood; areas subject
to the 100-year flood with average depths of less than one foot or with
contributing drainage area less than one square mile; and areas protected by
levees from the base flood.
      (7)   ZONE C and ZONE X (UNSHADED). Areas determined to be outside the
500-year floodplain.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official report in which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has provided flood profiles, floodway boundaries (sometimes shown
on flood boundary and floodway maps) and the water surface elevations of the
base flood.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. The flood protection elevation, or FPE, is the
base flood elevation. In areas where no base flood elevations exist from any
authoritative source, the FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION can be historical flood
elevations, or base flood elevations determined and/or approved by the
Floodplain Administrator.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that have been reserved in order to pass the base flood discharge. A
FLOODWAY is typically determined through a hydraulic and hydrologic engineering
analysis such that the cumulative increase in the water surface elevation of
the base flood discharge is no more than a designated height. In no case shall
the designated height be more than one foot at any point within the community.
The FLOODWAY is an extremely hazardous area, and is usually characterized by
any of the following: moderate to high velocity flood waters, high potential
for debris and projectile impacts, and moderate to high erosion forces.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level
for the purposes of floodplain management. FREEBOARD tends to compensate for
the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than
the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such
as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, and the
hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listings on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on the state’s inventory of historic places
maintained by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office; or
      (4)   Individually listed on the inventory of historic places maintained
by city’s historic preservation program, which program is certified by the Ohio
Historic Preservation Office.
   HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING ANALYSIS. An analysis performed by a
professional engineer, registered in the state, in accordance with standard
engineering practices as accepted by FEMA, used to determine flood elevations
and/or floodway boundaries.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). An official FEMA determination, by letter, to
amend or revise effective Flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and
floodway maps, and flood insurance studies. LOMCs are broken down into the
following categories.
      (1)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). A revision based on technical data
showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood
hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and
establishes that a specific property is not located in a special flood hazard
area.
      (2)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A revision based on technical data
that, usually due to human-made changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood
elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. One
common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a determination concerning whether a
structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation
and is, therefore, excluded from the special flood hazard area.
      (3)   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A formal review and
comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum
national flood insurance program floodplain management criteria. A CLOMR does
not amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and
floodway maps, or flood insurance studies.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The LOWEST FLOOR of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement) of a structure. This definition excludes an ENCLOSURE BELOW THE
LOWEST FLOOR which is an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely
for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area; provided that such enclosure is built in accordance with the
applicable design requirements specified in these regulations for enclosures
below the LOWEST FLOOR.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. MANUFACTURED
HOME does not include a recreational vehicle. For the purposes of these
regulations, a MANUFACTURED HOME includes manufactured homes and mobile homes
as defined in R.C. Ch. 3781.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. As specified in the O.A.C. 4781-12-01(K), any tract
of land upon which three or more manufactured homes, used for habitation are
parked, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and includes any
roadway, building, structure, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as
part of the facilities of the park. A tract of land that is subdivided and the
individual lots are not for rent or rented, but are for sale or sold for the
purpose of installation of manufactured homes on the lots, is not a
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, even though three or more manufactured homes are parked
thereon, if the roadways are dedicated to the local government authority.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). A federal program enabling property
owners in participating communities to purchase insurance protection against
losses from flooding. This insurance is designed to provide an insurance
alternative to disaster assistance to meet the escalating costs of repairing
damage to buildings and their contents caused by floods. Participation in the
NFIP is based on an agreement between local communities and the federal
government that states if a community will adopt and enforce floodplain
management regulations to reduce future flood risks to all development in
special flood hazard areas; the federal government will make flood insurance
available within the community as a financial protection against flood loss.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the initial effective date of the city flood insurance rate map,
April 15, 1981, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   PERSON. Any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association or any other entity, including state and local governments and
agencies. An agency is further defined in R.C. § 111.15 as any governmental
entity of the state and includes, but is not limited to, any board, department,
division, commission, bureau, society, council, institution, state college or
university, community college district, technical college district, or state
community college. Agency does not include the general assembly, the
controlling board, the adjutant general’s department or any court.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ARCHITECT. A person registered to engage in the
practice of architecture under the provisions of R.C. §§ 4703.01 to 4703.19.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A person registered as a professional
engineer under R.C. Ch. 4733.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL SURVEYOR. A person registered as a professional
surveyor under R.C. Ch. 4733.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA or AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the
floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS are designated by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency on flood insurance rate maps, flood insurance studies, flood boundary
and floodway maps, and flood hazard boundary maps as Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30
and A99. SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS may also refer to areas that are flood-
prone and designated from other federal state or local sources of data,
including, but not limited to, historical flood information reflecting high
water marks, previous flood inundation areas and flood-prone soils associated
with a watercourse.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. The date the building permit was issued; provided the
actual START OF CONSTRUCTION, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The
ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations; or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of a building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, manufactured home, or gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally aboveground.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures, which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include:
      (1)   Any improvement to a structure that is considered new construction;
      (2)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified prior to the application for a development permit by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
      (3)   Any alteration of a historic structure; provided that the
alteration would not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the standards of these regulations
consistent with the variance conditions herein.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with these regulations.
(Prior Code, § 1466.10) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.25 DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Director of Planning is hereby appointed to administer and implement
these regulations and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 1466.11) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.26 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include but are not limited to:
   (A)   Evaluate applications for permits to develop in special flood hazard
areas;
   (B)   Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide flood hazard and flood
protection elevation information;
   (C)   Issue permits to develop in special flood hazard areas when the
provisions of these regulations have been met or refuse to issue the same in
the event of noncompliance;
   (D)   Inspect buildings and lands to determine whether any violations of
these regulations have been committed;
   (E)   Make and permanently keep all records for public inspection necessary
for the administration of these regulations, including flood insurance rate
maps, letters of map amendment and revision, records of issuance and denial of
permits to develop in special flood hazard areas, determinations of whether
development is in or out of special flood hazard areas for the purpose of
issuing floodplain development permits, elevation certificates, variances, and
records of enforcement actions taken for violations of these regulations;
   (F)   Enforce the provisions of these regulations;
   (G)   Provide information, testimony or other evidence as needed during
variance hearings;
   (H)   Coordinate map maintenance activities and FEMA follow-up; and
   (I)   Conduct substantial damage determinations to determine whether
existing structures, damaged from any source and in special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, must meet the development standards of these regulations.
(Prior Code, § 1466.12) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.27 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to begin construction or other
development activity, including, but not limited to, filling; grading;
construction; alteration, remodeling or expanding any structure; or alteration
of any watercourse wholly within, partially within or in contact with any
identified special flood hazard area, as established in §
154.20, until a floodplain development permit is obtained from the Floodplain
Administrator. Such floodplain development permit shall show that the proposed
development activity is in conformity with the provisions of these regulations.
No such permit shall be issued by the Floodplain Administrator until the
requirements of these regulations have been met.
(Prior Code, § 1466.13) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.28 APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   An application for a floodplain development permit shall be required for all
development activities located wholly within, partially within or in contact
with an identified special flood hazard area. Such application shall be made by
the owner of the property or his or her authorized agent, herein referred to as
the applicant, prior to the actual commencement of such construction on a form
furnished for that purpose. Where it is unclear whether a development site is
in a special flood hazard area, the Floodplain Administrator may require an
application for a floodplain development permit to determine the development’s
location. Such applications shall include, but not be limited to:
   (A)   Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and
topography of the area in question; the location of existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of
the foregoing;
   (B)   Elevation of the existing, natural ground where structures are
proposed;
   (C)   Elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed
structures;
   (D)   Such other material and information as may be requested by the
Floodplain Administrator to determine conformance with and provide enforcement
of these regulations;
   (E)   Technical analyses conducted by the appropriate design professional
registered in the state and submitted with an application for a floodplain
development permit when applicable:
      (1)   Floodproofing certification for nonresidential floodproofed
structure as required in §
154.37;
      (2)   Certification that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a
structure not meeting the design requirements of §
154.37(D)(5) are designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces;
      (3)   Description of any watercourse alteration or relocation that the
flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished, and
maintenance assurances as required in §
154.37(I)(3);
      (4)   A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot in special flood hazard areas
where the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided base flood
elevations but no floodway as required by §
154.37(I)(2);
      (5)   A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis showing impact of
any development on flood heights in an identified floodway as required by §
154.37(I)(1); and
      (6)   Generation of base flood elevation(s) for subdivision and large-
scale developments as required by §
154.37(C).
(Prior Code, § 1466.14) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.29 REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF A FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Review.
      (1)   After receipt of a complete application, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the application to ensure that the standards of
these regulations have been met. No floodplain development permit application
shall be reviewed until all information required in §
154.28 has been received by the Floodplain Administrator.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review all floodplain
development permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have been
received from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which
prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining
such permits as required, including permits issued by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers under § 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act of 1899, being 33 U.S.C. §
403 and § 404 of the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1344, and the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency under § 401 of the Clean Water Act, being 33
U.S.C. § 1341.
   (B)   Approval. Within 30 days after the receipt of a complete application,
the Floodplain Administrator shall either approve or disapprove the
application. If an application is approved, a floodplain development permit
shall be issued. All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon
the commencement of work within one year. A floodplain development permit shall
expire one year after issuance unless the permitted activity has been
substantially begun and is thereafter pursued to completion.
(Prior Code, § 1466.15) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.30 INSPECTIONS.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall make periodic inspections at appropriate
times throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance with
permit conditions.
(Prior Code, § 1466.16) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.31 POST-CONSTRUCTION CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED.
   The following as-built certifications are required after a floodplain
development permit has been issued:
   (A)   For new or substantially improved residential structures, or
nonresidential structures that have been elevated, the applicant shall have a
Federal Emergency Management Agency elevation certificate completed by a
registered surveyor to record as-built elevation data. For elevated structures
in Zone A and Zone AO areas without a base flood elevation, the elevation
certificate may be completed by the property owner or owner’s representative;
and
   (B)   For all development activities subject to the standards of §
154.16(A).
(Prior Code, § 1466.17) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.32 REVOKING A FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be revocable, if among other things,
the actual development activity does not conform to the terms of the
application and permit granted thereon. In the event of the revocation of a
permit, an appeal may be taken to the Appeals Board in accordance with §
154.37.
(Prior Code, § 1466.18) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.33 EXEMPTION FROM FILING A DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   An application for a floodplain development permit shall not be
required for:
      (1)   Maintenance work, such as roofing, painting and basement sealing,
or for small nonstructural development activities (except for filling and
grading) valued at less than $5,000;
       (2)   Development activities in an existing or proposed manufactured
home park that are under the authority of the Ohio Department of Health and
subject to the flood damage reduction provisions of the O.A.C. 3701;
      (3)   Major utility facilities permitted by the Ohio Power Siting Board
under R.C. Ch. 4906;
      (4)   Hazardous waste disposal facilities permitted by the Hazardous
Waste Siting Board under R.C. Ch. 3734; and
      (5)   Development activities undertaken by a federal agency and which are
subject to Federal Executive Order 11988 - Floodplain Management, being C.F.R.,
1977 Comp., p. 117.
   (B)   Any proposed action exempt from filing for a floodplain development
permit is also exempt from the standards of these regulations.
(Prior Code, § 1466.19) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.34 MAP MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES.
   To meet national flood insurance program minimum requirements to have flood
data reviewed and approved by FEMA, and to ensure that the city’s flood maps,
studies and other data identified in §
154.20 accurately represent flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain
management criteria are based on current data, the following map maintenance
activities are identified.
   (A)   Requirement to submit new technical data.
      (1)   For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations or
base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical data
reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six months of the date such
information becomes available. These development proposals include:
         (a)   Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood
elevations or alter floodway boundaries;
         (b)   Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures
where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard
area;
         (c)   Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or
elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts; and
         (d)   Subdivision or large scale development proposals requiring the
establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with §
154.37.
      (2)   It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data,
required in accordance with division (A) of this section, prepared in a format
required for a conditional letter of map revision or letter of map revision,
and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for these map revisions
shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator shall require a conditional letter of
map revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for:
         (a)   Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood
elevation; and
         (b)   Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation by
more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations but
no floodway.
      (4)   Floodplain development permits issued by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a letter of map
revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to division (A)(1) of
this section.
   (B)   Right to submit new technical data. The Floodplain Administrator may
request changes to any of the information shown on an effective map that does
not impact floodplain or floodway delineations or base flood elevations, such
as labeling or planimetric details. Such a submission shall include appropriate
supporting documentation made in writing by the Mayor of the city and may be
submitted at any time.
   (C)   Annexation/detachment. Upon occurrence, the Floodplain Administrator
shall notify FEMA in writing whenever the boundaries of the city have been
modified by annexation or the community has assumed authority over an area, or
no longer has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations
for a particular area. In order that the city’s flood insurance rate map
accurately represent the city boundaries, include within such notification a
copy of a map of the city suitable for reproduction, clearly showing the new
corporate limits or the new area for which the city has assumed or relinquished
floodplain management regulatory authority.
(Prior Code, § 1466.20) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.35 DATA USE AND FLOOD MAP INTERPRETATION.
   The following guidelines shall apply to the use and interpretation of maps
and other data showing areas of special flood hazard.
   (A)   In areas where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard areas, or
in FEMA identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and
floodway data have not been identified, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review and reasonably utilize any other flood hazard data available from a
federal, state or other source.
   (B)   Base flood elevations and floodway boundaries produced on FEMA flood
maps and studies shall take precedence over base flood elevations and floodway
boundaries by any other source that reflect a reduced floodway width and/or
lower base flood elevations. Other sources of data, showing increased base
flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas that are shown on FEMA flood maps
and studies, shall be reasonably used by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (C)   When preliminary flood insurance rate maps and/or flood insurance
study have been provided by FEMA:
      (1)   Upon the issuance of a letter of final determination by the FEMA,
the preliminary flood hazard data shall be used and replace all previously
existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA for the purposes of administering
these regulations; or
      (2)   Prior to the issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA,
the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall only be required where no base
flood elevations and/or floodway areas exist, or where the preliminary base
flood elevations or floodway area exceed the base flood elevations and/or
floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA. Such
preliminary data may be subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA.
   (D)   The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where needed,
as to the exact location of the flood boundaries and areas of special flood
hazard. A person contesting the determination of the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in §§
154.38 through
154.43.
   (E)   Where a map boundary showing an area of special flood hazard and field
elevations disagree, the base flood elevations or flood protection elevations
(as found on an elevation profile, floodway data table, established high water
marks and the like) shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 1466.21) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.36 SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE DETERMINATIONS.
   (A)   Damages to structures may result from a variety of causes including
flood, tornado, wind, heavy snow, fire and the like. After such a damage event,
the Floodplain Administrator shall:
      (1)   Determine whether damaged structures are located in special flood
hazard areas;
      (2)   Conduct substantial damage determinations for damaged structures
located in special flood hazard areas; and
      (3)   Make reasonable attempt to notify owners of substantially damaged
structures of the need to obtain a floodplain development permit prior to
repair, rehabilitation or reconstruction.
   (B)   Additionally, the Floodplain Administrator may implement other
measures to assist with the substantial damage determination and subsequent
repair process. These measures include issuing press releases, public service
announcements, and other public information materials related to the floodplain
development permits and repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other
federal, state and local agencies to assist with substantial damage
determinations; providing owners of damaged structures materials and other
information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood
hazard areas; and assist owners of substantially damaged structures with
increased cost of compliance insurance claims.
(Prior Code, § 1466.22) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.37 USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
   The following use and development standards apply to development wholly
within, partially within or in contact with any special flood hazard area as
established in §§
154.20 or
154.35(A).
   (A)   Use regulations.
      (1)   Permitted uses. All uses not otherwise prohibited in this section
or any other applicable land use regulation adopted by city are allowed;
provided they meet the provisions of these regulations.
      (2)   Prohibited uses.
         (a)   Private water supply systems in all special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, permitted under R.C. Ch. 3701.
         (b)   Infectious waste treatment facilities in all special flood
hazard areas, permitted under R.C. Ch. 3734.
   (B)   Water and wastewater systems. The following standards apply to all
water supply, sanitary sewerage and waste disposal systems not otherwise
regulated by the state statutes:
      (1)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems;
      (2)   New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
      (3)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to or contamination from them during flooding.
   (C)   Subdivisions and large developments.
      (1)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in these
regulations.
      (2)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
      (3)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage.
      (4)   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation
data are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for all subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments containing at least 50 lots or five
acres, whichever is less.
      (5)   The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical data
to FEMA in §
154.35(A)(1)(d) when a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis is completed that
generates base flood elevations as required by division (D) of this section.
   (D)   Residential structures.
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Where a
structure, including its foundation members, is elevated on fill to or above
the base flood elevation, the requirements for anchoring (this division) and
construction materials resistant to flood damage (division (B) of this section)
are satisfied.
      (2)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with methods and materials resistant to flood damage.
      (3)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
      (4)   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to or above the flood protection elevation. In Zone AO areas
with no elevations specified, the structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent
natural grade.
      (5)   New construction and substantial improvements, including
manufactured homes, that do not have basements and that are elevated to the
flood protection elevation using pilings, columns, posts or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to allow unimpeded movement of flood
waters may have an enclosure below the lowest floor; provided the enclosure
meets the following standards:
         (a)   Be used only for the parking of vehicles, building access or
storage;
         (b)   Be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters; and/or
         (c)   Have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total
net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot above grade.
The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or
devices; provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood
waters.
      (6)   Manufactured homes shall be affixed to a permanent foundation and
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
      (7)   Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure, shall
be exempt from the development standards of this division (D).
       (8)   In AO Zones, new construction and substantial improvement shall
have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters
around and away from the structure.
   (E)   Nonresidential structures.
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall meet the requirements of
divisions (D)(1) through (D)(3) and (D)(5) through (D)(8) of this section.
      (2)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above the level of the flood
protection elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall meet all of the following standards:
         (a)   Be dry floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of the
flood protection elevation;
         (b)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
         (c)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect,
through the use of a Federal Emergency Management Agency floodproofing
certificate, that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
this division.
      (3)   In Zone AO areas with no elevations specified, the structure shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet above the
highest adjacent natural grade.
   (F)   Accessory structures. Relief to the elevation or dry floodproofing
standards may be granted for accessory structures containing no more than 600
square feet. Such structures must meet the following standards:
      (1)   They shall not be used for human habitation;
      (2)   They shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
      (3)   They shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the
minimum resistance to the flow of flood waters;
      (4)   They shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
      (5)   Service facilities, such as electrical and heating equipment shall
be elevated or floodproofed to or above the level of the flood protection
elevation; and
      (6)   They shall meet the opening requirements of division (D)(5)(c) of
this section.
   (G)   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles must meet at least one of
the following standards:
      (1)   They shall not be located on sites in special flood hazard areas
for more than 180 days;
      (2)   They must be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
      (3)   They must meet all standards of this section.
   (H)   Aboveground gas or liquid storage tanks. All aboveground gas or liquid
storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral movement
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads.    
   (I)   Assurance of flood-carrying capacity. Pursuant to the purpose and
methods of reducing flood damage stated in these regulations, the following
additional standards are adopted to assure that the reduction of the flood-
carrying capacity of watercourses is minimized:
      (1)   Development in floodways.
         (a)   In floodway areas, development shall cause no increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Prior to issuance of
a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer,
demonstrating that the proposed development would not result in any increase in
the base flood elevation; or
         (b)   Development in floodway areas causing increases in the base
flood elevation may be permitted; provided all of the following are completed
by the applicant:
            1.   Meet the requirements to submit technical data in §
154.35(A);
            2.   An evaluation of alternatives, which would not result in
increased base flood elevations and an explanation why these alternatives are
not feasible;
            3.   Certification that no structures are located in areas that
would be impacted by the increased base flood elevation;
            4.   Documentation of individual legal notices to all impacted
property owners within and outside the community, explaining the impact of the
proposed action on their property; and
            5.   Concurrence of the Mayor and the Chief Executive Officer of
any other communities impacted by the proposed actions.
      (2)   Development in riverine areas with base flood elevations but no
floodways.
         (a)   In riverine special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA where
base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been designated,
the cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point. Prior to issuance of a floodplain
development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer, demonstrating that
this standard has been met; or
         (b)   Development in riverine special flood hazard areas identified by
FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been
designated causing more than one foot increase in the base flood elevation may
be permitted; provided all of the following are completed by the applicant:
            1.   An evaluation of alternatives which would result in an
increase of one foot or less of the base flood elevation and an explanation why
these alternatives are not feasible; and
            2.   Division (I)(1)(b)1. and (I)(1)(b)3. through (I)(1)(b)5. of
this section.
      (3)   Alterations of a watercourse. For the purpose of these regulations,
a watercourse is altered when any change occurs within its banks. The extent of
the banks shall be established by a field determination of the bankfull stage.
The field determination of bankfull stage shall be based on methods presented
in Ch. 7 of the USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-245, Stream
Channel Reference Sites: An Illustrated Guide to Field Technique or other
applicable publication available from a federal, state or other authoritative
source. For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse, the following
standards apply.
         (a)   The bankfull flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a description of the
extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development, and certification by a registered professional engineer
that the bankfull flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be
diminished.
         (b)   Adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the
Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water, must be notified prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Evidence of such notification
must be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
          (c)   The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary
maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood-carrying capacity will not be diminished. The Floodplain
Administrator may require the permit holder to enter into an agreement with the
city specifying the maintenance responsibilities. If an agreement is required,
it shall be made a condition of the floodplain development permit.
         (d)   The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical
data in §
154.35(A)(1)(c) when an alteration of a watercourse results in the relocation
or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts.
(Prior Code, § 1466.23) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.38 APPEALS BOARD ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby appointed to serve as the
Appeals Board for these regulations as established by the city code.
   (B)   Records of the Appeals Board shall be kept and filed at the city
administrative offices.
(Prior Code, § 1466.24) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.39 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Appeals Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
the Floodplain Administrator in the administration or enforcement of these
regulations.
   (B)   Authorize variances in accordance with §
154.41 of these regulations.
(Prior Code, § 1466.25) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.40 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person affected by any notice and order, or other official action
of the Floodplain Administrator may request and shall be granted a hearing on
the matter before the Appeals Board; provided that such person shall file,
within 20 days of the date of such notice and order, or other official action,
a brief statement of the grounds for such hearing or for the mitigation of any
item appearing on any order of the Floodplain Administrator’s decision. Such
appeal shall be in writing, signed by the applicant and be filed with the
Floodplain Administrator. Upon receipt of the appeal, the Floodplain
Administrator shall transmit said notice and all pertinent information on which
the Floodplain Administrator’s decision was made to the Appeals Board.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Appeals Board shall fix a
reasonable time for the appeal, give notice in writing to parties in interest
and decide the appeal within a reasonable time after it is submitted.
(Prior Code, § 1466.26) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.41 VARIANCES.
   Any person believing that the use and development standards of these
regulations would result in unnecessary hardship may file an application for a
variance. The Appeals Board shall have the power to authorize, in specific
cases, such variances from the standards of these regulations, not inconsistent
with federal regulations, as will not be contrary to the public interest where,
owning to special conditions of the lot or parcel, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of these regulations would result in unnecessary hardship.
   (A)   Application for a variance.
      (1)   Any owner, or agent thereof, of property for which a variance is
sought shall make an application for a variance by filing it with the
Floodplain Administrator, who upon receipt of the variance shall transmit it to
the Appeals Board.
      (2)   Such application, at a minimum, shall contain the following
information: name, address and telephone number of the applicant; legal
description of the property; parcel map; description of the existing use;
description of the proposed use; location of the floodplain; description of the
variance sought; and reason for the variance request.
   (B)   Public hearing. At such hearing, the applicant shall present such
statements and evidence as the Appeals Board requires. In considering such
variance applications, the Appeals Board shall consider and make findings of
fact on all evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of these regulations and the following factors:
       (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use that
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
      (6)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   (C)   Variances. Variances shall only be issued upon:
      (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the property.
Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the requirements of these
regulations does not constitute an exceptional hardship to the applicant;
      (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in these regulations;
additional threats to public safety; extraordinary public expense, nuisances,
fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws;
      (4)   A determination that the structure or other development is
protected by methods to minimize flood damages;
      (5)   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and
      (6)   Upon consideration of the above factors and the purposes of these
regulations, the Appeals Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances, as it deems necessary to further the purposes of these regulations.
   (D)   Other conditions for variances.
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (2)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing items in division (B)(1) to (B)(11) of
this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-
half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
      (3)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and the cost of flood insurance will
be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
(Prior Code, § 1466.27) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.42 PROCEDURE AT HEARINGS.
   (A)   All testimony shall be given under oath.
   (B)   A complete record of the proceedings shall be kept, except
confidential deliberations of the Board, but including all documents presented
and a verbatim record of the testimony of all witnesses.
   (C)   The applicant shall proceed first to present evidence and testimony in
support of the appeal or variance.
   (D)   The administrator may present evidence or testimony in opposition to
the appeal or variance.
   (E)   All witnesses shall be subject to cross-examination by the adverse
party or their counsel.
   (F)   Evidence that is not admitted may be proffered and shall become part
of the record for appeal.
   (G)   The Board shall issue subpoenas upon written request for the
attendance of witnesses. A reasonable deposit to cover the cost of issuance and
service shall be collected in advance.
   (H)   The Board shall prepare conclusions of fact supporting its decision.
The decision may be announced at the conclusion of the hearing and thereafter
issued in writing or the decision may be issued in writing within a reasonable
time after the hearing.
(Prior Code, § 1466.28) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.43 APPEAL TO THE COURT.
   Those aggrieved by the decision of the Appeals Board may appeal such
decision to the County Court of Common Pleas, as provided in R.C. Ch. 2506.
(Prior Code, § 1466.29) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.44 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or altered without full
compliance with the terms of these regulations and all other applicable
regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of these regulations,
unless specifically exempted from filing for a development permit as stated in
§
154.34.
   (B)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit shall be a violation
of these regulations and shall be punishable in accordance with §
154.99.
   (C)   Floodplain development permits issued on the basis of plans and
applications approved by the Floodplain Administrator authorize only the use,
and arrangement, set forth in such approved plans and applications or
amendments thereto. Use, arrangement or construction contrary to that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and punishable in
accordance with §
154.99.
(Prior Code, § 1466.30) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.45 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Whenever the Floodplain Administrator determines that there has been a
violation of any provision of these regulations, he or she shall give notice of
such violation to the person responsible therefore and order compliance with
these regulations as hereinafter provided. Such notice and order shall:
   (A)   Be put in writing on an appropriate form;
   (B)   Include a list of violations, referring to the section or sections of
these regulations that have been violated and order remedial action, which, if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of these regulations;
   (C)   Specify a reasonable time for performance;
   (D)   Advise the owner, operator or occupant of the right to appeal; and
   (E)   Be served on the owner, occupant or agent in person. However, this
notice and order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner, occupant
or agent if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to the
person’s last known mailing address, residence or place of business, and/or a
copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or on the dwelling affected.
(Prior Code, § 1466.31) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of the provisions of these regulations or failure to comply with
any of its requirements shall be deemed to be a strict liability offense, and
shall constitute a fourth degree misdemeanor. Any person who violates these
regulations or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined or imprisoned as provided by the laws of the city.
Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. The city shall
prosecute any violation of these regulations in accordance with the penalties
stated herein.
(Prior Code, § 1466.32) (Ord. 2009-8, passed 5-26-2009)
CHAPTER 155: WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS
Section
   
155.01   Purpose; determination of use; conformity with applicable codes,
standards and regulations
   
155.02   Definitions
   
155.03   Application fee for site plan review
   
155.04   General construction standards
   
155.05   Construction in residential districts
   
155.06   Placement of antennas and equipment
   
155.07   Review and approval of plans
Statutory reference:
   Interrupting or impairing television, radio, telephone, telegraph or other
mass communication service, see R.C. § 2909.04
   Powers and restrictions on public utility services, see R.C. § 4931.05
   Telegraph and telephone companies, see R.C. Ch. 4931
§ 155.01 PURPOSE; DETERMINATION OF USE; CONFORMITY TO APPLICABLE CODES,
STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation of, and
to establish guidelines for, the site process and construction of wireless
telecommunications towers (cellular towers) located in the city, and to ensure
the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort and welfare of the citizens
of the city. The regulations provided in this chapter are presented as minimum
standards and requirements.
   (B)   The construction of new wireless telecommunications towers and related
facilities is hereby determined to be a conditionally permitted use in all
zoning districts. The placing of wireless telecommunications antennas on any
legal tower, building or structure within the city is determined to be a
conditionally permitted use in all zoning districts.
   (C)   All new construction or the placement of equipment shall conform to
the regulations of the district in which it is located and to the additional
development standards and supplementary regulations contained herein.
(Prior Code, § 1478.01) (Ord. 98-6, passed 4-28-1998)
§ 155.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CO-LOCATION. The use of a wireless telecommunications facility by more than
one wireless telecommunications provider.
   LATTICE TOWER. A support structure constructed of vertical metal struts and
cross braces forming a triangular or square structure which often tapers from
the foundation to the top.
   MONOPOLE. A support structure constructed of a single, self-supporting
hollow metal tube securely anchored to a foundation.
   OPEN SPACE. Land devoted to conservation or recreational purposes and/or
land designated by a municipality to remain undeveloped (may be specified on a
zoning map).
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. The technology which enables information to be exchanged
through the transmission of voice, video or data signals by means of electrical
or electromagnetic systems.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA. The physical device through which
electromagnetic, wireless telecommunications signals authorized by the Federal
Communications Commission are transmitted or received. Antennas used by amateur
radio operators are excluded from this definition.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. A facility consisting of the equipment
and structures involved in receiving telecommunications or radio signals from a
mobile radio communications source and transmitting those signals to a central
switching computer which connects the mobile unit with the land-based telephone
lines.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SHELTER. The structure in which the electronic
receiving and relay equipment for a wireless telecommunications facility is
housed.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER. A structure intended to support equipment
used to transmit and/or receive telecommunications signals, including
monopoles, and guyed and lattice construction steel structures.
(Prior Code, § 1478.02) (Ord. 98-6, passed 4-28-1998)
§ 155.03 APPLICATION FEE FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   The application fee for any site plan review required by this chapter shall
be $1,000.
(Prior Code, § 1478.04) (Ord. 98-6, passed 4-28-1998)
§ 155.04 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   Proposed new telecommunication shall comply with the following development
standards. Wireless telecommunications towers/facilities are permitted as a
sole use on a lot or when combined with another use, subject to all existing
regulations in each district and the following.
   (A)   The tower must be set back from any property line or existing
structure off the lot on which the tower is to be located by a distance equal
to the vertical height of the tower.
   (B)   The tower must not exceed 150 feet (including antenna) if designed for
use by a single user; 175 feet if designed for use by two co-users; and 200
feet if designed for use by three co-users. Due to the proximity of the Akron-
Canton Regional Airport, all wireless telecommunications towers must also
receive Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) clearance and concurrence of the
FAA decision by the Airport Director before construction may proceed.
   (C)   The maximum size of the equipment shelter shall be 300 square feet,
or, if there is more than one shelter, a total of 750 square feet.
   (D)   When a wireless telecommunications tower/facility is to be located on
a property with an existing use:
      (1)   The existing use need not be affiliated with the wireless
telecommunications provider;
      (2)   The wireless telecommunications facility shall be fully automated
and unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for periodic and
necessary maintenance (except during construction or an emergency); and
      (3)   The service access to the equipment shelter shall, whenever
feasible, be provided along the circulation driveways of the existing use.
   (E)   Security fencing, eight feet in height, shall surround the tower, the
equipment shelter and any guy wires, either completely or individually, as
determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (F)   A vegetative screen shall be planted that consists of one row of a
mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees or privet hedge planted five feet on
center maximum. A landscaping plan is required to be submitted that indicates
how the wireless telecommunications facility will be screened from adjoining
properties.
   (G)   Existing vegetation (trees and shrubs) shall be preserved to the
maximum extent possible.
   (H)   Any applicant requesting permission to install a new tower shall
provide evidence of written contact with all wireless service providers who
supply service within a mile of the proposed facility. The applicant shall
inquire about potential co-location opportunities at all technically feasible
locations. The contacted providers shall be requested to respond in writing to
the inquiry within 60 days. The applicant shall present proof of mailing, as
well as responses to the Planning and Zoning Commission as a means of
demonstrating the need for a new tower. If a contacted wireless service
provider fails to respond to a written request for co-location from the
applicant within 60 days, the Planning and Zoning Commission may accept the
nonresponse as proof that co-location on an existing tower is not feasible.
   (I)   No advertising is permitted anywhere on the facility, with the
exception of identification signage.
   (J)   No trespassing signs shall be posted around the facility, with a
telephone number of who to contact in the event of an emergency.
   (K)   Applicants will provide evidence of legal access to the tower site and
maintain this access regardless of other developments that may take place on
the site.
   (L)   No tower shall be artificially lighted, except to assure safety or as
required by the FAA. Security lighting around the equipment shelter is
prohibited, unless specifically requested by the applicant and a need is proved
to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (M)   The tower shall be painted a neutral tone, i.e., desert sand/khaki, so
as to minimize its visibility, unless otherwise required by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) or the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
   (N)   Any application to locate an antenna on a building or structure that
is listed in the city’s inventory of historic structures shall be subject to
review by the Historic Preservation Commission.
   (O)   The electromagnetic field levels of the tower shall conform to the
standards developed by the National Council on Radiation Protection and
Measurement (NCRP Report No. 86) or by the American National Standards
Institute and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (ANSI/IEEE
C95.1-1992).
(Prior Code, § 1478.05) (Ord. 98-6, passed 4-28-1998)
§ 155.05 CONSTRUCTION IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   The construction of wireless telecommunications towers/facilities in
residential zoning districts shall conform to all applicable existing zoning
regulations, all development standards contained herein and the following
supplementary regulations.
   (A)   In applying for a permit to construct a wireless telecommunications
tower/facility in any residential district, the applicant must present
substantial evidence as to why it is not technically feasible to locate in a
more appropriate nonresidential zone. Once those efforts to locate in a
nonresidential zone have been exhausted, a wireless telecommunications facility
may be located in a residential district.
   (B)   When the telecommunications facility is located on property with
another principal use, the applicant shall present documentation that the owner
of the property has granted an easement or entered into a lease for the
proposed facility and that vehicular access is provided to the facility.
(Prior Code, § 1478.06) (Ord. 98-6, passed 4-28-1998)
§ 155.06 PLACEMENT OF ANTENNAS AND EQUIPMENT.
   The placing of wireless telecommunications antennas on any legal tower,
building or structure within the city is determined to be a conditionally
permitted use in all zoning districts. The placement of equipment shall conform
to the regulations of the zone in which it is located, as well as the
following.
   (A)   Business and industrial zoning districts. No wireless
telecommunications antenna shall be higher than 20 feet or 20% of the building
height, whichever is greater, above the existing tower, building or structure
in a business or industrial zoning district.
   (B)   Residential zoning districts. No wireless telecommunications antenna
shall be higher than 20 feet above the existing tower, building or structure in
a residential zoning district.
   (C)   Equipment shelters. If the applicant proposes to locate the
telecommunications equipment in a separate shelter (not located on or attached
to the building), the shelter shall comply with all applicable development
standards contained herein. Also, vehicular access to the shelter shall not
interfere with the parking or vehicular circulation on the site for the
principal use.
(Prior Code, § 1478.07) (Ord. 98-6, passed 4-28-1998)
§ 155.07 REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF PLANS.
   No person or entity shall construct a wireless telecommunications tower and
facility, or place a wireless telecommunications antenna, on any legal tower,
building or structure, without a site plan review (a public hearing and
approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission), as specified below.
   (A)   The site plan for the construction of a wireless telecommunications
tower and related facility shall be reviewed and approved according to the
standards and procedures.
   (B)   The placing of a wireless telecommunications antenna on any legal
tower, building or structure (which may or may not involve co-location with
another wireless service provider) shall be reviewed and approved according to
the standards and procedures, and the site plan shall consist of a drawing or
depiction which accurately conveys the following information:
      (1)   A vicinity map indicating the location of the site and the existing
structure;
      (2)   The location of the antenna on the structure;
      (3)   The length of any projection above the existing structure (if
applicable); and
      (4)   (a)   The location of the equipment shelter. If the equipment
shelter is separate from the structure, its size, fencing, landscaping,
setbacks and evidence of legal access to the site shall be indicated.
         (b)   All other applicable site plan review procedures shall also be
adhered to.
(Prior Code, § 1478.08) (Ord. 98-6, passed 4-28-1998)
CHAPTER 156: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEM
Section
   
156.01   Title
   
156.02   Purpose
   
156.03   Definitions
   
156.04   Alternative energy system types
   
156.05   Remedies
§ 156.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Alternative Energy System Code for the
city.
(Prior Code, § 1479.01) (Ord. 2009-20, passed 8-25-2009)
§ 156.02 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is intended to regulate the construction and operation of
alternative energy source facilities, such as wind, less than five megawatts,
solar, and wood burning, subject to reasonable conditions that will protect the
environment, public health, safety and welfare.
(Prior Code, § 1479.02) (Ord. 2009-20, passed 8-25-2009)
§ 156.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANEMOMETER. A temporary wind speed indicator constructed for the purpose of
analyzing the potential for utilizing a wind energy system at a given site.
This includes the tower, base plate, anchors, cables and hardware, wind
direction vanes, booms to hold equipment, data logger, instrument wiring, and
any telemetry devices that are used to monitor or transmit wind speed and wind
flow characteristics over a period of time for either instantaneous wind
information or to characterize the wind resources at a given location.
   APPLICANT. The property owner is required to make application for the
Planning and Zoning Commission review; however, she or he may have anyone
assist or make presentation before the Commission.
   FREESTANDING. An alternative energy system that is ground mounted and self-
supporting, although it may be attached to a primary structure for additional
stability.
   FUEL, APPROVED. Approved fuel for outdoor furnaces shall be natural wood,
corn or the manufacturer’s listed fuels. Burning of any and all other materials
is prohibited, including, but not limited to, plastics, naphtha, leaves, trash,
rubbish, garbage, construction materials, treated wood, yard waste, green wood,
pallets and the like.
   FURNACE, OUTDOOR. Any equipment, device or apparatus, or any part thereof,
which is installed outdoors for the primary purpose of the combustion of solid,
approved fuel to produce heat or energy used as a component of a heating system
providing heat for any interior space or water.
   HABITABLE BUILDING, STRUCTURE. A structure constructed for human occupation,
such as a residence, school, hospital, church, public library or other building
used for public gathering that is occupied or in use when the system permit
application is submitted.
   HEIGHT, APPURTENANCE. An alternative energy system that is attached to the
roof or extends above the highest peak of the roof of a primary structure may
not exceed ten feet in height. Measurement would be made from the peak of the
highest roof point to the top of the unit.
   HEIGHT, WIND TURBINE. The distance measured from true grade at the base of
the tower where it meets the slab or ground, to the highest point of the
turbine rotor or tip of the turbine blade at its highest elevation.
   NACELLE. The encasement on a wind system that houses all of the generating
components, gear box, drive team and other equipment.
   NET METERING. The process by which surplus energy generated by a customer as
measured by the difference between the electricity supplied by an electric
service provider and the electricity generated by a customer in an applicable
billing period, is fed back to the electric service provider with customer
compensation.
   OVERSPEED CONTROL. A mechanism used to limit the speed of blade rotation so
that it remains below the design limits of the wind turbine system.
   PARTICIPATING LANDOWNER. The owner of the property(s) upon which an
alternative energy system is located.
   PUBLIC OR PRIVATE ROAD. A full passage right-of-way or easement established
to provide vehicular access to property(s).
   ROTOR. The rotating part of a wind system or turbine, including the blades.
   SETBACK/FALL ZONE, WIND TURBINE. The distance from the alternative energy
system to the property line and habitable structures on the turbine-site
property.
   SETBACK, OUTDOOR FURNACE. The minimum setback for an outdoor furnace is 25
feet from side and rear property lines, measured from the closest feature of
the furnace to the property line.
   SHADOW FLICKER. The visible flicker effect when rotating turbine blades cast
shadows on the ground and nearby structures causing the repeating pattern of
light and shadow.
   SHORT-TERM EVENTS. Less than 48 hours for a period of increased rate of wind
speed and less than seven days for power outages.
   SOLAR ENERGY PANEL/SYSTEM. A structure or panel containing solar cells that
collects sunlight and converts it to electric current.
   WATER PUMPER. A nonelectrical wind system used for pumping water for
agricultural use.
   WIND TURBINE, BUILDING-MOUNTED. A single wind conversion system mounted on a
primary structure, designed to convert wind energy into electricity used
primarily for on-site consumption. Includes all types of wind energy systems,
turbines, cubes, spirals and the like.
   WIND TURBINE, FREESTANDING. A single mono-pole tower wind conversion system
designed to convert wind energy into electricity used primarily for on-site
consumption. Includes all types of wind energy systems, turbines, cubes,
spirals and the like.
(Prior Code, § 1479.03) (Ord. 2009-20, passed 8-25-2009)
§ 156.04 ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEM TYPES.
   (A)   Wind turbines.
      (1)   Development standards.
         (a)   Single, mono-pole wind turbines are considered to be conditional
uses in all zoning districts as primary or accessory structures.
         (b)   Single, mono-pole wind turbines are subject to compliance with
all requirements established in this chapter, as well as all county, state and
federal agency requirements, including the FAA due to possible proximity to
Akron Canton Airport. Wind turbines supported by guy wires are not permitted.
         (c)   As conditional uses, freestanding wind turbines shall be
reviewed and approved through the Planning and Zoning Commission, through the
established site plan review process and applicable fee schedule. Wind turbines
that are installed as appurtenances to primary structures are not subject to
Planning and Zoning Commission approval.
         (d)   A water pumper is exempt from Planning and Zoning Commission
review, but must be sited with setbacks to the property lines equivalent to the
height of the tower plus ten feet.
         (e)   Application submittals shall include a site plan, a line drawing
identifying the electrical components of the system, detailed specifications
for the wind turbine to be installed, a property entry agreement providing city
access to the site in the event that decommissioning is required, and evidence
that the applicant has communicated with Ohio Edison regarding proposed
interconnection to the utility grid.
         (f)   Site plans for wind turbine projects shall be drawn to scale and
clearly detail the following:
            1.   Information about the proposed site, including all parcels,
property lines, dimensions of the site, acreage, parcel number(s), current
zoning designation and use;
            2.   Indicate the location and dimensions of existing structures on
the site, noting which are habitable; indicate habitable structures on
adjoining property not owned by the applicant within 100 feet of the property
lines in all directions;
            3.   Freestanding turbines: indicate the exact location and height
of the proposed wind turbine, setbacks from the wind turbine to all property
lines on the site and to all habitable structures within 100 feet;
            4.   Specific location and positioning on the structure for
building mounted units;
            5.   Location of all aboveground utility lines, freestanding
antennas, public and private streets, gas and oil storage, and pumping
facilities within the setback radius;
            6.   Indicate the property owner, mailing address and physical
address of the project;
            7.   Wind turbine: include the make, model, picture/diagram showing
the height to the hub and to the top of the blade when extended to the highest
point, a cutaway view illustrating the foundation, manufacturer’s
specifications, and decibel level; and
            8.   Photographs of the turbine location, taken from the property
line and/or setback locations.
      (2)   Review and permit requirement.
         (a)   Prior to installation of a freestanding wind turbine, the
property owner is responsible for making application for a conditional use
permit through the Planning Department a minimum of 45 days prior to the
intended meeting.
         (b)   The Planning Department will provide a minimum ten-day advance
notification to contiguous property owners and property owners within a 200-
foot radius of the project site via regular U.S. mail through the conditional
use process with specific information about the proposed project and the
Planning and Zoning Commission meeting, date, and time, when the project will
be reviewed; and also publish the notification in newspapers of general
publication in the city with the same advance notice period.
         (c)   After obtaining approval through the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the property owner is responsible for ensuring that all required
permits are obtained prior to initiation of construction, including city
permits and county building and any other permits deemed necessary.
         (d)   Prior to making any modifications to an existing wind turbine
under a conditional use permit that may materially alter the size and/or type
of equipment, the applicant is responsible for contacting the Planning
Department for alteration review. Like-kind replacements shall not require an
additional review or permit.
      (3)   Location/placement on property.
         (a)   A freestanding wind turbine may be located in the side or rear
yard on lots that exceed one acre in area, subject to all setback restrictions.
The turbine may be located in a front yard in specific applications, where the
home is situated further from the street than current code permits, if double
tower height setbacks can be met in all directions, or as approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
         (b)   A building-mounted wind turbine may be installed on a primary
structure located on any size parcel, in compliance with appurtenance height
restrictions; a qualified professional must install the turbine in accordance
with manufacturer’s guidelines. Building-mounted turbines are not subject to
review and approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
         (c)   Small, accessory use turbines may be approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission.
      (4)   Height regulations. A freestanding wind turbine shall not be
installed on an artificially established mound or base, with the intention of
siting the system higher than natural grade settings.
         (a)   In all residential zoning districts, freestanding wind turbines
shall not exceed 55 feet in height, or as approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, and subject to required setbacks.
         (b)   In business and industrial districts, freestanding wind turbines
shall not exceed 75 feet in height, or as approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and subject to required setbacks.
         (c)   Building-mounted wind turbines may be attached to primary
structures and may not extend more than ten feet above the peak of the highest
roof level.
         (d)   All moving parts, components and blades of freestanding wind
turbines shall be at least 15 feet above the ground and at least 15 feet above
any open-air building features intended for human occupancy, such as balconies
or roof gardens that are located directly below the wind turbine.
      (5)   Setbacks.
         (a)   Setbacks are established to create a fall zone. The minimum
setback is equal to the height of the freestanding wind turbine plus ten feet,
measured from the base of the tower to property lines and habitable buildings
contiguous to the site.
         (b)   The entire fall zone must be free of overhead transmission
lines, public or private streets, aboveground gas or oil storage or pumping
facilities, and habitable buildings.
         (c)   For lots where property lines extend to the center of a road,
the setback shall be measured to the road right-of-way or road easement.
      (6)   Nuisance conditions.
         (a)   Anemometer. The construction of an anemometer tower for the
purpose of collecting data to develop a wind energy system shall require a
building permit conforming to the applicable sections of the Ohio Building Code
and shall be permitted for a period not to exceed 18 months.
         (b)   Sound.
            1.   A normal sound pressure level shall be measured at the
property line with the wind turbine turned off; a second measurement shall be
made with the turbine turned on.
            2.   An acceptable wind turbine sound pressure level will not
exceed 20 decibels above the normal sound level measured at the property line.
This level, however, may be exceeded during short-term events, such as times of
excessive wind speeds or during power outages.
         (c)   Shadow flicker. During the location design phase, prior to
installation, the property owner shall anticipate possible shadow flicker on
neighboring properties and make reasonable efforts to reduce or remove the
impact to occupied structures.
      (7)   Safety standards.
         (a)   Rotor safety. Each wind turbine system must be equipped with
both manual and automatic controls to limit the rotational speed of the blade
to correspond with the design limits of the rotor.
         (b)   Wind turbine tower access. Tower-climbing apparatus for
freestanding wind turbines shall be located no closer than 15 feet from the
ground; or have a locked anti-climb device installed on the tower; or the tower
shall be completely enclosed by a locked, protective six-foot tall fence.
         (c)   Lighting. Wind turbines shall not be artificially lighted,
except to the extent that may be required by the Federal Aviation
Administration or other applicable authority that regulates air safety. The
city shall notify the Akron Canton Airport of proposed structures.
         (d)   Transmission lines. Transmission and power lines shall be placed
underground.
      (8)   Appearance.
         (a)   Wind turbines and components shall be painted or finished with a
nonreflective, unobtrusive color that blends into the surrounding landscape to
the greatest extent possible.
         (b)   Signage identifying the manufacturer, owner and emergency
contacts shall be posted on the turbine. Signage shall not exceed one square
foot; a sign permit is not required.
      (9)   Freestanding wind turbine maintenance and abandonment.
         (a)   The property owner is responsible for ensuring that the wind
turbine operates as designed and in compliance with the guidelines established
in this chapter. If a wind turbine system ceases to perform as originally
intended for more than 12 consecutive months, the property owner is responsible
for repairing or totally removing all parts of the system no later than 90 days
after the end of the 12-month period.
         (b)   A wind turbine that is out-of-service for a continuous 12-month
period will be deemed to have been abandoned. The Zoning Division may issue a
notice of abandonment to the owner of a wind turbine that is deemed to have
been abandoned. The owner shall have the right to respond to the notice of
abandonment within 30 days from notice receipt date. The Zoning Division shall
withdraw the notice of abandonment and notify the owner that the notice has
been withdrawn if the owner provides information that demonstrates the wind
turbine has not been abandoned.
         (c)   If the wind turbine is determined to be abandoned, the owner of
a wind turbine shall remove the tower and all components completely at the
owner’s sole expense within three months of receipt of notice of abandonment.
If the owner fails to remove said tower and components from the site, the
Zoning Division may pursue a legal action to have the tower and all components
removed at the owner’s expense.
         (d)   The property owner is responsible for all costs and expenses
incurred in connection with the securing, removal and disposal of the system.
Upon failure to pay invoices for such costs and expenses within 30 days of
invoicing by the Finance Department, any unpaid costs will be placed as a lien
to be collected as part of real estate taxes. The assessment of such costs
shall be effective even if the property would otherwise be exempt from real
estate taxation.
      (10)   Utility connection. Energy systems proposed to be connected to the
power grid through net metering shall adhere to R.C. § 4928.67.
   (B)   Solar panels.
      (1)   Solar panels mounted on primary structures are considered to be
appurtenances and subject to applicable code restrictions in each zoning
district: residential, business and industrial. The amount of solar panels to
be installed shall serve the needs of the structures located on the parcel.
      (2)   Solar panels must be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer’s design and operation standards, as well as all local, county,
state and federal guidelines.
      (3)   Freestanding solar panels are considered to be accessory uses,
subject to accessory use code and zoning and building permit requirements in
each zoning district, however they shall not be counted as contributing to the
total square footage of accessory uses/structures. Transmission and power lines
shall be placed underground.
   (C)   Outdoor furnaces.
      (1)   Not to be confused with wood-burning stoves and fireplaces, outdoor
furnaces are generally installed outside, sometimes within a small insulated
shed, some distance from the home for the primary purpose of the combustion of
solid fuel (wood or corn) to heat interior space or water.
      (2)   Outdoor furnaces are permitted accessory to residential uses in RR
and R-1 Zoning Districts, and must also comply with county, state or federal
agency guidelines. The city recommends installation by a qualified professional
and strict adherence to manufacturer’s instructions.
      (3)   Outdoor furnaces shall be located on minimum one acre lots to be
used during the established burning season, in compliance with the following.
         (a)   Outdoor furnaces installed after January 1, 2010 must be EPA
Phase II Program Qualified Models or better.
         (b)   Outdoor furnaces may be located only in the rear yard.
         (c)   Minimum setback to all property lines shall be 25 feet.
         (d)   If located within 100 feet of any residence not served by the
furnace, the stack height must be adjusted to minimize smoke encroaching onto
neighboring properties at human-occupied levels.
         (e)   Only natural wood or the manufacturer’s listed fuels may be
burned in any outdoor furnace. Burning of any and all other materials is
prohibited, including, but not limited to, plastics, naphtha, leaves, trash,
rubbish, garbage, construction materials, treated wood, yard waste, green wood,
pallets and the like.
         (f)   The maximum height for the furnace and/or enclosure shall not
exceed 15 feet, measured from the average grade at the base of the furnace to
the top, not including the stack.
         (g)   The property owner is required to obtain all required permits,
including a zoning permit for an accessory use and applicable permits through
County Department of Building Standards. (Note: the square footage of the
furnace shall not be calculated into the total square footage allowed for
accessory uses.)
         (h)   Operation of outdoor furnaces is permitted during the
established burning season, from September 15 through April 30.
(Prior Code, § 1479.04) (Ord. 2009-20, passed 8-25-2009)
§ 156.05 REMEDIES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any property owner to fail to comply with the
terms of this chapter or create a nuisance condition for neighboring property
owners.
   (B)   If city zoning determines that a violation of the code or permit has
occurred, the property owner shall be notified of the violations in writing.
   (C)   If the alleged violation does not pose an immediate threat to the
public health or safety, the parties shall engage in good faith negotiations to
resolve the issues at hand. Such negotiations shall be conducted within 30 days
of the notice of violation.
   (D)   If the conditions pose an immediate threat to the public health or
safety, the city shall require the offending alternative energy system to be
discontinued until, through negotiations with all parties involved, a solution
or system-modification can be achieved to resolve the problem.
   (E)   If city zoning determines that the parties have not resolved the
alleged violation, the city may revoke the conditional use permit, as
applicable, and/or institute enforcement proceedings or other remedy at law to
ensure compliance with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1479.05) (Ord. 2009-20, passed 8-25-2009)
CHAPTER 157: PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
157.001   Title
   
157.002   Purpose
   
157.003   Authority
   
157.004   Effective date
   
157.005   Compliance required
   
157.006   Permits and certificates required
   
157.007   Relationship to the Long Range Land Use Plan
   
157.008   Interpretation and conflicts
   
157.009   Sale of land in a subdivision
   
157.010   Transitional rules
   
157.011   Separability
Development Approval Authority
   
157.025   Purpose
   
157.026   Administration generally
   
157.027   The Mayor and City Council
   
157.028   Planning and Zoning Commission (PZC)
   
157.029   Board of Zoning of Appeals (BZA)
   
157.030   Design Review Board (DRB)
   
157.031   Planning Department
   
157.032   Zoning Division
Development Review Procedures
   
157.045   Purpose
   
157.046   Summary table of development review procedures and development review
authority
   
157.047   Common application requirements
   
157.048   Text or map amendment
   
157.049   Minor subdivision
   
157.050   Major subdivision
   
157.051   Site plan review
   
157.052   Conditional use permit
   
157.053   Land disturbance permit
   
157.054   Variance
   
157.055   Appeals
   
157.056   Zoning permit
   
157.057   Certificate of use and compliance
Zoning Districts
   
157.070   Purpose
   
157.071   General provisions
   
157.072   Zoning districts
   
157.073   Allowed uses
   
157.074   Site development standards
Use Regulations
   
157.085   Table of allowed uses
   
157.086   Use specific regulations
   
157.087   Accessory uses
   
157.088   Temporary uses
   
157.089   Nonconforming uses
Site Development Standards
   
157.100   Measurements, computations and exceptions
   
157.101   Site development standards for residential districts
   
157.102   Open space residential subdivisions
   
157.103   Site development standards for conditional uses in the R-R and R-
1 Districts
   
157.104   Site development standards for business districts
Planned Development Regulations
   
157.115   Planned developments require a district change
   
157.116   Permitted uses
   
157.117   General project development standards
   
157.118   Residential development standards
   
157.119   Nonresidential and mixed use development standards
Development Standards
   
157.130   General subdivision design and regulations
   
157.131   Transportation and access
   
157.132   Drainage standards
   
157.133   Lot layout and general site regulations
   
157.134   Parking, loading, and stacking regulations
   
157.135   Signs
   
157.136   Landscaping and screening
   
157.137   Site plan review standards
   
157.138   Transitional area standards
   
157.139   Architectural standards
   
157.140   Outdoor lighting
   
157.141   Outdoor sales, display and storage
   
157.142   Riparian setbacks
Violations
   
157.155   Violations
   
157.156   Remedies
Definitions and Rules of Construction
   
157.170   Rules of construction and interpretation
   
157.171   Definitions
Special Use Permit District
   
157.185   Purpose
   
157.186   Process
   
157.187   Continuity/termination
   
157.188   Change of use
   
157.189   Fee
   
157.190   Right to revoke
Land Reutilization Program
   
157.210   Purpose
   
157.211   Authority of officials
 
   
157.999   Penalty
   
App. A:Woody Plants Suitable for Riparian Areas
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 157.001 TITLE.
   The official title of these regulations shall be the “Land Development Code
for the City of Green, Summit County, Ohio” and the same shall be referred to
herein as “the Code” or “this Code.”
(Prior Code, § 1222.01) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.002 PURPOSE.
   This Code is adopted to secure and provide for the city the following
objectives:
   (1)   To promote the public health, safety, comfort and welfare of the
residents of the city;
   (2)   To establish and maintain zoning districts in order to protect the
property rights of all individuals by assuring the compatibility and efficient
relationships of uses and practices within districts;
   (3)   To facilitate the provision of public utilities and public services;
   (4)   To provide the proper arrangement of streets or highways in relation
to existing or proposed streets and highways (and the city’s transportation
plan);
   (5)   To promote orderly, efficient and appropriate development of land;
   (6)   To provide uniform procedures and standards for observance by both the
approving authority and the subdivider for the division, subdivision and
development of land;
   (7)   To provide standards and guidelines for compatibility of designs,
materials, layout, landscaping and effective use of land for quality commercial
development;
   (8)   To provide reasonable and appropriate visual identification of
commercial establishments;
   (9)   To ensure adequate provision of open space for light, air and fire
safety;
   (10)   To manage traffic via access points and other planning tools;
   (11)   To preserve and protect existing trees and vegetation, floodplains,
stream corridors, and other areas of scenic and environmental significance from
adverse impacts of land development;
   (12)   To provide guidelines for development of recreational uses;
   (13)   To require the adequate and safe provision of transportation, water,
sewage and drainage in the city; and
   (14)   To preserve the character and quality of residential neighborhoods.
(Prior Code, § 1222.02) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.003 AUTHORITY.
   The authority for the preparation, adoption and implementation of this Code
is derived from R.C. Chs. 711 and 713, which permit the adoption of uniform
rules and regulations governing the zoning and subdivision of land.
(Prior Code, § 1222.03) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.004 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This Code was adopted by City Council on October 27, 2009. This Code shall
become effective 30 days after adoption by City Council.
(Prior Code, § 1222.04) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.005 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (1)   No building or structure shall be erected, constructed, enlarged,
moved or structurally altered, except in conformity with all of the regulations
herein specified as being applicable to such land or structure, nor shall any
land, building, or structure be used, subdivided, or changed, except in
compliance with all of the applicable regulations established by this Code.
   (2)   Any new lots created after the effective date of this Code must
conform to the applicable requirements of this Code unless allowed by §
157.010.
   (3)   No yard or lot existing upon the effective date of this Code shall be
reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein.
Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Code shall meet at least
the minimum requirements herein established.
(Prior Code, § 1222.05) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.006 PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES REQUIRED.
   (1)   Permits or certificates issued on the basis of plans and applications
approved by the agency having jurisdiction authorize only the use and
arrangement set forth in such approved plans and applications and no other use,
arrangement or construction. Any other use, arrangement or construction, or
failure to obtain an appropriate permit, certificate or inspection, shall be
deemed to be a violation of this Code, punishable under §
157.999.
   (2)   Failure to construct in accordance with approved plans shall be deemed
to be a violation of this Code, punishable under §
157.999.
(Prior Code, § 1222.06) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 154.007 RELATIONSHIP TO THE LONG RANGE LAND USE PLAN.
   The administration, enforcement and amendment of this Code should be
consistent with the Long Range Land Use Plan, as amended and herein referred to
as the “Land Use Plan.” In the event this Code becomes inconsistent with the
Land Use Plan, then this Code should be amended within a reasonable time so as
to become or remain consistent with the Land Use Plan. Additionally, all
amendments to this Code should maintain and enhance the consistency between
this Code and the Land Use Plan.
(Prior Code, § 1222.07) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 154.008 INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICTS.
   (1)   Conflict with other public laws, ordinances, regulations or permits.
      (A)   In its interpretation and application, the provisions of this Code
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety and general welfare.
      (B)   Whenever the requirements of this Code conflict with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances,
resolutions or laws, the more restrictive, or that imposing the higher
standard, shall govern.
   (2)   Conflict with private agreements.
      (A)   Nothing in this Code is intended to invalidate any easement,
covenant, deed restriction or other private agreement. Where the regulations of
this Code are more restrictive than such easement, covenant, deed restriction
or other private agreement, then the requirements of this Code shall govern.
      (B)   In no case shall the city enforce the provisions of private
easements, covenants, deed restrictions or agreements between private parties.
(Prior Code, § 1222.08) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.009 SALE OF LAND IN A SUBDIVISION.
   No owner or agent of an owner of any land located within a subdivision shall
transfer or agree to transfer ownership thereof in the future by reference to,
exhibition of, or use of, a plan or plat of a subdivision before such plan or
plat has been accepted, approved and recorded in the manner described in this
Code. Any sale or transfer contrary to the provisions of this section is void.
The description of such sublot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument
of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring
shall not exempt the transaction from the provisions of this Code.
(Prior Code, § 1222.09) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.010 TRANSITIONAL RULES.
   (1)   Purpose. The purpose of these transitional rules is to resolve the
status of properties with pending applications or recent approvals, and
properties with outstanding violations, on the effective date of this Code.
   (2)   Violations continue.
      (A)   Any violation of the previous versions of the Planning and Zoning
Code, shall continue to be a violation under this Code and shall be subject to
the penalties and enforcement set forth in §
157.999, unless the use, development, construction or other activity complies
with the provisions of this Code.
      (B)   Payment shall be required for any civil penalty assessed under the
previous regulations, even if the original violation is no longer considered to
be a violation under this Code.
   (3)   Uses, structures and lots rendered nonconforming. Where any use,
building, structure or lot that legally existed on the effective date of this
Code does not meet all standards set forth in this Code, such building,
structure or lot shall be considered nonconforming and shall be controlled by §
157.089.
   (4)   Processing of applications commenced or approved under previous
regulations.
      (A)   Pending applications.
         1.)   Any complete application that has been submitted or accepted for
approval, but upon which no final action has been taken by the appropriate
decision-making body prior to the effective date of this Code, shall be
reviewed in accordance with the provisions of the subdivision and zoning
regulations in effect on the date the application was deemed complete by the
city.
         2.)   If the applicant fails to comply with any applicable required
period for submittal or other procedural requirements, the application shall
expire and subsequent applications shall be subject to the requirements of this
Code.
         3.)   Any re-application for an expired project approval shall meet
the standards in effect at the time of re-application.
         4.)   An applicant with a pending application may waive review
available under prior regulations through a written letter to the authority
having jurisdiction and request for review under the provisions of this Code.
      (B)   Approved projects.
         1.)   Approved preliminary plans, improvement plans, final plats,
planned developments, variances, conditional uses, zoning permits or
certificates of use and compliance that are valid on the effective date of this
Code shall remain valid until their expiration date, where applicable.
         2.)   Any building or development for which a permit or certificate
was granted prior to the effective date of this Code shall be permitted to
proceed to construction, even if such building or development does not conform
to the provisions of this Code, as long as the permit or certificate remains
valid.
         3.)   If the development for which the permit or certificate is issued
prior to the effective date of this Code fails to comply with the time frames
for development established for the permit or certificate, the permit or
certificate shall expire, and future development shall be subject to the
requirements of this Code.
(Prior Code, § 1222.10) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.011 SEPARABILITY.
   (1)   If any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates any provision of
this Code, then such judgment shall not affect the validity and continued
enforcement of any other provision of this Code.
   (2)   If any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates the application of
any provision of this Code to a particular property, structure or situation,
then such judgment shall not affect the application of that provision to any
other building, structure or situation not specifically included in that
judgment.
   (3)   If any court of competent jurisdiction judges invalid any condition
attached to the approval of a development review application, then such
judgment shall not affect any other conditions or requirements attached to the
same approval that are not specifically included in that judgment.
(Prior Code, § 1222.11) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL AUTHORITY
§ 157.025 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to identify the authority of the review
and decision-making bodies in the development review procedures as established
in §§
157.045 through
157.057.
(Prior Code, § 1223.01) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.026 ADMINISTRATION GENERALLY.
   The staff of the City’s Planning Department, Zoning Division, the Mayor,
City Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission, and the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall administer this Code jointly as specified herein, except where
specific authority is given to another city or county department or agency as
set forth in this Code.
(Prior Code, § 1223.02) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.027 THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL.
   In addition to any other authority granted to the Mayor or City Council by
Charter, ordinance or state law, the Mayor and City Council shall have the
following powers and duties related to this Code:
   (1)   Initiate, hear, review and make decisions related to amendments to
this Code;
   (2)   Initiate, hear, review and make decisions related to amendments to the
zoning district map;
   (3)   Appoint members of the Planning and Zoning Commission (PZC), the Board
of Zoning Appeals (BZA), the Design Review Board (DRB) and to appoint the
persons responsible for the administration and enforcement of this Code;
   (4)   Establish fees for development review and permits; and
   (5)   To hear, review and confirm decisions on final plats and acceptance of
public improvements as part of major subdivisions and general plans for planned
developments.
(Prior Code, § 1223.03) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.028 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION (PZC).
   (1)   Reference. The Planning and Zoning Commission, established in the City
Charter, shall be known and hereafter referenced in this Code as the PZC.
   (2)   Membership. The members of the PZC shall be appointed to five-year
staggered terms. (Charter, Article VII, § 7.5)
   (3)   Powers and duties. The Planning and Zoning Commission (PZC) shall have
the following functions, powers and duties, exercisable in accordance with the
procedures contained in this Code, Ohio Revised Code and as established by the
City Charter:
      (A)   Initiate, hear, review and make recommendations related to
amendments to this Code;
      (B)   Initiate, hear, review and make recommendations related to
amendments to the zoning map;
      (C)   Hear, review and make decisions on conditional use applications;
      (D)   To interpret the boundaries on the zoning map, where questions with
respect to zoning boundaries may have been raised, to carry out the intent and
purpose of this Code. In case of any question as to the location of any
boundary line between zoning districts, a request for interpretation of the
zoning map may be made to the PZC and a determination shall be made by the PZC,
after formal public notice is given to adjacent and other affected property
owners pursuant to the procedure established in §
157.055;
      (E)   To hear, review and make decisions on preliminary plans and make
recommendations on final plats as part of major subdivisions;
      (F)   To hear, review and make decisions on minor subdivisions upon
referral of the Planning Director;
      (G)   To hear, review and make decisions on an appeal of the Planning
Director’s decision on a minor subdivision pursuant to §
157.049(8);
      (H)   To hear, review and make decisions on site plans required in and
pursuant to §
157.051; and
      (I)   To hear, review and make decisions on applications to vary the
terms of the land development standards (related to subdivision) of §§
157.130 through
157.142, as part of a major subdivision review, when such variance will not be
contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, literal
enforcement of the provisions of this Code will result in undue hardship, and
so that the spirit of this Code shall be observed and substantial justice done.
Such variances shall be made pursuant to §
157.050(16).
   (4)   Meetings. All meetings of the PZC shall be open to the public and the
PZC shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon
each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall
keep records of its examinations and other official action, all of which shall
be immediately filed in the office of the Planning Department and City Council
and shall be a public record.
   (5)   Bylaws. The PZC shall, by a majority vote of its entire membership,
adopt bylaws governing its procedures on such matters as officers, agendas,
voting, quorum, order of business and related matters as it may consider
necessary or advisable; provided such bylaws are consistent with the provisions
of this Code.
   (6)   Action by the PZC. Any action taken by the PZC shall have the
supporting votes of the majority of the full membership of the PZC, regardless
of the number of Commission members present.
(Prior Code, § 1223.04) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.029 BOARD OF ZONING OF APPEALS (BZA).
   (1)   Reference. The Zoning Board of Appeals, established in the City
Charter, shall be known and hereafter referenced as the BZA in this Code.
   (2)   Membership. The members of the BZA shall be appointed to five-year
staggered terms by the Mayor per the City Charter.
(Charter, Article VII, § 7.6)
   (3)   Powers and duties. The BZA shall have the following functions, powers
and duties, exercisable in accordance with the procedures contained in this
Code, Ohio Revised Code and as established by the City Charter:
      (A)   To hear, review and make decisions on appeals where it is alleged
that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made
by an administrative official in the enforcement of this Code or any amendment
adopted pursuant thereto. Such appeals shall be made pursuant to §
157.055; and
      (B)   To hear, review and make decisions on applications to vary the
terms of this Code, unless otherwise specified, when such variance will not be
contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, literal
enforcement of the provisions of this Code will result in undue hardship, and
so that the spirit of this Code, shall be observed and substantial justice
done. Such variances shall be made pursuant to §
157.054.
   (4)   Meetings.
      (A)   All meetings of the BZA shall be open to the public and the BZA
shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each
question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep
records of its examinations and other official action, all of which shall be
filed in the Offices of the Zoning Division and City Council.
      (B)   The chairperson, or in his or her absence, the acting chairperson,
may administer oaths, and the BZA may compel the attendance of witnesses.
   (5)   Action by the BZA. Any action taken by the BZA shall have the
supporting votes of the majority of the full membership present at a hearing of
the BZA.
   (6)   Bylaws. The BZA shall, by a majority vote of its entire membership,
adopt bylaws governing its procedures on such matters as officers, agendas,
voting, quorum, order of business and related matters as it may consider
necessary or advisable; provided such bylaws are consistent with the provisions
of this Code.
(Prior Code, § 1223.05) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.030 DESIGN REVIEW BOARD (DRB).
   (1)   Establishment/reference. The Design Review Board (DRB) shall have the
following functions, powers and duties, exercisable in accordance with the
procedures contained in this Code.
   (2)   Membership.
      (A)   The DRB shall consist of six members inclusive of an alternate
member, who shall be appointed as follows:
         1.)   The Mayor shall appoint two members; one member and one
alternate. The term of the DRB appointments shall be three years and a person
appointed by the Mayor shall fill any expired or unexpired term of the mayoral
appointments. One appointment shall be the alternate member;
         2.)   The City Council shall appoint two members. The term of the
Council appointments shall be three years. Any expired or unexpired term shall
be filled by and appointed by City Council;
         3.)   The City Engineer; and
         4.)   The Planning Director.
         5.)   Role of the alternate member:
            a.)   The alternate member shall attend all meetings and will
receive the same compensation paid to other members of the Design Review Board.
            b.)   The alternate member shall participate in the discussion of
any matter before the Design Review Board as if he/she were an active, voting
member.
            c.)   The alternate member shall only vote on any matter if a
Design Review Board member is absent for any reason, including sickness and/or
conflict of interest, however, the alternate member shall not vote if five
standing members of the Design Review Board are present and able to vote.
      (B)   Each appointed member shall be a registered architect, landscape
architect, surveyor, professional engineer, or certified land planner or shall
have significant experience in building design or construction, or a related
field.
   (3)   Powers and duties. The DRB shall have the power and duty, exercisable
in accordance with the procedures contained in this Code, to review and make
recommendations to the PZC on site plans pursuant to §
157.051.
   (4)   Meetings. The DRB shall hold at least one meeting annually, in January
of each year, for the purpose of organizing. Additional meetings shall be held
as agreed by the members and as required by this chapter.
      (A)   Meetings shall be open to the public.
      (B)   Attendance by a majority of the DRB members shall constitute a
quorum for the conduct of business.
      (C)   Recommendations and other actions shall be made by vote of the
majority of the membership.
   (5)   Bylaws. The DRB shall, by a majority vote of its entire membership,
adopt bylaws governing its procedures on such matters as officers, agendas,
voting, quorum, order of business and related matters as it may consider
necessary or advisable; provided such bylaws are consistent with the provisions
of this Code.
(Prior Code, § 1223.06) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009; Ord. 2022-21, passed
1-10-2023)
§ 157.031 PLANNING DEPARTMENT.
   The Planning Department, established by the City Charter, shall have the
following general functions, powers and duties, exercisable in accordance with
the procedures contained in this Code. The Planning Department shall include
the Planning Director and any other personnel as shall be determined.
   (1)   To establish application requirements and schedules for review of all
development review applications, to review and make recommendations to the City
Council, PZC, and DRB on all application for development approval considered by
those public bodies, and take any other actions necessary to administer the
provisions of this Code;
   (2)   To review and make decisions on land disturbance permits pursuant to §
157.053;
   (3)   To review and make decisions on minor subdivisions pursuant to §
157.049;
   (4)   The Planning Department shall prepare staff reports and
recommendations for all development review procedures, except appeals, that
require PZC, DRB, or City Council review and/or decision;
   (5)   The Planning Department shall coordinate meetings related to this Code
and provide support, expertise and technical assistance to City Council, PZC,
BZA and DRB; and
   (6)   To maintain a record of all administrative and legislative proceedings
under this Code, as it pertains to the Planning Department. The Planning
Department shall also be responsible for maintaining the zoning map.
(Prior Code, § 1223.07) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.032 ZONING DIVISION.
   The Zoning Division shall have the following general functions, powers and
duties, exercisable in accordance with the procedures contained in this Code:
   (1)   To review and make decisions on applications for all zoning permits
and certificates of use and compliance;
   (2)   Determine the existence of Code violations and cause such
notifications, revocation notices, stop orders or citations to be issued, or
initiate such other administrative or legal action as needed, to address such
violations;
   (3)   The Zoning Division shall provide the necessary information and
administrative support for meetings, hearings and recordkeeping;
   (4)   To maintain a record of all required administrative actions under this
Code as it pertains to the Zoning Division;
   (5)   To review and process applications as noted under table in §
157.045;
   (6)   To conduct inspections of building locations, sites, site amenities
and uses to determine compliance with approved plans and requiring corrective
action when applicable; and
   (7)   To issue certificate of use and compliance permits and ensure
compliance with applicable codes.
(Prior Code, § 1223.08) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES
§ 157.045 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to describe the procedures for review and
approval of all applications for development activity in the city as regulated
by this Code. Common review requirements, which are applicable to all or most
types of development applications, are set forth in §
157.047. Subsequent sections set forth additional provisions that are unique to
each type of application, including timetables, staff and review board
assignments, review standards, and other information.
(Prior Code, § 1224.01) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.046 SUMMARY TABLE OF DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT REVIEW
AUTHORITY.
   (1)    Table 157.046-1  summarizes the development review authority of the
entities that have roles in the administration of the procedures set forth in
this chapter. Other duties and responsibilities of the entities are set forth
in §§
157.025 through
157.032.
   (2)   Even though not referenced in this subchapter, other boards,
commissions, government agencies and nongovernmental agencies may be required
or asked to review some development review applications.
Table 157.046-1: Summary Table of Development Review Procedures
H = Public Hearing Required                                 R = Review and Recommendation
M = Public Meeting                                          D = Decision
Development         City    Planning                        Board of            Design Planning   Zoning
Review      Section Council and   Zoning   Commission Zoning   Appeals Review Department Division
Procedure                                                                       Board
Table 157.046-1: Summary Table of Development Review Procedures
H = Public Hearing Required                                   R = Review and Recommendation
M = Public Meeting                                            D = Decision
Development           City    Planning                        Board of            Design Planning   Zoning
Review        Section Council and   Zoning   Commission Zoning   Appeals Review Department Division
Procedure                                                                         Board
Appeals       157.055                                         H-D                                   [3]
Certificate
of use and    157.057                                                                               D
compliance
Conditional   157.052         H-D                                                        R
use permit
Land
disturbance   157.053                                                                    R-D
permit
Major
subdivision - 157.050         M-D                                                        R
preliminary
plan
Major
subdivision - 157.050 M-D     M-R                                                        R
final plat
Minor         157.049         M-D [1]                                                    R-D        R [2]
subdivision
Site plan
review
(including    157.051         M-D                                                 R      R
all
freestanding
signs)
Text or map   157.048 H-D     M-R                                                        R
amendment
Variance -    157.054                                         H-D                                   R
general
Variance of
land
development   157.050         H-D                                                        R
standards     (16)
(major
subdivisions)
Zoning permit 157.056                                                                               D
[1]   The PZC shall review and decide on minor subdivisions upon referral from the Planning Director,
otherwise the Planning Department may authorize minor subdivisions in compliance with this Code.
[2]   The Zoning Division shall provide a secondary signature on minor subdivisions.
[3]   The Zoning Division, or the department whose decision is being appealed, shall provide all information
related to the appealed decision as part of the record.
 
(Prior Code, § 1224.02) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.047 COMMON APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The requirements of this section shall apply to all development review
applications and procedures subject to review under this Code, unless otherwise
stated.
   (1)   Authority to file applications.
      (A)   Unless otherwise specified in this Code, development review
applications may be initiated by:
         1.)   The owner of the property that is the subject of the
application; or
         2.)   The owner’s authorized agent.
      (B)   When an authorized agent files an application under this Code on
behalf of a property owner(s), the owner(s) of all properties shall be required
to sign the application, which shall bind all decisions, and related conditions
of approval, to the owner of the property.
   (2)   Application submission schedule. The schedule for the submission of
applications in relation to scheduled meetings and hearings of the review
bodies shall be established by the Planning Department and made available to
the public.
   (3)   Application contents.
      (A)   Submittal requirements. Applications required under this Code shall
be submitted in a form and in such numbers as established by the Planning
Department and made available to the public.
      (B)   Submission of fees. Applications shall be accompanied by a fee as
established by City Council, in a separate ordinance, and pursuant to division
(6) below.
      (C)   Complete application determination.
         1.)   The Planning Department shall only initiate the review and
processing of applications submitted under this chapter if such application is
complete.
         2.)   The Planning Department shall make a determination of
application completeness within ten days of the application filing.
         3.)   If the application is determined to be complete, the application
shall then be processed according to the procedures set forth in this Code.
         4.)   If an application is determined to be incomplete, the Planning
Department shall provide notice to the applicant along with an explanation of
the application’s deficiencies. No further processing of an incomplete
application shall occur until the deficiencies are corrected in a future
resubmittal application.
         5.)   Additional fees may be required if the applicant fails to submit
a complete application within 60 days of the initial application.
         6.)   If the applicant fails to resubmit a complete application within
60 days, the original fee shall be forfeited and the applicant shall be
required to submit a new application including fees pursuant to this chapter.
         7.)   If any false or misleading information is submitted or supplied
by an applicant on an application, that application shall be deemed incomplete.
   (4)   Simultaneous processing of applications. Whenever two or more forms of
review and approval are required under this Code (e.g., a site plan review or
variance), the applications for those approvals may, at the option of the
Planning Director, be processed simultaneously, so long as all applicable
requirements are satisfied for all applications.
   (5)   Effect of preapplication conferences or meetings. Discussions that
occur during a preapplication conference or meeting are not binding on the city
and do not constitute official assurances or representations by the city or its
officials regarding any aspects of the plan or application discussed.
   (6)   Fees.
      (A)   Determination of fees. City Council shall approve the fees to
accompany applications submitted under this Code through the adoption of a fee
schedule. City Council may adjust the fees from time-to-time.
      (B)   Fees to be paid. No application shall be processed or determined to
be complete until the established fee has been paid.
      (C)   Refund of fees.
         1.)   Application fees are not refundable, except where the Planning
Department determines that an application was accepted in error, or the fee
paid exceeds the amount due, in which case the amount of the overpayment will
be refunded to the applicant.
         2.)   For final subdivision plats, in the event that the plat is
withdrawn by the applicant before any physical inspection of the site has been
made or before any staff review time, the Planning Director may process a
request that the applicant be refunded an amount not to exceed one-half of the
fee paid.
   (7)   Public notification. Applications for development approval shall
comply with all applicable Ohio Revised Code requirements and the provisions of
this chapter with regard to public notification.
      (A)   Content. Notices for public hearings, whether by publication or
mail (written notice), shall, at a minimum:
         1.)   Identify the address or location of the property subject to the
application and the name, and address of the applicant or the applicant’s
agent;
         2.)   Indicate the date, time and place of the public hearing;
         3.)   Describe the land involved by street address, or by legal
description and the nearest cross street, and project area (size);
         4.)   Describe the nature, scope and purpose of the application or
proposal;
         5.)   Identify the location (e.g., the offices of the Planning
Department) where the public may view the application and related documents;
         6.)   Include a statement that the public may appear at the public
hearing, be heard and submit evidence and written comments with respect to the
application; and
         7.)   Include a statement describing where written comments will be
received prior to the public hearing.
      (B)   Notice requirements. Published and mailed notice shall be provided
as defined in Table 157.047-1.
 
Table 157.047-1: Notice Requirements
Development Review Agency Responsible  Published          Mailed
Procedure          for Notification    Notice             Notice
                                                          Written notice shall
                                                          be required a minimum
                                                          of 20 days before the
                                                          City Council hearing
                                                          only if a zoning map
                                       Published notice   amendment will affect
                                       required a minimum ten or fewer
Text or map        Clerk of Council    of 30 days before  properties; written
amendment                              the City Council   notice shall be
                                       hearing            provided to the
                                                          applicant and all
                                                          property owners
                                                          within, contiguous
                                                          and directly across
                                                          the street of the
                                                          subject property
                                       Published notice
Conditional use    Planning Department required a minimum
permit                                 of ten days before Written notice to the
                                       the PZC hearing    applicant and all
                                       Published notice   property owners
Variance           Zoning Division     required a minimum within, contiguous
                                       of ten days before and directly across
                                       the BZA hearing    the street of the
                                                          subject property
                                       Published notice   shall be required a
Appeals            Zoning Division     required a minimum minimum of ten days
                                       of ten days before prior to the hearing
                                       the BZA hearing
 
      (C)   Published notice. When the provisions of this Code require that
notice be published, the agency responsible for notification shall prepare the
content of the notice and publish the notice in a newspaper of general
circulation. The content and form of the published notice shall be consistent
with the requirements of division (7)(A) of this section and state law.
      (D)   Written notice.
         1.)   The agency responsible for notification shall notify applicable
property owners by regular mail, of information required in division (7)(A) of
this section and state law.
         2.)   The letters to the applicable property owners shall be
postmarked no later than the minimum number of days required in division (7)(B)
of this section.
      (E)   Constructive notice.
         1.)   Minor defects in any notice shall not impair the notice or
invalidate proceedings pursuant to the notice if a bona fide attempt has been
made to comply with applicable notice requirements. Minor defects in notice
shall be limited to errors in a legal description, typographical or grammatical
errors, or errors of actual acreage that do not impede communication of the
notice to affected parties. Failure of a party to receive written notice shall
not invalidate subsequent action. In all cases, however, the requirements for
the timing of the notice and for specifying the time, date and place of a
hearing shall be strictly construed. If questions arise at the hearing
regarding the adequacy of notice, the decision-making body shall direct the
agency having responsibility for notification to make a formal finding as to
whether there was substantial compliance with the notice requirements of this
Code, and such finding shall be made available to the decision-making body
prior to final action on the request.
         2.)   When the records of the city document the publication, mailing
and posting of notices as required by this chapter, it shall be presumed that
notice of a public hearing was given as required by this section.
   (8)   Continuation of public hearings. A public hearing for which proper
notice was given may be continued to a later date without again complying with
the written notice requirements of this Code; provided that the continuance is
set for a date within 60 days and the date and time of the continued hearing
are announced at the time of the continuance.
   (9)   Effect of inaction on applications. When a review or decision-making
body fails to take action on an application within the time required, such
inaction shall be deemed a denial of the application, unless the decision-
making body agrees to an extension of the time frame that is mutually agreed
upon between the applicant and the decision-making body.
(Prior Code, § 1224.03) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.048 TEXT OR MAP AMENDMENT.
   (1)   Purpose. City Council may amend the text of this Code or the zoning
map pursuant to the procedure set forth in this section. The purpose of a text
or map amendment is to make adjustments due to changed conditions, changes in
public policy, recommendations of the Land Use Plan or that necessary to
advance the health, safety and general welfare of the city.
   (2)   Applicability. This section shall apply to requests to amend the text
of this Code or the official zoning map of the city, hereafter referred to as
the “zoning map.”
   (3)   Initiation.
      (A)   Pursuant to division (1) of this section, any person having
authority to file applications may initiate an application for amendment;
      (B)   The PZC may make a motion to initiate a text or map amendment; or
      (C)   City Council may initiate a zoning text or zoning map amendment by
recommendation or referral to the PZC.
   (4)   Procedure. The review procedure for a text amendment or an amendment
of the zoning map shall be as follows.
      (A)   Step 1 - preapplication conference.
         1.)   The applicant shall meet with the Planning Department for a
preapplication conference before submitting an application for an amendment to
the zoning map.
         2.)   The applicant shall supply preliminary information to the
Planning Department in a form established by the Department. Such information
shall be submitted at least three business days prior to the preapplication
conference.
         3.)   The purpose of the preapplication conference shall be to discuss
the proposed development, review submittal requirements, and discuss compliance
with the provisions of this Code and the Long Range Land Use Plan prior to the
submission of an application.
      (B)   Step 2 - application.
         1.)   The applicant shall submit an application in accordance with §
157.047 and with the provisions of this chapter.
         2.)   If the applicant fails to submit an application within 120 days
of the preapplication conference (Step 1), the applicant shall be required to
begin the review procedure again from the preapplication conference (Step 1).
         3.)   Amendments initiated by City Council through legislation shall
be referred to the PZC for review.
         4.)   Amendments initiated by the Planning Department on behalf of the
PZC shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and their
recommendation referred to City Council pursuant to this section.
      (C)   Step 3 - Planning Department review and staff report. Prior to the
PZC meeting where the text or map amendment is scheduled for review, the
Planning Department shall review the application and prepare a staff report.
      (D)   Step 4 - PZC review and recommendation.
         1.)   Within 60 days of receipt of the application for the proposed
amendment (Step 2), the PZC shall submit a written recommendation on the
application to City Council. The PZC shall recommend approval, denial or
approval with some modification, of the proposed amendment.
         2.)   If the PZC fails to make a recommendation within 60 days of the
receipt of an application, the application shall be forwarded to City Council
and the application shall be considered to have received a recommendation for
approval from the PZC.
      (E)   Step 5 - City Council review and decision.
         1.)   Upon receipt of the recommendation from the PZC, the Planning
Department shall request legislation from the Law Department and said
legislation shall be introduced within 30 days of receipt of the PZC’s
recommendation. City Council shall set a time for a public hearing on the
proposed amendment.
         2.)   During such 30 days, the text of the proposed amendment, maps or
the site or general plans (PDs), if applicable, and the recommendations of the
PZC, shall be on file for public examination in the office of the Clerk of
Council or in such other office as is designated by City Council.
         3.)   After the public hearing, Council shall either adopt or deny the
recommendations of the PZC, or adopt some modification thereof. In the event
Council adopts, modifies or denies the recommendations of the PZC, concurrence
by a majority of the full Council members shall be required.
   (5)   Approval criteria. Recommendations and decisions on text or map
amendment shall be based on consideration of the following criteria:
      (A)   Whether the proposed amendment corrects an error or meets the
challenge of some changing condition, trend or fact since the time that the
original text or map designations were established;
      (B)   Whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the land use plan
or other applicable city plans;
      (C)   Whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the purpose of
this Code;
      (D)   Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment addresses a
demonstrated community need;
      (E)   Whether the proposed amendment will protect the health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the public;
      (F)   Whether the proposed amendment will result in significant
mitigation of adverse impacts on the natural environment, including air, water,
noise, storm water management, wildlife and vegetation;
      (G)   Whether the proposed amendment will ensure efficient development
within the city; and
      (H)   Whether the proposed amendment will result in a logical and orderly
development pattern.
   (6)   Proposed Planned Development District requirements. All proposed
amendments to the zoning map that will result in the creation of a PD District
shall meet the following requirements, in addition to the procedures and
requirements of this chapter.
      (A)   Submittal of general plan. The applicant shall submit a general
plan as part of the map amendment application pursuant to §
157.047.
      (B)   Review of general plan. The general plan shall be reviewed
simultaneously with the PD map amendment.
      (C)   Amendment to the approved general plan. No substantial change in or
deviation from the approved general plan shall be made without prior review and
recommendation by the PZC and the approval by City Council pursuant to the
review procedure established in divisions (4) and (6) of this section.
      (D)   Final development plan review required.
         1.)   Prior to site development of any phase of a planned development
project, an application shall be submitted to the PZC for review and approval
of the final development plan. This shall include the review of any and all
legal documents required for the platting of land, pursuant to §
157.050(4)(F)1.), and all on-site (and off-site, if applicable) improvement
plans, pursuant to §
157.050(4)(F)2.). The bonding requirements of §
157.050(8) and (9) shall apply in cases where the planned development will
contain public roadways.
         2.)   In addition to the approval requirements for final development
plan review, the final development plan shall be reviewed for compliance with
the applicable provisions of this Code and the approved general plan for the
planned development.
         3.)   Failure to comply with the general plan or any applicable
provision of this Code will result in the denial of the final development plan.
      (E)   Time limit for planned development approvals.
         1.)   The applicant shall be required to submit a site plan for site
plan review within one year of the effective date of the map amendment and
general plan. Failure to file the final development plan within one year of
approval shall invalidate the general plan.
         2.)   If a general plan becomes invalid, the applicant shall be
required to resubmit for general plan approval pursuant to the procedure
outlined in divisions (4) and (6) above.
         3.)   If a general plan becomes invalid, the City Council or PZC may
initiate a map amendment of the planned development district.
      (F)   Site plan review required. All buildings within the planned
development which require site plan review, as stipulated in §
157.051(2), shall be reviewed pursuant to the provisions of §
157.051 prior to the issuance of a zoning permit for construction.
(Prior Code, § 1224.04) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.049 MINOR SUBDIVISION.
   (1)   Purpose. The purpose of the minor subdivision review process is to
ensure compliance with this Code while allowing for small scale subdivisions
that will not result in new roads or major extensions of infrastructure.
   (2)   Minor subdivision determination and applicability. The Planning
Department shall make a determination if a proposed subdivision is a minor
subdivision if the proposed subdivision meets the following conditions:
      (A)   The subdivision will result in less than five lots after the
original tract has been completely subdivided;
      (B)   The subdivision will occur along an existing public street;
      (C)   The subdivision will not result in the creation, widening or
extension of any street or road;
      (D)   The proposed subdivision will not be contrary to the applicable
provisions of this Code; and
      (E)   No lot depth shall exceed four and one-half times the lot width or
be less than one and one-half times the lot width at the minimum building
setback line, unless otherwise required by this Code.
   (3)   Replats.
      (A)   Any minor subdivision that involves the consolidation of lots or
the adjustment of a boundary(ies) between lots that are situated within platted
subdivisions shall adhere to the procedures set forth in division (5) of this
section and be subject to the approval criteria set forth in division (6) of
this section.
      (B)   Any subdivision of land within a platted subdivision which results
in one or more additional lots within that subdivision shall adhere to the
procedures for a major subdivision, as applicable, as set forth in §
157.050.
   (4)   Initiation. Pursuant to §
157.047(1), any person having authority to file applications may initiate an
application for a minor subdivision.
   (5)   Procedure. The review procedure for a minor subdivision shall be as
follows.
      (A)   Step 1 - application. The applicant shall submit an application in
accordance with §
157.047.
      (B)   Step 2 - review and comment by applicable agencies.
         1.)   Upon determination that the application for a minor subdivision
is complete, the Planning Department may transmit copies of the application for
review by applicable agencies including, but not limited to, the City Engineer,
and the agencies having jurisdiction over wastewater or water.
         2.)   Such agencies may supply comments, recommendations and approvals
as applicable, to the Planning Department for consideration prior to the
department’s decision (Step 3).
      (C)   Step 3 - review and decision by the Planning Department.
         1.)   Within ten days of the determination that the application (Step
1) is complete, the Planning Department shall review the application and
approve or deny the application for a minor subdivision based on the approval
criteria established in division (6) of this section.
         2.)   The Planning Department may choose to refer the application to
the PZC who shall then make a final decision on the application for a minor
subdivision at its next scheduled meeting for which it meets the applicable
submittal deadlines.
         3.)   If the Planning Department denies an application for a minor
subdivision, the Department shall provide the applicant with written finding
for the denial.
         4.)   Both the Planning Department and the Zoning Division shall be
required to sign the minor subdivision (total of two signatures).
   (6)   Approval criteria. In order to approve a minor subdivision, the
Planning Department and/or the PZC shall determine the following:
      (A)   That the minor subdivision complies with all applicable provisions
of this Code;
      (B)   That the minor subdivision does not conflict with other
regulations, plans or policies of the city;
      (C)   That applicable review agencies have no objections that cannot be
resolved by the applicant; and
      (D)   That the minor subdivision is not otherwise contrary to the
interest of the city.
   (7)   Recording.
      (A)   If the Planning Department approves the minor subdivision without a
plat, the conveyance shall be stamped with “Approved for transfer only, no
building site approved. Valid for 180 days from the above date.”
      (B)   The Planning Director shall sign and date the conveyance.
   (8)   Appeals.
      (A)   If the Planning Department denies the application for a minor
subdivision, the applicant may appeal the decision to the PZC within 20 days of
the Planning Department’s decision.
      (B)   The PZC shall review and decide on the appeal at its next regular
meeting following, for which the submittal of the appeal meets the applicable
submittal deadlines.
   (9)   Approval time limit. The minor subdivision approval shall expire 180
days after the Planning Department signs and dates the conveyance unless the
instrument of conveyance (deed) is recorded in the office of the County Fiscal
Officer during said period.
(Prior Code, § 1224.05) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.050 MAJOR SUBDIVISION.
   (1)   Purpose. The purpose of the major subdivision review process is to
ensure compliance with this Code while promoting the appropriate development of
the city as provided for in the purpose of this Code.
   (2)   Major subdivision determination and applicability. A major subdivision
shall include any subdivision that includes the construction of a public
roadway, that does not meet the requirements of a minor subdivision, or that
includes the improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential,
commercial, or industrial structures or groups of structures, which ultimately
are to be jointly owned under a recorded condominium property declaration under
the provisions of R.C. Ch. 5311.
   (3)   Initiation. Pursuant to §
157.047(1), any person having authority to file applications may initiate an
application for a major subdivision.
   (4)   Procedure. The review procedure for a major subdivision shall be as
follows.
      (A)   Step 1 - preapplication conference.
         1.)   The applicant shall meet with the Planning Department for a
preapplication conference before submitting an application for a major
subdivision.
         2.)   The applicant shall supply preliminary information to the
Planning Department in a form established by the Department. Such information
shall be submitted at least three business days prior to the preapplication
conference.
         3.)   The purpose of the preapplication conference shall be to discuss
the proposed subdivision, review submittal requirements and discuss compliance
with the provisions of this Code prior to the submission of an application.
         4.)   Subsequent to the preapplication conference with the Planning
Department, the applicant may consult with, at a minimum, the City Engineer and
the County Soil and Water Conservation District. The applicant shall also
consult with the agencies having jurisdiction over wastewater or water, where
applicable.
      (B)   Step 2 - application and official filing of the preliminary plan.
         1.)   The applicant shall submit an application in accordance with §
157.047 and with the provisions of this chapter.
         2.)   The preliminary plan shall be submitted as part of the initial
application.
         3.)   Upon determination by the Planning Department that the
preliminary plan has been properly submitted, the preliminary plan shall be
accepted as being officially filed.
         4.)   The application and the official filing of the preliminary plan
shall take place a minimum of 45 days prior to the regular meeting of the PZC
where the application will be heard.
         5.)   If the applicant fails to submit an application and preliminary
plan within 120 days of the preapplication conference (Step 1), the applicant
shall be required to begin the review procedure again from the preapplication
conference.
      (C)   Step 3 - site visit.
         1.)   The applicant shall be responsible for scheduling with the
Planning Department to allow for viewing of the site in the field.
         2.)   Members of the PZC will be invited to the site visit to help
understand the project with proper legal notice given if a quorum of PZC
members are to be in attendance.
         3.)   The developer shall delineate the centerline of proposed roads
prior to the site visit.
         4.)   The site visit shall take place a minimum of seven days prior to
the regularly scheduled PZC meeting where the preliminary plan will be
reviewed.
         5.)   The Planning Director may waive the site visit requirement if
the Planning Director determines that there is no need for the visit due to
minimal impacts of the proposed project, the availability of information in the
application to fully illustrate the plan and similar considerations.
      (D)   Step 4 - staff review and staff report on the preliminary plan.
         1.)   Upon determination that the application for a major subdivision
is complete, the Planning Department shall transmit copies of the application
for review by applicable agencies including, but not limited to, the City
Engineer, agencies having jurisdiction for water and/or sanitary sewer, or
other agencies the department deems appropriate.
         2.)   Such agencies shall supply comments and recommendations to the
Planning Department a minimum of ten days prior to the regularly scheduled PZC
meeting where the preliminary plan will be reviewed.
         3.)   Prior to the PZC meeting where the preliminary plan is scheduled
for review, the Planning Department shall review the preliminary plan and
prepare a staff report.
      (E)   Step 5 - review and decision on the preliminary plan by the PZC.
         1.)   The PZC shall not consider a major subdivision, unless the
preliminary plan is officially filed (Step 2).
         2.)   The following information shall be provided to the Planning
Department prior to the PZC meeting or shall be identified for future review as
a condition of approval:
            a.)   A statement indicating that the proposed subdivision meets
all applicable provisions of this Code;
            b.)   A letter from the County Health Department indicating sublot
acceptability for individual septic systems and/or drilled wells, or a letter
from the agency having jurisdiction for sanitary sewer indicating the
availability of centralized sewage facilities; and
            c.)   Additional information as deemed necessary by the Planning
Department. If the developer requires additional time to acquire the needed
information, he or she may do so by submitting a written request to the
Planning Department.
         3.)   The PZC shall hold a public meeting to review and decide on the
preliminary plan. The PZC shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the
preliminary plan. The PZC may also continue the meeting if questions regarding
the plan are not addressed by the applicant.
         4.)   Upon approval, the PZC shall communicate its action to City
Council.
         5.)   If the PZC denies the preliminary plan, the applicant shall not
move forward in the review process until a preliminary plan is approved by the
PZC.
      (F)   Step 6 - filing of the final plat and improvement plans. The final
plat and improvement plans shall be submitted and reviewed concurrently.
         1.)   Filing of the final plat.
            a.)   The applicant shall submit the final plat in accordance with
§
157.047 and with the provisions of this subchapter.
            b.)   Upon determination by the Planning Department that the final
plat has been properly submitted, the final plat shall be accepted as being
filed.
            c.)   The official filing of the final plat shall take place a
minimum of 30 days prior to the regular meeting of the PZC where the final plat
will be heard.
            d.)   The final plat submission shall include a signed warranty
deed for any lot(s) where open space, a park, playground, school site or other
public land is to be dedicated to the public. The deed shall be considered part
of the final plat for approval and recording purposes.
            e.)   The final plat submission shall include the submission of
improvement plans for the corresponding phase of development.
         2.)   Submission of the improvement plans.
            a.)   The applicant’s engineer shall prepare improvement plans,
which shall conform to the approved preliminary plan, and include all work to
be performed. In cases where the applicant proposes to develop the subdivision
in phases, improvement plans shall be submitted for each individual phase.
            b.)   The applicant shall supply the improvement plans to the
Planning Department in a form and number established by the Department.
            c.)   If the applicant finds, in the process of preparing
improvement plans, that the approved preliminary plan is not workable and
changes in layout are required, the applicant shall inform the Planning
Department. The Planning Department may require that a revised preliminary plan
be submitted for reapproval.
      (G)   Step 7 - Planning Department review and staff report on the final
plat. Prior to the PZC meeting where the final plat is scheduled for review,
the Planning Department shall review the final plat and prepare a staff report.
      (H)   Step 8 - staff review and decision on the improvement plans.
         1.)   The Planning Department shall distribute copies of the
improvement plans to the City Engineer and, where applicable, the applicant
shall submit the improvement plans to the agencies having jurisdiction for
sanitary sewer or water, the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency, and any
other applicable agencies.
         2.)   The review agencies shall provide comments and recommendations
on the improvement plans to the Planning Department.
         3.)   A copy of the improvement plans shall be marked and returned to
the applicant’s engineer for corrections, if necessary. If found to be
satisfactory, the original tracing shall be submitted for approval signature by
the Planning Director, City Engineer and the agencies having jurisdiction over
sanitary sewer or water (where applicable).
         4.)   Improvements shall not be constructed until such time as the
city has accepted the final plat and performance bond, and the city and other
applicable agencies have approved the improvement plans. The applicant is
required to participate in a preconstruction meeting and file all bond
documents with the Planning Department prior to commencing construction of
improvements.
      (I)   Step 9 - review and decision on the final plat by the PZC.
         1.)   The PZC shall hold a public meeting to review and make a
recommendation on the final plat. The PZC shall take one of the following
actions:
            a.)   The PZC shall give a favorable recommendation on the final
plat before any required improvements are installed pursuant to the improvement
plans, authorizing its chairperson or any other officer of the PZC, to indicate
such approval and the date on the tracing of the final plat;
            b.)   Notwithstanding the provisions of §
157.130(13), where it appears that the requirements of §
157.130(13) will be met prior to the PZC’s next scheduled meeting, the PZC may,
with the consent of the applicant, give final approval effective upon the City
Engineer’s future approval of the improvement plans and signing of the plat.
Such final approval shall take effect as of the date of the City Engineer’s
signature;
            c.)   If the requirements of §
157.130(13) have not been met by the time of the PZC’s next scheduled meeting,
the final plat may be placed on the agenda for the next PZC meeting, at which
the PZC may reaffirm, modify or change its previous action; or
            d.)   Should the PZC deny the final plat, written notice of such
action, including reference to the regulation or regulations not complied with
by the plat, shall be mailed to the applicant and the applicant’s engineer and/
or surveyor. The action shall also be entered on the official records of the
PZC.
         2.)   The chairperson of the PZC shall certify the final plat by
signing and dating the final plat upon approval from the PZC.
         3.)   Upon making a favorable or unfavorable recommendation, with or
without conditions, the PZC shall communicate its action to City Council.
      (J)   Step 10 - review and decision on the final plat by the City
Council.
         1.)   After full compliance with this section, the Planning Department
shall request the Law Director to prepare the necessary legislation for Council
for introduction no later than the 60 days of the PZC’s recommendation.
         2.)   Council shall review and judge the final plat with access to the
files of the PZC and shall accept bonds for the guarantee of performance of
public improvements pursuant to division (9) of this section, and acceptance of
the plat.
         3.)   If approval is given, the plat and any appropriate documents
shall be signed by the President and Clerk of Council upon passage of the
acceptance resolution duly signed by the Mayor. All drawings shall be returned
to the Planning Department for distribution and filing.
   (5)   Approval criteria. In order to approve a major subdivision, the PZC
and City Council, as appropriate, shall determine the following:
      (A)   That the major subdivision complies with all applicable provisions
of this Code;
      (B)   That the major subdivision does not conflict with other
regulations, plans or policies of the city;
      (C)   That applicable review agencies have no objections that cannot be
resolved by the applicant; and
      (D)   That the major subdivision is not otherwise contrary to the
interest of the city.
   (6)   No construction until bond is accepted.
      (A)   No construction shall take place until a bond, as required by this
Code, is received and approved by the Planning and Law Departments, and
authorization to proceed is granted by the city at the time the final plat is
approved and accepted.
      (B)   A land disturbance permit may be issued if all criteria for its
issuance are approved.
      (C)   No public infrastructure may be installed.
   (7)   Effect of approvals.
      (A)   Effect of preliminary plan approval.
         1.)   An approved preliminary plan is to be used as a guide for the
preparation of improvement plans and the final plat for final approval and
recording upon fulfillment of all conditions of the preliminary plan approval
and all provisions of this Code.
         2.)   Approval of a preliminary plan shall be valid for a period of
one year at which point the PZC shall review the preliminary plan for renewal.
If the PZC does not authorize renewal, the preliminary plan shall expire.
         3.)   Upon expiration of a preliminary plan approval, no approval of a
final plat shall be given until the preliminary plan has been resubmitted and
approved pursuant to division (4) above.
   (B)   Effect of final plat approval.
         1.)   Approval of a final plat by the PZC shall not be an acceptance
by the public of the offer of dedication of any street, highway, or other
public way or open space upon the plat, until such acceptance is also endorsed
by the City Council upon the tracing of the final plat.
         2.)   The PZC’s approval shall automatically expire if the final plat
is not presented to the City Council for approval within one year of the PZC’s
preliminary plan approval.
   (8)   Estimated cost. Upon approval of the construction drawings by the City
Engineer and Planning Director, and before starting any construction work, the
developer’s engineer shall prepare and submit to the Planning Department and/or
the agencies having jurisdiction over sanitary sewer or water (where
applicable), an independent estimate of costs, by item, for construction
surveying; construction of roads, storm and sanitary sewers, sanitary treatment
plants, pumping stations and water supply systems; drainage structures; erosion
control, storm water management basins, restoration of land and site clean-up;
and other related items. The total estimated cost, including labor, shall be
prepared and signed by the developer’s engineer. The City Engineer and/or the
agencies having jurisdiction over sanitary sewer or water (where applicable),
may add to the developer’s estimate an amount to cover contingencies, including
inspection costs, to arrive at the total estimated cost. The approved total of
estimated costs shall be the basis for the establishment of the performance
bond amount.
   (9)   Bonding requirements.
      (A)   Performance bonds.
         1.)   Before the recording of any plat of any subdivision, the
developer shall furnish performance bonds to the Planning Director in an amount
equal to 100% of the approved total estimated cost of the improvements. The
improvements shall be covered by separate bonds according to the department
which shall guarantee completion of the required improvements, as follows.
            a.)   City of Green.
               i.)   Paving;
               ii.)   Storm sewer; and
               iii.)   Miscellaneous (i.e., monuments, street signs,
restoration of land, site clean-up and the like).
            b.)   Agencies having jurisdiction.
               i.)   Water; and
               ii.)   Sanitary sewer.
         2.)   The performance bond will remain in effect until released by the
Mayor through executive order. In lieu of a surety bond, the developer may
deposit a fund equal to 100% of the performance bond in an escrow account with
a bank and approved by the city. The developer and the bank shall inform the
city, in writing, that said money is secured and deposited in the bank for the
improvements and shall be in a form dictated by the city. Performance bonds
shall not be released without approval of the city.
         3.)   The developer’s engineer shall verify all invoices and
statements of expenditures and submit them to the Planning Director and/or the
agencies having jurisdiction for sanitary sewer or water (where applicable),
for review and approval.
         4.)   The withdrawal of funds from the escrow account shall not exceed
90% of the total estimated costs until the performance bond is released and the
maintenance bond is in effect. The Mayor may, upon recommendation of the City
Engineer and Planning Director, elect to release a portion of the performance
bond based on the amount of construction work performed. Upon full release of
the performance bond, the city may accept the maintenance bond prior to the
completion of the project; provided the public improvements are 90% complete
and the maintenance bond includes work to be performed at a value of 100% of
the cost of items yet to be completed.
         5.)   If the developer fails to proceed with the project within 18
months of the date the performance bonds are filed, and the Planning Director
and/or agencies having jurisdiction over sanitary sewer or water (where
applicable), deems it necessary to notify the Mayor that the developer has
failed in his or her duty to complete the project, the Mayor or his or her
designee shall notify the developer and the bank, in writing, of such failure
and of their intention to vacate the subdivision or complete the project, using
proceeds from the bond.
      (B)   Maintenance bond or bonds. Before the City Engineer and/or the
agencies having jurisdiction over sanitary sewer or water (where applicable),
will recommend the acceptance of the subdivision roads or release any
performance bond, the developer shall provide a maintenance bond or cash to the
Planning Director, which shall be divided and administered as follows:
         1.)   Bonds as required by the agency having jurisdiction for water or
sanitary sewer; and
         2.)   Ten percent of the total estimated cost of all other
improvements divided into separate bonds as follows.
            a.)   City of Green.
               i.)   Paving;
               ii.)   Storm sewer; and
               iii.)   Miscellaneous (i.e., monuments, street signs,
restoration of land and site clean-up and the like).
            b.)   Agencies having jurisdiction over sanitary sewer or water.
               i.)   Water; and
               ii.)   Sanitary sewer.
         3.)   The Planning Director after consultation with the City Engineer
and/or the agencies having jurisdiction over sanitary sewer or water, as
applicable, may increase the required maintenance bond above the specified
amounts if, in his or her opinion, unusual topographic, subsoil or other
construction limitations warrant such action. However, in such situations, the
City Engineer or the agencies having jurisdiction over sanitary sewer or water,
as applicable, shall furnish written explanations of their action to the Mayor
and City Council. No action shall be taken by the city regarding bonding with
the agencies having jurisdiction over sanitary sewer or water. These
maintenance bonds shall guarantee that the developer will maintain the road and
related improvements for a minimum of two years and that the developer will
restore the road and related improvements, if determined to be necessary by the
City Engineer and/or the agencies having jurisdiction over sanitary sewer or
water (where applicable). If the developer fails to perform the maintenance and
restoration items, the Mayor will authorize the City Engineer and/or the County
Executive to authorize the agencies having jurisdiction over sanitary sewer or
water (where applicable), to have the work performed. The cost of this work
shall be deducted from the money on deposit as the maintenance bond for that
work. The developer shall be held liable for any expenditures over and above
the maintenance bonds. After all maintenance and restoration work has been
completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, Service Director, Planning
Director and/or the agencies having jurisdiction over sanitary sewer or water
(where applicable), the city’s and the county’s Chief Executive shall release
the maintenance bonds or those portions remaining to the developer,
respectively. It is the responsibility of the developer to request inspection
for bond release. The bonds shall remain in effect until formally released by
the Mayor through an executive order, as applicable.
         4.)   Upon release of the performance bond and acceptance of the
maintenance bond, the city shall provide for the removal of snow and ice
provided all roadway improvements are complete.
   (10)   Land disturbance permit required. A land disturbance permit, issued
in accordance with §
157.053, shall be required prior to commencement of clearing and grading
activities on the site. Clearing and grading activities shall not begin until
the applicant has held a preconstruction meeting with either the city, or, if
required, the County Soil and Water Conservation District, and a plan for
clearing and grading is approved. Such permit shall be based on a clearing and
grading plan prepared and approved as part of the major subdivision process.
   (11)   Recording.
      (A)   After all required approvals are secured, the final plat shall be
submitted by the Planning Department for final recording with the County Fiscal
Office.
      (B)   No plat of any subdivision shall be recorded in the office of the
County Fiscal Officer, or have any validity, until it has been approved and
processed in the manner prescribed in this section.
      (C)   In the event that any such unapproved plat is recorded, it shall be
considered invalid.
      (D)   All costs for recording of the plat shall be borne by the owner
and/or developer.
   (12)   Requirements for the start of construction of public improvements.
The applicant must comply with the following requirements in order to begin
construction on the public improvements pursuant to the approved improvement
plan.
      (A)   The following items must have been approved prior to the
commencement of construction:
         1.)   The improvement plans for the subdivision;
         2.)   The construction schedule, showing the starting and completion
dates for each phase of the construction work, and a date for the completion of
the entire subdivision; and
         3.)   Any bonds required for the project must be filed with the
Planning Department.
      (B)   The contractor must have all necessary permits required for the
project prior to the start of construction.
      (C)   A preconstruction meeting will be held, at which time the owner,
the developer and/or his or her representative, the design engineer, the
contractor, the City Engineer, the Planning Director, any other interested city
officials and other agencies, as required, will attend prior to the
commencement of any project. At this time, the project will be discussed in
regard to the procedure, construction methods, plans, materials, inspections,
storm water management, erosion control and the like.
   (13)   Amendments.
      (A)   No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made to
any improvement plans of a subdivision after approval has been given by the
city and an endorsement is made in writing thereon, unless the improvement plan
is first resubmitted and the changes approved by the city and/or the agencies
having jurisdiction over wastewater or water (where applicable).
      (B)   No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made to
any final plat of a subdivision after approval has been given by the PZC and
City Council, and an endorsement is made in writing on a final plat, unless the
final plat is first resubmitted and the changes approved by the PZC and City
Council.
      (C)   If it becomes necessary to modify the improvements as approved due
to unforeseen circumstances, the developer shall inform the Planning Director
who shall consult with the City Engineer and the agencies having jurisdiction
over wastewater or water (where applicable), in writing, of the conditions
requiring the modifications. Written authorization from the appropriate review
agency to make the required modification must be received before proceeding
with the construction of the improvement.
   (14)   Plan checking and field inspection fees. The applicant shall pay or
reimburse the city and/or the agencies having jurisdiction over wastewater or
water (where applicable), the total cost of plan review and field inspection of
the improvements.
      (A)   The review and inspection fee shall be determined by the city and
the agencies having jurisdiction over wastewater or water (where applicable).
      (B)   The inspector’s salary shall be paid at the rate discussed at the
preconstruction meeting.
      (C)   The rate per hour will be the inspector’s regular rate per hour as
paid by the city and/or the agencies having jurisdiction over wastewater or
water (where applicable), plus appropriate fringe benefits and an overhead
percentage.
      (D)   The applicant is held responsible for all city plan review and
inspection fees which will be payable upon invoice.
      (E)   Failure to pay fees shall result in the city not issuing permits
until all fees are paid in full.
      (F)   The performance bond posted by the applicant guarantees the payment
of all inspection fees and no bonds will be released until all inspection fees
have been paid in full.
   (15)   Final drawings. At the completion of the construction, and before
acceptance, the developer’s engineer shall update the original tracings as
directed by the City Engineer and the agencies having jurisdiction over
wastewater or water (where applicable), showing the locations, sizes and
elevations of all improvements as constructed. A legible Mylar reproduction
shall be furnished to the agencies having jurisdiction over wastewater or water
(where applicable). The original tracings shall remain with the Planning
Department. An electronic version shall be provided in a program compatible
with the city’s computer system.
   (16)   Variance of land development standards.
      (A)   The PZC may consider and grant variances from the standards
identified in §§
157.130 through
157.133, as they relate to subdivisions, where unusual or exceptional factors
or conditions require such modification; provided that the PZC shall:
         1.)   Determine that the size, shape, location or surroundings of the
property are unusual and that unusual topographical or physical conditions or
other conditions inherent in the land exist;
         2.)   Determine that a strict compliance with the provision would
create an extraordinary and unnecessary hardship in the face of the exceptional
conditions;
         3.)   Permit any variance of a provision only to the extent necessary
to equitably remove the hardship so that substantial justice is done;
         4.)   Determine that any modification granted will not be detrimental
to the public interest nor in conflict with the spirit, intent and purpose of
these regulations;
         5.)   Require such other conditions to be met by the proposed plat as
the PZC may find necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Code, when
modified; and
         6.)   Determine that a strict compliance with the provision would
deprive the property of privileges enjoyed by similar properties in the
vicinity.
      (B)   In making its determinations, the PZC may also consider:
         1.)   Whether the property will yield a reasonable return or whether
there can be any beneficial use of the property without the variance;
         2.)   Whether the essential character of the neighborhood will be
altered or whether adjoining properties would be adversely affected as a result
of the variance; and
         3.)   Whether the variance would adversely affect the delivery of
governmental services.
      (C)   Cul-de-sacs shall be discouraged if future roadway connections can
be made. The PZC shall have the right to deny cul-de-sacs based on development
design versus service-related functions. Where a subdivision includes a cul-de-
sac that requires a variance because the cul-de-sac is in excess of the maximum
permitted length, the PZC may also consider the number and size of sublot
served by the cul-de-sac, and the availability of central water service, to
determine if the variance will permit appropriate development of the land
without unduly affecting the public safety. The PZC may also consider the
opinions of local city officials.
      (D)   If the proposed variance involves the creation of a sublot whose
depth exceeds four and one-half times its width, the PZC may also consider the
pattern of existing platting for similarly zoned land adjacent to the property
and within 500 feet of the proposed site.
      (E)   The City Council may support variances affecting required
improvements upon approval by the PZC. Such recommendations shall be based on
the findings listed in this section.
   (17)   Appeals. Whenever an applicant presenting a preliminary plan for a
major subdivision to the PZC has been rendered a decision from the PZC which is
adverse to the request of the applicant, the aggrieved applicant may make an
appeal to Council.
      (A)   The appeal shall be submitted to Council within 30 days following
the PZC decision and a copy of said appeal shall be filed with the PZC and the
Planning Department.
      (B)   The appeal shall state, in full, the reasons it is being filed and
the facts surrounding the same. Any facts and/or information not previously
available to the PZC, the inclusion of which at the time of the appeal would
operate to substantially alter the facts and information submitted to the PZC
prior to its original decision concerning the matter, shall be cause for
resubmission of such matter to the PZC, together with new facts and
information, for its reconsideration.
      (C)   Council shall, upon receipt of an appeal, request a statement from
the PZC setting out the reasons for the decision being appealed, so as to
properly advise Council as to the considerations and regulations upon which the
original decision was based.
      (D)   The Clerk of Council shall notify the PZC, applicant, owner of the
subject property, and contiguous property owners of the time and place of
Council’s consideration of any such appeal. All parties shall be heard and
final judgment rendered by a two-thirds vote of Council. Such decision shall be
in writing, with the original being sent to the appellant and a copy to the
PZC.
(Prior Code, § 1224.06) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009; Ord. 2018-13, passed
8-28-2018)
§ 157.051 SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a process for the
review and approval of site plans and building designs by the DRB, PZC and city
officials. These regulations are established in the interest of encouraging
quality development, establishing compatibility of designs, establishing a
sense of place and identity for the community, and for the special design
districts within the community, to ensure proper design of sites for the
effective use of land, and to promote high standards in the layout, design,
landscaping and construction of development. Site plan review is intended to
control site and building design only to the extent necessary to promote these
objectives, while allowing flexibility and creativity in the design of
individual sites.
   (2)   Applicability. No use or construction for which a site plan review is
required shall be established or commenced and no permit or certificate shall
be issued until a site plan application has been approved by the PZC.
      (A)   In all residential districts and planned development districts that
allow residential uses, any new construction, substantial renovation, or
expansion of a building or site improvements, or establishment of a new use
for:
         1.)   Two-family dwellings;
         2.)   Multi-family dwellings;
         3.)   Conditional uses;
         4.)   Agricultural building, roadside stand, private stable or
building for housing domestic animals;
         5.)   Commercial uses, as permitted in planned developments; and
         6.)   Recreational facilities, as permitted in planned developments.
      (B)   In all commercial or industrial districts, any new construction,
substantial renovation or expansion of a building or site improvements, or
establishment of a new use as defined in division (2)(C) below.
      (C)   As used in this section, “new construction, substantial renovation,
expansion of a building or site improvements, or establishment of a new use”
shall include the following:
         1.)   New construction, expansion in floor area, change in location on
a lot, or significant reconstruction or alteration of an exterior wall, roof,
or other exterior part of a main structure or of an accessory structure, not
including repair or replacement of a structure or part of a structure in a
manner conforming to an approved site development plan;
         2.)   New construction, alteration, or expansion of any freestanding
sign or any attached sign which is greater than 20 square feet, and replacement
of sign panels in an existing nonconforming sign;
         3.)   Construction of a new curb cut, parking area, drive, loading
area or related improvement;
         4.)   Alterations to site improvements (including, but not limited to,
fences, walls, and landscaping enclosing loading and storage areas) which are
designed to buffer or protect abutting properties from impacts, except that, if
no other changes to the site require site plan review by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, the Planning Director may approve the design of such
improvements without site plan review by the Commission or may require that
such improvements be reviewed by the Commission; and
         5.)   A change in the use of an existing building or lot, where:
            a.)   A dwelling is replaced by any other use or where a dwelling
use replaces any other use;
            b.)   The number of dwelling units is increased in a multi-family
dwelling or on a lot having multi-family use;
            c.)   A commercial use is replaced by an industrial or
institutional use;
            d.)   An industrial use is replaced by a commercial or
institutional use;
            e.)   An institutional use is replaced by a commercial or
industrial use;
            f.)   A use other than a dwelling is expanded into existing,
unfinished floor area; and
            g.)   The Planning Director determines that a proposed new use will
create new impact on abutting properties, will generate additional traffic,
will require additional parking or altered curb cuts and drives, or will have
other effects which justify review of the suitability of the site and
improvements to support the proposed new use.
   (3)   Initiation. Pursuant to §
157.047(1), any person having authority to file applications may initiate an
application for a site plan review.
   (4)   Procedure. The review procedure for a site plan review shall be as
follows.
      (A)   Step 1 - application and preliminary site plan.
         1.)   The applicant shall submit an application in accordance with §
157.047.
         2.)   A preliminary site plan shall be prepared and submitted with the
application and appropriate fee.
      (B)   Step 2 - Planning Department and city review of the preliminary
site plan.
         1.)   Upon determination that the application is complete, the
Planning Department shall coordinate review of the preliminary site plan,
including distribution to other city departments as appropriate.
         2.)   Within ten days of the application, the Planning Department
shall advise the applicant of amendments, deficiencies or additional
information necessary to prepare the final site plan.
         3.)   When an application proposes modifications to a structure known
or believed to be older than 50 years, the Planning Department shall transmit a
copy of the application to the Historic Preservation Commission. The Historic
Preservation Commission shall, prior to the scheduled meeting of the DRB,
advise the Planning Department of the historic status of the structure and of
any issues which should be considered in the site plan review process.
      (C)   Step 3 - final site plan submission.
         1.)   Upon receiving comments from the Planning Department on the
preliminary site plan, the applicant shall prepare a final site plan for review
by the DRB.
         2.)   The Planning Department shall review the final site plan
submission for completeness and shall advise the applicant of any deficiencies
which may delay submittal to the PZC.
         3.)   The final site plan shall be submitted to the Planning
Department a minimum of 15 days prior to the scheduled DRB meeting when the
site plan requires DRB review or a minimum of 30 days prior to the PZC meeting
where the final site plan shall be reviewed.
      (D)   Step 4 - DRB review and recommendation.
         1.)   For site plans that require DRB review, the Planning Department
shall deliver the application to the DRB for review at its next scheduled
meeting for which it meets the applicable submittal deadlines.
         2.)   Within 30 days of the DRB meeting at which the site plan is
reviewed, the DRB shall review the application and submit a recommendation to
the PZC. In making the decision, the DRB may make a favorable or unfavorable
recommendation, with or without conditions, or table the review of the site
plan. The DRB shall communicate its action to the PZC.
      (E)   Step 5 - Planning Department review and staff report.
         1.)   The Planning Department shall distribute the final site plan to
appropriate administrative departments for review and comment. Such departments
shall return written comments to the Planning Department a minimum of seven
days prior to the PZC meeting at which the site plan will be reviewed.
         2.)   The Planning Department shall review the final site plan and
make a recommendation to the PZC to approve, approve with conditions or deny
the final site plan. The Planning Department may also recommend the continuance
of the matter to allow for further review.
      (F)   Step 6 - PZC review and decision.
         1.)   The PZC shall hold a public meeting within 30 days of the filing
of the final site plan where a recommendation from the DRB is not required or
45 days of the filing of the final site plan when a recommendation from the DRB
is required.
         2.)   Within 60 days of the public meeting, the PZC shall either
approve, approve with conditions, deny the approval or table the review of the
final site plan.
         3.)   If the site plan is denied, the PZC shall make a finding, in
writing, justifying the denial of the plan and provide a copy of the findings
to the applicant.
         4.)   The PZC may attach conditions to the approval of a site plan as
may be reasonably required to promote the public health, safety and welfare.
         5.)   The PZC shall not take action on a site plan application until
it has received and considered the recommendations of the DRB (where
applicable).
         6.)   Approval of the site plan shall be indicated by a letter from
the Planning Department. The approved plan will be stamped “Approved.”
   (5)   Approval criteria. Recommendations and decisions on a site plan shall
be based on consideration of the following criteria:
      (A)   That the proposed development is consistent with all the
requirements of this Code; and
      (B)   That the proposed development is in compliance with the applicable
zoning districts.
   (6)   Time limit.
      (A)   Approval of a site plan shall expire six months from the date of
approval, unless the applicant has received all applicable zoning permits.
      (B)   Upon written request, one extension of up to six months may be
granted by the Planning Department if the applicant can show good cause.
   (7)   Design exceptions.
      (A)   Where, as a result of characteristics of a site or use, or due to
the nature of surrounding development, it is impracticable to comply with one
or more of the site plan review standards of §
157.137, the applicant may request approval of an alternative design that is
equal to or exceeds the intent of the original standard.
      (B)   The written request shall be submitted to the Planning Director for
transmittal to the DRB and PZC. The request shall state the conditions which
result in the impracticability of compliance. The request shall be accompanied
by additional information and illustrations necessary to support the request.
The request shall describe or illustrate site improvements which will be
constructed to mitigate the effects of granting the design exception or to
otherwise ensure that the site plan meets the intent of this Code.
      (C)   The PZC may grant a design exception after review of the request.
Findings and grounds for approval of a design exception shall be entered into
the motion for approval of the site plan.
   (8)   Effect of approval. Approval shall constitute authorization to proceed
with application for required zoning permits and construction in compliance
with the approved site plan and in compliance with all other applicable
regulations of this Code.
   (9)   Land disturbance permit required. A land disturbance permit, issued in
accordance with §
157.053, shall be required prior to commencement of clearing and grading
activities on the site. Clearing and grading activities shall not begin until
the applicant has held a preconstruction meeting with either the city, or if
required, the County Soil and Water Conservation District, and a plan for
clearing and grading is approved. Such permit shall be based on a clearing and
grading plan prepared and approved as part of the site plan review process.
   (10)   Amendments of an approved site plan. Amendments to an approved site
plan shall be accomplished in the manner required for an original approval
pursuant to division (4) of this section; provided, however, that minor
technical changes and additions or alterations to accessory structures which do
not substantially alter a previously approved site plan or that do not require
a variance may be authorized by approval of the Planning Director.
   (11)   Qualifications required to prepare site plans. Site plans shall be
prepared by persons professionally qualified to do such work and shall be
certified by an architect, engineer, landscape architect or land surveyor duly
registered by the state. Site plans for signs, fences, parking lots and loading
facility additions, and minor structural additions or alterations, may be
prepared by persons other than those stated above, except that the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall not be required to review or take action upon plans
which are not sufficient to clearly and completely document compliance with
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1224.07) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.052 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
   (1)   Purpose. The characteristics and impacts of an ever-increasing number
of new and unique uses, together with the broadening of numerous conventional
uses, have fostered the development of more flexible regulations designed to
accommodate these activities in a reasonable and equitable manner, while
safeguarding both the property rights of all individuals and the health, safety
and general welfare of the community. Toward these ends, it is recognized that
this Code should provide for more detailed evaluation of each use conditionally
permissible in a specific district with respect to such considerations as
location, design, size, methods of operation, intensity of use, public
facilities requirements and traffic generation. Accordingly, conditional use
permits shall conform to the procedures and requirements of this section.
   (2)   Initiation. Pursuant to §
157.047(1), any person having authority to file applications may initiate an
application for a conditional use permit.
   (3)   Procedure.
      (A)   Step 1 - application. An application for a conditional use shall
comply with the provisions of §
157.047.
      (B)   Step 2 - Planning Department review and staff report. The Planning
Department shall review the application for a conditional use permit and make a
recommendation to the PZC to approve, approve with conditions or deny the
conditional use. The Planning Department may also recommend the continuance of
the matter to allow for further review.
      (C)   Step 3 - PZC review and decision on a conditional use.
         1.)   The PZC shall hold a public hearing within 45 days of the filing
of the application for a conditional use permit.
         2.)   Within 60 days of the public hearing, the PZC shall either
approve, approve with conditions, deny or table the request for a conditional
use permit.
         3.)   If the conditional use permit is denied, the PZC shall make a
finding, in writing, justifying the denial of the conditional use permit and
provide a copy of the findings to the applicant.
         4.)   In granting approval, the PZC may prescribe appropriate
conditions and safeguards in conformance with the intent and purposes of this
Code for the protection of nearby property and the public health, safety and
general welfare. The PZC shall authorize the Planning Department to issue the
conditional use permit with notation of conditions thereon or attached thereto.
   (4)   Approval criteria. In order to approve a conditional use, the PZC
shall use the following review criteria:
      (A)   The use is in fact a conditional use as allowed in the applicable
zoning district;
      (B)   A conditional use, except as specifically otherwise provided in
this chapter or in the applicable zoning district regulations, shall conform to
such district regulations and to other substantive requirements of this Code,
and shall also satisfy the conditions, standards and requirements of this
chapter;
      (C)   The use will be harmonious with, and in accordance with, the
purpose of this Code and the goals of the land use plan;
      (D)   The use will conform to the general character of the neighborhood
in which it will be located;
      (E)   The use complies with all applicable provisions of this Code,
including any use specific provisions established in §§
157.085 through
157.089;
      (F)   If the use is permitted, the public health, safety and general
welfare of the neighborhood in which it will be located, will be secure;
      (G)   The use will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so
as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity, and will not change the essential character
of the same area;
      (H)   The use will be served adequately by essential public facilities
and services, such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage
structures, refuse disposal, water and sewers, and schools, or the persons or
agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use will be able to
provide adequately any such service;
      (I)   The use will not create excessive additional requirements, at
public cost, for public facilities and services, and will not be detrimental to
the economic welfare of the community;
      (J)   The use will not be detrimental to property in the immediate
vicinity or to the community as a whole;
      (K)   The use will have vehicular approaches to the property designed so
as not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public
thoroughfares; and
      (L)   The use will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of a
natural or scenic feature of importance or a locally or nationally designated
historic landmark.
   (5)   Effect of a conditional use permit.
      (A)   Approvals granted under a conditional use permit shall run with the
land and shall not be affected by a change in ownership.
      (B)   The breach by the applicant of any condition, safeguard, or
requirement expressed or referred to on the conditional use permit shall render
the permit void and shall constitute a violation of this Code.
   (6)   Subsequent development. Development authorized by a conditional use
permit shall not be carried out until the applicant has secured all other
approvals required by this Code or any other applicable provisions of the city.
The approval of a conditional use permit shall not ensure that the development
approved as a conditional use shall receive subsequent approval for other
applications for development approval, unless the relevant and applicable
portions of this Code or other applicable provisions are met.
   (7)   Time limit.
      (A)   A conditional use permit shall be valid for a period of 90 days
from the date of approval. The conditional use permit shall become invalid
after the 90-day time limit, unless the applicant receives approval of a zoning
permit or is granted an extension within such time period.
      (B)   Upon written request, one extension of 30 days may be granted by
the Planning Director if the applicant can show good cause.
   (8)   Amendment. A conditional use permit may be amended, extended or
modified only in accordance with the procedures and standards established for
its original approval. A request for a change in the conditions of approval of
a conditional use permit shall be considered an amendment and subject to the
full review procedure set forth in this section.
(Prior Code, § 1224.08) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.053 LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT.
   (1)   Purpose.
      (A)   The purpose of this section is to establish a procedure to review
grading and clearing activities within the city to ensure the promotion of the
public health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the citizens of the city.
This permit and review procedure also helps to eliminate the unnecessary
clearing of trees and vegetation so as to maintain them as long as possible in
order to preserve the benefits associated with their existence. Regulating
grading and clearing activities will also assure that adequate provisions are
made for the prevention of surface erosion and pollution of water resources
prior to the grading of land.
      (B)   This chapter will:
         1.)   Allow development while minimizing increases in erosion and
sedimentation; and
         2.)   Reduce water quality impacts to receiving water resources and
wetland that may be caused by new development or redevelopment activities.
   (2)   Applicability. No clearing and/or grading activities shall be
commenced within the city without first obtaining a land disturbance permit
from the Planning Department. This regulation requires that a Storm Water
Pollution Prevention Plan (SWP3) be developed and implemented for all parcels
disturbing one acre or more of land and an Abbreviated SWP3 shall be submitted
for the following activities:
      (A)   Residential construction disturbing less than one acre and within a
larger common plan of development; and
      (B)   All nonresidential construction disturbing less than one acre.
Activities disturbing one-tenth or less of an acre are not required to submit a
Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan or an Abbreviated Storm Water Pollution
Prevention Plan, unless required by the city. These activities must comply with
all other provisions of this regulation.
   (3)   Initiation. Pursuant to §
157.047(1), any person having authority to file applications may initiate an
application for a land disturbance permit.
   (4)   Procedure.
      (A)   Step 1 - application.
         1.)   An application for a land disturbance permit shall comply with
the provisions of §
157.047.
         2.)   An application for a land disturbance permit shall be submitted
a minimum of 30 days prior to commencement of the clearing and/or grading
activities.
         3.)   An application for a land disturbance permit shall include
either a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWP3) or an Abbreviated SWP3,
as appropriate and as outlined below:
            a.)   The applicant shall submit two sets of the SWP3 and the
applicable fees to the Planning Department and two sets of the SWP3 and the
applicable fees to the Summit Soil and Water Conservation District (Summit
SWCD); or
            b.)   The applicant shall submit two sets of the Abbreviated SWP3
to the Planning Department (there shall be no fee for an Abbreviated SWP3).
      (B)   Step 2 - Planning Department and applicable agency review and
decision or staff report.
         1.)   Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan.
            a.)   Submitted plans must be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Department, the County Soil and Water Conservation District, and any other
applicable city department.
            b.)   Within 30 days after the application (Step 1) is determined
to be complete, the Planning Department shall review the application and
approve, approve with conditions or deny the land disturbance permit based on
the approval criteria established in subsection (5) of this section.
            c.)   All comments from the city and other review agencies shall be
provided to the Planning Department for transmission of comments to the
applicant. The applicant shall be required to revise all applicable plans and
resubmit such revised plans to the Planning Department prior to the issuance of
a land disturbance permit.
         2.)   Abbreviated Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan.
            a.)   Submitted plans must be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Department or any other applicable city department.
            b.)   Within ten days after the application (Step 1) is determined
to be complete, the Planning Department shall review the application and
approve, approve with conditions or deny the land disturbance permit based on
the approval criteria established in division (5) of this section.
            c.)   All comments from the city and other review agencies shall be
provided to the Planning Department for transmission of comments to the
applicant. The applicant shall be required to revise all applicable plans and
resubmit such revised plans to the Planning Department prior to the issuance of
a land disturbance permit.
      (C)   Step 3 - notification. The land disturbance permit holder shall
agree to notify the city and, if applicable, the County Soil and Water
Conservation District a minimum of 48 hours before commencing with permitted
clearing and/or grading activities.
   (5)   Approval criteria. In order to approve a land disturbance permit, the
Planning Department shall use the following review criteria:
      (A)   Compliance with applicable provisions of this Code;
      (B)   Conformance with current NPDES permit requirements;
      (C)   No land disturbance permit shall be issued until a SWP3 or
Abbreviated SWP3 has been approved by the County Soil and Water Conservation
District and/or appropriate city departments;
      (D)   All current best management practices (BMPs) are considered to
control erosion and sediment, and a plan for implementation of such practices
is approved by the County Soil and/or Water Conservation District and
appropriate city departments;
      (E)   A land disturbance permit shall not be approved without a drafted
storm water management maintenance agreement (not applicable to sites
submitting an Abbreviated SWP3). The storm water management maintenance
agreement shall be executed upon completion of construction. The post
construction water quality practices must be maintained in perpetuity by those
parties identified in the storm water management agreement;
      (F)   A preconstruction meeting was held with either the city or, if
required, the County Soil and Water Conservation District (not applicable to
sites submitting an Abbreviated SWP3). The applicant, contractor and
applicant’s engineer should be in attendance at the preconstruction meeting;
and
      (G)   An abbreviated SWP3 for an individual sublot in a subdivision may
not be approved, unless the larger common plan of development containing the
sublot is in compliance with this chapter.
   (6)   Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan.
      (A)   The applicant shall submit a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
(SWP3) consistent with the requirements the most recent Ohio EPA NPDES general
construction permit. For specific requirements of a SWP3, the designer shall
refer to the NPDES state general construction permit and the County SWCD/OEPA
SWP3 checklist. The SWP3 must address erosion and sediment control during
construction, as well as post construction water quality and water quality
volume practices. Post construction practices must meet the requirements of the
current NPDES state general construction permit, the County Storm Water
Management Manual and the Ohio Rainwater and Land Development Manual.
      (B)   The SWP3 shall be certified by a professional engineer, a
registered surveyor, certified professional erosion and sediment control
specialist, or a registered landscape architect.
      (C)   The SWP3 shall incorporate measures as recommended by the most
current edition of the Rainwater and Land Development Manual as published by
the Ohio Department of Natural Resources or other technical manuals approved by
the city and/or the County SWCD.
      (D)   The County SWCD may require the SWP3 to include a soils engineering
report based upon his or her determination that the conditions of the soils are
unknown or unclear to the extent that additional information is required to
protect against erosion. This report shall contain all the information listed
below:
         1.)   Data regarding the nature and erodibility of existing soils;
         2.)   If applicable, data regarding the nature and erodibility of the
soil to be placed on the site;
         3.)   Conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures; and
         4.)   Conclusions and recommended designs for interim soil
stabilization devices and measures for permanent soil stabilization after
construction is completed.
   (7)   Compliance with local, state and federal regulations. All submittals
are required to show proof of compliance with all state and federal
regulations. Approvals issued in accordance with this chapter do not relieve
the applicant of responsibility for obtaining all other necessary permits and/
or approvals from the Ohio EPA, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and other
federal, state, and/or county agencies. If requirements vary, the most
restrictive requirement shall prevail. These permits may include, but are not
limited to, those listed below.
      (A)   Ohio EPA NPDES permits authorizing storm water discharges
associated with construction activity or the most current version thereof.
Proof of compliance with these requirements shall be the applicant’s notice of
intent (NOI) number from Ohio EPA, a copy of the Ohio EPA Director’s
authorization letter for the NPDES permit or a letter from the site owner
certifying and explaining why the NPDES permit is not applicable.
      (B)   Section 401 of the Clean Water Act. Proof of compliance shall be a
copy of the Ohio EPA water quality certification application tracking number,
public notice, project approval or a letter from the site owner certifying that
a qualified professional has surveyed the site and determined that § 401 of the
Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1341, is not applicable. Wetlands and other
waters of the United States shall be delineated by protocols accepted by the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers at the time an application is made under this
chapter.
      (C)   Ohio EPA isolated wetland permit. Proof of compliance shall be a
copy of Ohio EPA’s isolated wetland permit application tracking number, public
notice, project approval or a letter from the site owner certifying that a
qualified professional has surveyed the site and determined that Ohio EPA’s
isolated wetlands permit is not applicable. Isolated wetlands shall be
delineated by protocols accepted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers at the
time an application is made under this chapter.
      (D)   Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. Proof of compliance shall be a
copy of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers individual permit application, public
notice or project approval, if an individual permit is required for the
development project. If an individual permit is not required, the site owner
shall submit proof of compliance with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineer’s
nationwide permit program. This shall include one of the following:
         1.)   A statement from a qualified wetland professional who has
determined that § 404 of the Clean Water Act is not applicable; or
         2.)   A site plan showing that any proposed fill of waters of the
United States conforms to the general and special conditions specified in the
applicable nationwide permit. Wetlands and other waters of the United States
shall be delineated by protocols accepted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
at the time an application is made under this chapter.
      (E)   Ohio Dam Safety Law. Proof of compliance shall be a copy of the
Ohio Department of Natural Resources Division of Soil and Water Resources dam
safety permit application tracking number, a copy of the project approval
letter from the Ohio Department of Natural Resources Division of Soil and Water
Resources or a letter from the applicant’s engineer certifying and explaining
why the Ohio Dam Safety Law, being R.C. §§ 1521.06 et seq., is not applicable.
      (F)   Section 1229.13: riparian setbacks. Proof of compliance shall be a
copy of the Planning Department approval letter and/or zoning permit. Riparian
setbacks must be shown on the SWP3.
   (8)   Performance standards.
      (A)   The SWP3 must contain a description and location of all appropriate
BMPs for each construction operation. Prior to the start of grading and within
seven days from the start of grubbing, the applicant must implement such
controls. The SWP3 must clearly describe for each major construction activity
the appropriate control measures; the general sequence during the construction
process under which the measures will be implemented; and the person(s)
responsible for implementation. The SWP3 shall be consistent with the current
Ohio EPA NPDES construction permit. No project subject to this chapter shall
commence without a SWP3 approved by the County SWCD. No project subject to this
chapter shall commence without a preconstruction meeting being held with the
city and/or the County SWCD. It will be the applicant’s responsibility to
contact the city and/or the County SWCD.
      (B)   The applicant shall inform all contractors and subcontractors not
otherwise defined as OPERATORS as defined in the Ohio EPA’s NPDES permit, who
will be involved in the implementation of the SWP3 of the terms and conditions
of the SWP3. The applicant shall maintain a written document containing the
signatures of all contractors and subcontractors involved in the implementation
of the SWP3 as proof acknowledging that they have reviewed and understand the
conditions and responsibilities of the SWP3. The written document shall be
created and signatures shall be obtained prior to commencement of work on the
construction site. A copy shall be provided to the city and the County SWCD
prior to commencing with the project.
      (C)   A SWP3 must include BMPs to minimize erosion and off-site
sedimentation. The controls shall include the following minimum components.
         1.)   During active construction.
            a.)   Nonstructural preservation measures. The applicant must make
use of practices that preserve the existing natural condition to the maximum
extent practicable. Such practices may include preserving riparian areas,
preserving existing vegetation and vegetative buffer strips, phasing of
construction operations in order to minimize the amount of disturbed land at
any one time, and designation of tree preservation areas or other protective
clearing or grubbing practices. The requirements of §
157.142 shall be followed for stream and wetland protection in addition to
state and federal regulations.
            b.)   Erosion control practices. The applicant must make use of
erosion controls that are capable of providing cover over 70% of disturbed
soils. A description of control practices designed to restabilize disturbed
areas after grading or construction shall be included in the SWP3. The SWP3
must provide specifications for stabilization of all disturbed areas of the
site and provide guidance as to which method of stabilization will be employed
for any time of the year. Such practices may include: temporary seeding,
permanent seeding, mulching, matting, sod stabilization, vegetative buffer
strips, phasing of construction operations, the use of construction entrances
and the use of alternative ground cover.
            c.)   Runoff control practices. The applicant must make use of
measures that control the flow of runoff from disturbed areas so as to prevent
erosion. Such practices may include rock check dams, pipe slope drains,
diversions to direct flow away from exposed soils and protective grading
practices. These practices shall divert runoff away from disturbed areas and
steep slopes where practicable.
            d.)   Sediment control practices. The applicant must install
structural practices that shall store runoff, allowing sediments to settle and/
or divert flows away from exposed soils or otherwise limit runoff from exposed
areas. Structural practices shall be used to control erosion and trap sediment
from a site remaining disturbed for more than seven days. Such practices may
include, among others: sediment settling ponds, silt fences, storm drain inlet
protection, and earth diversion dikes or channels which direct runoff to a
sediment settling pond. All sediment control practices must be capable of
ponding or filtering runoff in order to be considered functional. Earth
diversion dikes or channels alone are not considered a sediment control
practice unless used in conjunction with a sediment settling pond.
            e.)   Nonsediment pollutant controls. No solid or liquid waste,
including building materials and concrete wash out water shall be discharged in
storm water runoff. The applicant must implement site best management practices
to prevent toxic materials, hazardous materials or other debris from entering
water resources or wetlands.
            f.)   Compliance with other requirements. The SWP3 shall be
consistent with applicable state and/or local waste disposal, sanitary sewer or
septic system regulations, including provisions prohibiting waste disposal by
open burning, and shall provide for the proper disposal of contaminated soils
located within the development area.
            g.)   Trench and ground water control. There shall be no sediment-
laden or turbid discharges to water resources or wetlands resulting from
dewatering activities. If trench or ground water contains sediment, it must
pass through a sediment-settling pond or other equally effective sediment
control device, prior to being discharged from the construction site.
Alternatively, sediment may be removed by settling in place or by dewatering
into a sump pit, filter bag or comparable practice. Ground water dewatering
which does not contain sediment or other pollutants is not required to be
treated prior to discharge. However, care must be taken when discharging ground
water to ensure that it does not become pollutant-laden by traversing over
disturbed soils or other pollutant sources.
            h.)   Applicant inspections. An initial inspection of all erosion
and sediment control practices shall be conducted by a qualified individual to
certify that the installations comply with the approved SWP3. All controls on
the site shall be inspected by the applicant’s agent at least once every seven
calendar days and within 24 hours after any storm event greater than one-half
inch of rain per 24-hour period. The applicant shall assign a qualified
individual to conduct these inspections to ensure that the control practices
are functional and to evaluate whether the SWP3 is adequate, or whether
additional control measures are required. Internal inspections and
documentation of corrective actions taken must be made available upon request.
            i.)   Maintenance. The SWP3 shall be designed to minimize
maintenance requirements. All control practices shall be maintained and
repaired as needed to ensure continued performance of their intended function
until final stabilization. All sediment control practices must be maintained in
a functional condition until all upslope areas they control reach final
stabilization. The applicant shall provide a description of maintenance
procedures needed to ensure the continued performance of control practices and
shall ensure a responsible party and adequate funding to conduct this
maintenance, all as determined by the city and/or the County SWCD.
            j.)   Final stabilization. All soil disturbing activities are
complete and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of 70%
coverage for the area has been established on all unpaved areas and areas not
covered by permanent structures. In addition, all temporary erosion and
sediment control practices have been removed and disposed of in an acceptable
manner.
         2.)   Post construction water quality practices.
            a.)   Nonstructural water quality practices. Nonstructural post
construction best management practices include preservation, planning or
procedures that direct development away from water resources or limit creation
of impervious surfaces. Practices, such as conservation easements, riparian and
wetland setbacks, and conservation subdivision design are all nonstructural
controls.
               i.)   All nonstructural water quality practices must be
protected from disturbance through the construction phase of the project.
               ii.)   All nonstructural water quality practices must be
protected in perpetuity through the use of appropriate legal tools. All
easement or conservation areas must appear on the final plat and be disclosed
to potential buyers.
            b.)   Structural water quality practices. Structural post
construction best management practices are permanent features constructed to
provide treatment of storm water runoff either through storage, filtration or
infiltration.
               i.)   All structural water quality practices must be established
prior to the completion of the project. Structural water quality practices
should be made functional once the disturbed areas on site are stabilized. If
detention/retention facilities were used for sediment control during
development, sediments must be removed prior to the basin being used for post
construction storm water quality.
               ii.)   All structural water quality practices must be designed
to treat water quality volume using the design criteria found in the ODNR
Rainwater & Land Development Manual or as otherwise approved by the City
Engineer.
               iii.)   The post construction water quality practice must be
maintained in perpetuity by those parties identified in the SWP3 or the storm
water management maintenance agreement.
   (9)   Abbreviated Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan.
      (A)   In order to control sediment pollution of water resources and
wetland, the applicant shall submit an Abbreviated SWP3 in accordance with the
requirements of this regulation.
      (B)   The Abbreviated SWP3 shall include a minimum of the following BMPs.
The city may require other BMPs as site conditions warrant.
         1.)   Construction entrances. Construction entrances shall be built
and shall serve as the only permitted points of ingress and egress to the
development area. These entrances shall be built of a stabilized pad of
aggregate stone or recycled concrete or cement sized greater than two inches in
diameter, placed over a geotextile fabric, and constructed in conformance with
specifications in the most recent edition of the Rainwater and Land Development
Manual.
         2.)   Sediment control. Silt fences shall be installed along the
perimeter of the lot’s down slope side(s) to trap sediment. Silt socks may be
used where appropriate.
         3.)   Concrete truck wash out. The washing of concrete material into a
street, catch basin or other public facility or natural resource is prohibited.
A designated area for concrete washout shall be made available.
         4.)   Street sweeping. Streets directly adjacent to construction
entrances and receiving traffic from the development area, shall be cleaned
daily to remove sediment tracked off-site. If applicable, the catch basins on
these streets nearest to the construction entrances shall be cleaned weekly.
         5.)   Stabilization. Any disturbed area that will be dormant for more
than 21 days, erosion controls shall be applied within seven days of the most
recent disturbance. Any disturbed area that will be idle over winter, erosion
controls shall be applied prior to November 1.
         6.)   Inlet protection. Erosion and sediment control practices, such
as boxed inlet protection, shall be installed to minimize sediment-laden water
entering active storm drain systems. Straw or hay bales are not acceptable
forms of inlet protection.
         7.)   Internal inspection and maintenance. All controls on the
development area shall be inspected at least once every seven calendar days and
within 24 hours after any storm event greater than one-half inch of rain per
24-hour period. Maintenance shall occur as detailed in division (10)(B) of this
section.
         8.)   Final stabilization. All soil disturbing activities are complete
and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of 70% coverage for the
area has been established on all unpaved areas and areas not covered by
permanent structures. In addition, all temporary erosion and sediment control
practices have been removed and disposed of in an acceptable manner.
   (10)   Inspections.
      (A)   All permitted clearing and/or grading activities shall be inspected
on a regular basis by appropriate city staff and/or the County Soil and Water
Conservation District to ensure compliance with the approved SWP3.
      (B)   When inspections reveal the need for repair, replacement or
installation of erosion and sediment control BMPs, the following procedures
shall be followed.
         1.)   When practices require repair or maintenance. If an inspection
reveals that a control practice is in need of repair or maintenance, with the
exception of a sediment-settling pond, it must be repaired or maintained within
three days of the inspection. Sediment settling ponds must be repaired or
maintained within ten days of the inspection.
         2.)   When practices fail to provide their intended function. If an
inspection reveals that a control practice fails to perform its intended
function as detailed in the SWP3 and that another, more appropriate control
practice is required, the SWP3 must be amended and the new control practice
must be installed within ten days of the inspection.
         3.)   When practices depicted on the SWP3 are not installed. If an
inspection reveals that a control practice has not been implemented in
accordance with the schedule, the control practice must be implemented within
ten days from the date of the inspection. If the internal inspection reveals
that the planned control practice is not needed, the record must contain a
statement of explanation as to why the control practice is not needed.
      (C)   The Planning Department shall issue violation notices, if
necessary, as determined through the inspection process. Violations shall be
rectified within the period stated and the city may take action as detailed in
division (14) of this section.
   (11)   Time limit.
      (A)   Work permitted by a land disturbance permit shall commence within
90 days of the permit approval or the grading and permit shall become invalid.
      (B)   The land disturbance permit shall also become invalid if the work
is suspended or abandoned for a period of 120 days at any time after the work
has commenced or one year after the date of issuance.
      (C)   Once a project is started, it shall remain the responsibility of
the permit holder to maintain all elements of an approved SWP3 or Abbreviated
SWP3 until completion of the project, including any periods during which work
has been suspended or after any abandonment of the work prior to completion.
      (D)   If a permit expires, no work may commence until a new permit is
issued.
   (12)   Burning prohibited. Open burning shall be prohibited for the clearing
of land. All clearing must be performed by generally accepted means, unless
otherwise permitted as part of the land disturbance permit review procedure.
   (13)   Enforcement.
      (A)   All development areas will be subject to inspections by the city
and/or County SWCD to ensure compliance with the approved SWP3 or Abbreviated
SWP3.
      (B)   After each inspection, the city and/or the County SWCD may prepare
and distribute a status report to the applicant.
      (C)   If an inspection determines that operations are being conducted in
violation of the approved SWP3 or Abbreviated SWP3, the city may take action as
detailed in division (14) of this section.
   (14)   Violations. In addition to the penalties outlined in §
157.999, the city will also have the ability to enforce any or all of the
following penalties for violations to this chapter.
      (A)   If the County SWCD or the Planning Department determines that a
violation of the rules adopted under this section exists, the Planning
Department shall issue a notice of violation. If, after a period of not less
than 30 days has elapsed following the issuance of the notice of violation, the
violation continues, the Planning Department shall issue a second notice of
violation. If, after a period of not less than 15 days has elapsed following
the issuance of the second notice of violation, the violation continues, the
Mayor shall have the authority to request the Law Director to immediately
institute legal action for a temporary restraining order and/or preliminary
injunction against the violator to cease operations until such time that the
violator proves that they are conducting operations in compliance with this
Code and the approved SWP3 or Abbreviated SWP3.
      (B)   The city may assess a fine in the amount of $100 per violation for
each day a violation to this chapter exists and/or continues up to a maximum
fine of $10,000.
      (C)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may deny the issuance of any
further plat approvals for the property in question until the site is brought
into compliance with this chapter.
      (D)   The Zoning Division may suspend the issuance of zoning permits and/
or certificates of use and compliance within developments that are not in
compliance with this chapter.
      (E)   The Planning Department may suspend the inspection of site
improvements and/or refuse the release of bonds on developments that are not in
compliance with this chapter. The city will have the right to proceed with the
capture of bond funds to bring the site into compliance.
      (F)   An assessment may be placed on the property upon failure to
maintain the storm water management maintenance agreement as outlined in the
agreement.
(Prior Code, § 1224.09) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009; Ord. 2011-07, passed
8-23-2011; Ord. 2012-24, passed 11-13-2012)
§ 157.054 VARIANCE.
   (1)   Purpose. A variance from the requirements of this Code may be granted
by the BZA, or in limited cases by the PZC, where the applicable board
determines that such a variance will not be contrary to the public intent and
where due to special conditions and practical difficulties with strict
application of this Code may exist.
   (2)   Initiation. Pursuant to §
157.047(1), any person having authority to file applications may initiate an
application for a variance.
   (3)   Procedure.
      (A)   Step 1 - application for a variance. An application for a variance
shall comply with the provisions of §
157.047.
      (B)   Step 2 - variance application review.
         1.)   The Zoning Division shall process the variance request upon its
denial of a zoning permit.
         2.)   The Planning Department (variances requested during the
subdivision process or as part of a floodplain permit) shall review the
variance request and make a recommendation to the PZC to approve, approve with
conditions or deny the request. The Planning Department may also recommend the
continuance of the matter to allow for further review.
      (C)   Step 3 - BZA or PZC hearing and decision on a variance.
         1.)   The BZA or the PZC shall hold a public hearing within 45 days of
the filing of the variance application; provided adequate notification is
provided pursuant to §
157.047(7).
         2.)   Within 45 days of the public hearing, the BZA or PZC shall
either approve, approve with conditions or deny the request for a variance.
         3.)   The BZA or PZC shall further make a finding, in writing, that
the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting or denial of the
variance.
         4.)   The BZA or PZC may amend the variance application, with approval
from the applicant, as part of the motion. However, such amendment shall not
create a larger nonconformity or larger variance published as part of the
notification requirements.
         5.)   In approving a variance, the BZA or PZC may further prescribe
any conditions and safeguards that it deems necessary to ensure that the
objectives of the provisions to which the variance applies will be met and
completed. Any violation of such conditions and safeguards, when they have been
made a part of the terms under which the variance has been granted, shall be
deemed a punishable violation under this Code.
   (4)   Basis for granting a variance. In order to grant a variance, the BZA
or PZC shall use the following review criteria:
      (A)   1.)   The BZA or PZC shall not grant a variance, as authorized in
this Code, unless it can determine that there are circumstances, conditions and
practical difficulties encountered by the applicant in complying with the
provisions of this Code. This evaluation shall include, but is not limited to,
the following criteria:
            a.)   Whether the property will yield a reasonable return without
the variance or whether there can beneficial use of the property;
            b.)   Whether the variance is substantial;
            c.)   Whether the essential character of the neighborhood would be
substantially altered or whether adjoining properties would suffer a
substantial detriment as a result of the variance;
            d.)   Whether the variance would adversely affect the delivery of
governmental services;
            e.)   Whether the property owner purchased the property with
knowledge of the zoning restrictions;
            f.)   Whether the problem can feasibly be addressed through some
method other than variance (e.g., zone change); and
            g.)   Whether the variance preserves the spirit and the intent
behind the purpose of this Code and whether substantial justice would be done
by granting the variance.
         2.)   No single factor listed above shall control, and not all factors
shall be applicable in each case. Each case shall be determined on its own
facts.
      (B)   To obtain a variance, the applicant must show practical difficulty,
by demonstrating:
         1.)   Whether strict compliance with area, setbacks, frontage, height,
bulk or density would unreasonably prevent the owner from using the property
for a permitted purpose, or would render conformity unnecessarily burdensome;
         2.)   Whether a variance would do substantial justice to the
applicant, as well as to other property owners in the district, or whether a
lesser relaxation would give substantial relief and be more consistent with
justice to others;
         3.)   Whether the plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances
of the property; and
         4.)   Whether the problem is self-created.
      (C)   Variances shall not be granted on the grounds of convenience or
profit.
      (D)   The BZA shall not consider or grant a use variance when the use is
otherwise prohibited in the zoning district in which the property is located.
In such cases, the applicant may submit a request for a zoning map amendment
pursuant to §
157.048 in order to accommodate the proposed use.
      (E)   The fact that a structure, use or lot does not conform to this Code
prior to the consideration of a variance application may not be used as a basis
for the granting of a variance.
   (5)   Effect of a variance.
      (A)   The issuance of a variance shall authorize only the particular
variation that is approved in the variance.
      (B)   A variance, including any conditions, shall run with the land and
shall not be affected by a change in ownership.
   (6)   Subsequent development. Development authorized by the variance shall
not be carried out until the applicant has secured all other approvals required
by this Code or any other applicable provisions of the city. A variance shall
not ensure that the development with an approved variance shall receive
subsequent approval for other applications for development approval, unless the
relevant and applicable portions of this Code or other applicable provisions
are met.
   (7)   Time limit. No variance shall be valid for a period longer than 12
months of the date of variance approval, unless the applicant receives approval
of a zoning permit.
   (8)   Amendment of a variance after a decision. When an amendment is
requested that would increase the extent or severity of the variance, the
variance shall be amended, extended or modified only in accordance with the
procedures and standards established for its original approval. An amendment
that reduces the extent or severity of the approved variance may be approved by
the Planning Director (for example, if the original variance grants a ten-foot
variance on a 20-foot setback, the Planning Director may approve an amendment
if the applicant only needs a five-foot variance).
   (9)   Appeals of BZA decisions. Those aggrieved by the decision of the BZA
or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the County Court of Common Pleas,
as provided in R.C. Ch. 2506.
(Prior Code, § 1224.10) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.055 APPEALS.
   (1)   Purpose. This section sets out the procedure to follow when a person
claims to have been aggrieved by any administrative decision made in the
enforcement of this Code.
   (2)   Initiation. Appeals shall be initiated by the person aggrieved or
affected by any order, decision, determination or interpretation made by the
authority having jurisdiction who is charged with the administration or
enforcement of this Code.
   (3)   Procedure.
      (A)   Step 1 - submission of appeal (application).
         1.)   An appeal pursuant to this section shall be initiated by filing
a written appeal of the administrative decision or determination within 20 days
of the date of the order, decision, determination or interpretation with the
Zoning Division.
         2.)   Where the decision of the PZC is the subject of the appeal, the
20-day timeframe shall not start until after 30 days of the original PZC
decision within which the PZC may reconsider its original decision.
         3.)   Appeals shall comply with the provisions of §
157.047.
      (B)   Step 2 - forwarding of the record to the BZA. Upon receiving the
written appeal of an administrative decision or determination, the Zoning
Division shall transmit the written appeal with all papers, documents and other
materials related to the appealed decision or determination to the BZA. This
material shall constitute the record of the appeal.
      (C)   Step 3 - BZA review and decision on appeal.
         1.)   The BZA shall hold a public hearing within 45 days of the filing
of the appeal provided adequate notification is provided pursuant to §
157.047(7).
         2.)   Any person affected by the appeal may appear at the public
hearing and testify in person or by attorney.
         3.)   The Board shall render a decision on the appeal without
unreasonable delay. The Zoning Division shall notify the appellant in writing
of the decision of the Board.
   (4)   Review criteria. A decision or determination shall not be reversed or
modified, unless there is competent, material and substantial evidence in the
record that the decision or determination fails to comply with either the
procedural or substantive requirements of this Code.
   (5)   Stay. A properly submitted appeal shall stay all administrative
proceedings by the city in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the
Zoning Division certifies to the BZA that a stay would cause imminent peril to
life or property, in which case the administrative proceedings shall not be
stayed unless a restraining order is granted by the BZA for good cause shown.
   (6)   Appeals of BZA decisions. Those aggrieved by the decision of the BZA
or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the County Court of Common Pleas,
as provided in R.C. Ch. 2506.
(Prior Code, § 1224.11) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.056 ZONING PERMIT.
   (1)   Purpose. A zoning permit shall be required in accordance with the
provisions of this section in order to ensure that proposed development
complies with the standards of this Code, and to otherwise protect the public
health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city.
   (2)   Applicability. No land shall be used nor shall any building or
structure be used, established, constructed, enlarged, moved or modified,
without first obtaining a zoning permit. Zoning permits shall be issued only in
conformity with the provisions of this Code, unless the Zoning Division
receives a written order from the BZA deciding an appeal or variance, or
approval from the PZC for a conditional use permit, site plan, or planned
development as provided in this Code or approval of the Planning Director.
   (3)   Exemptions. Buildings having a foundation area of 30 square feet or
less, excepting outdoor toilets and roadside stands, shall be exempted from
permit requirements. Such accessory buildings, however, are subject to all
other zoning regulations.
   (4)   Initiation. Pursuant to §
157.047(1), any person having authority to file applications may initiate an
application for a zoning permit.
   (5)   Procedure. The review procedure for a zoning permit shall be as
follows.
      (A)   Step 1 - application.
         1.)   The applicant shall submit an application in accordance with §
157.047.
         2.)   The applicant shall not begin construction until a zoning permit
has been issued and setbacks approved in the field.
      (B)   Step 2 - Zoning Division review and decision on a zoning permit.
         1.)   Within ten days of the determination that the application is
complete, the Zoning Division shall approve or deny the application based on
the provisions of this Code.
         2.)   When the Zoning Division denies a zoning permit, it shall
provide written findings for the denial of the zoning permit application.
   (6)   Approval criteria. In order to approve a zoning permit, the Zoning
Division shall consider the following:
      (A)   The application complies with all applicable provisions of this
Code and the applicable zoning district; and
      (B)   The application complies with all approved site plans or other
development approvals.
   (7)   Time limit.
      (A)   Zoning permits shall be effective for 12 months and shall not be
invalidated by a change in zoning during that period.
      (B)   A permit shall expire at the end of 12 months, unless the footer or
other base for the structure has been completed in compliance with the plans
presented as part of the zoning permit application.
      (C)   If, after the footer or base has been completed, construction has
been stopped for more than six months, the permit shall become invalid and a
new permit shall be required before construction can proceed.
      (D)   Temporary use permits shall include an expiration date for the
approved use.
      (E)   Zoning permits and temporary use permits may be renewed or extended
by the Zoning Division if just cause is shown.
   (8)   Temporary use permits.
      (A)   Applications for temporary use permits shall follow the same review
procedure outlined in division (5) of this section, but shall be submitted at
least seven days before the start of such temporary use.
      (B)   An application for a temporary use permit shall be made to the
Zoning Division and shall contain a graphic description of the property to be
used, a description of the proposed use, and a site plan, with sufficient
information to determine the setbacks, parking and sanitary facility
requirements for the proposed temporary use, and any other information required
to process the permit.
(Prior Code, § 1224.12) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.057 CERTIFICATE OF USE AND COMPLIANCE.
   (1)   Purpose. A certificate of use and compliance shall be required for
multi-family uses and nonresidential uses to ensure that new construction and
changes in tenants or uses comply with the provisions of this Code.
   (2)   Initiation. Pursuant to §
157.047(1), any person having authority to file applications may initiate an
application for a certificate of use and compliance.
   (3)   Applicability.
      (A)   No person shall use, occupy or permit the use or occupancy of a
multi-family or nonresidential building or lot, or part thereof, until the
Zoning Division issues a certificate of use and compliance stating that the
proposed use of the building, land or part thereof conforms to the requirements
of this Code. A certificate of use and compliance shall also state, where
applicable, that new construction complies with the plans approved as part of
the zoning permit procedure and approval.
      (B)   A certificate of use and compliance shall be obtained from the
Zoning Division for any of the following:
         1.)   Use and occupancy of a multi-family or nonresidential use
building hereafter erected or structurally altered unless exempted in division
(4) of this section;
         2.)   Use of vacant land or change in use of land;
         3.)   Any change in the use of a nonconforming use;
         4.)   Any change of tenants in a nonresidential building, portion of a
nonresidential building and/or tenant space; and
         5.)   Any change in the ownership of any multi-family dwelling or
nonresidential building.
   (4)   Exemptions. The following uses shall be exempt from the requirement of
a certificate of use and compliance:
      (A)   Single-family dwellings;
      (B)   Multi-family dwellings with no more than two units;
      (C)   Accessory uses; or
      (D)   Temporary uses.
   (5)   Procedure. The review procedure for a certificate of use and
compliance shall be as follows.
      (A)   Step 1 - application. The applicant shall submit an application and
all required documents to the Zoning Division for a certificate of use and
compliance.
      (B)   Step 2 - Zoning Division review and decision.
         1.)   Within ten days of the application for a certificate of use and
compliance, the Zoning Division shall schedule an inspection, where necessary,
or review the application and approve or deny the application based on the
provisions of this Code.
         2.)   In cases where the Zoning Division denies an application, it
shall provide the applicant with written findings for the denial.
   (6)   Approval criteria. In order to approve a certificate of use and
compliance, the Zoning Division shall determine the following:
      (A)   That the use and structure comply with the zoning permit as issued
and any applicable development approvals or conditions;
      (B)   That the use complies with all applicable provisions of this Code;
      (C)   That the use, structure or tenant has gained all other necessary
approvals prior to the issuance of the certificate of use and compliance; and
      (D)   That applicable review agencies have no objections that cannot be
resolved by the applicant.
   (7)   Approvals outside of the certificate of use and compliance required.
      (A)   The following approvals and/or certificates shall be required prior
to the issuance of a certificate of use and compliance:
         1.)   All required municipal, county, state and federal approvals and/
or certificates must be obtained for the proposed use, including any necessary
fire inspection(s) by the Green Fire Division; and
         2.)   Any necessary approvals, permits or certificates from county
offices, including the Building Department, the County Health Department
(including any required septic approvals), the County Department of
Environmental Services (for sanitary sewer approval), the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency (OEPA) and the Federal Army Corps of Engineers.
      (B)   Written documentation of these approvals and/or certificates must
be submitted to the Zoning Division prior to the issuance of the city’s
certificate of use and compliance.
(Prior Code, § 1224.13) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 157.070 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish zoning districts in order to
realize the general purposes set forth in this Code, to provide for orderly
growth and development, and to protect the property rights of all individuals
by assuring the compatibility of uses and practices within districts.
(Prior Code, § 1225.01) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.071 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (1)   Establishment of districts. For the purpose of this Code, the city is
hereby divided into the zoning districts listed in Table 157.071-1:
Table 157.071-1: Zoning Districts
Abbreviation District Name
Table 157.071-1: Zoning Districts
Abbreviation District Name
R-R          Rural Residential District
R-1          Single-Family Residential District
R-2          Multi-Family Residential District
B-1          General Business District
B-2          Professional Office District
B-3          Neighborhood Business District
B-4          Highway Business District
B-5          Airport Commerce District
I-1          General Industrial District
PD           Planned Development
 
   (2)   Incorporation of the zoning map.
      (A)   The boundaries of the zoning districts are indicated upon the map
of the city, which shall be known as the zoning map of the city, and which
shall hereafter be referred to as the zoning map.
      (B)   The zoning map, together with all notations, references and other
matters shown thereon, is hereby declared to be a part of this Code, thereby
having the same force and effect as if herein fully described in writing.
      (C)   The zoning map shall be available in the Planning Department and
Zoning Division offices.
   (3)   Interpretation of district boundaries. The following rules shall be
used to interpret the precise location of any zoning district boundary
illustrated on the zoning map.
      (A)   All zoning district boundaries proposed after the effective date of
this Code shall follow lot lines or street centerlines to the maximum extent
feasible.
      (B)   For zoning district boundaries that existed prior to the effective
date of this Code, the following rules shall apply.
         1.)   Where district boundaries are so indicated as approximately
following the centerlines of thoroughfares or highways, street lines or highway
right-of-way lines, such centerlines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
         2.)   Whenever any street or public way is vacated by official action
of Council, the zoning districts adjoining each side of the street or public
way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacations, and all
areas included in the vacation shall thereafter be subject to all regulations
of the extended districts.
         3.)   Where a zoning line does not follow a street, alley or lot line,
the district boundary lines shall be determined by the use of the scale
appearing on the zoning map or by dimensions.
   (4)   Existing planned developments. Any planned development approved prior
to the effective date of this Code shall continue in accordance with the
approved general plan(s) and final site plan(s). Modifications, amendments and
expansion of existing planned developments shall be in accordance with §
157.048(6).
   (5)   Relationship of overlay zoning districts. Where land is classified
into an overlay district, as well as a base zoning district, the regulations
governing development in the overlay district shall apply in addition to the
regulations governing the underlying base district. In the event of an express
conflict between the standards of the overlay zoning district and the base
zoning district, the standards governing the overlay district shall control.
(Prior Code, § 1225.02) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.072 ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The following is a list of the individual zoning districts and the specific
purpose statement for each district.
   (1)   R-R - Rural Residential District. The R-R Rural Residential District
is established to accommodate single-family residential development at a
density characteristic of a rural area in order to preserve the natural
environment and to provide alternatives for conservation open space residential
subdivisions. Alternative subdivision designs are encouraged to protect and
establish permanent open space.
   (2)   R-1 - Single-Family Residential District. The R-1 Single-Family
Residential District is established to accommodate single-family and two-family
residential development and maintain a density of development that will
preserve the natural environment. Minimum area regulations are commensurate
with the availability of water, proper provisions for satisfactory sanitation
facilities and other conservation values. Alternative subdivision designs are
encouraged to protect and establish permanent open space.
   (3)   R-2 - Multi-Family Residential District. The R-2 Multi-Family
Residential District is designed to accommodate attached and detached dwellings
at moderate densities. The purposes of this District are to provide for higher
density residential development, in locations served by sanitary sewer and
public water services, which offer a greater choice of living environments; to
regulate the bulk and location of buildings in relation to the land in order to
obtain proper light, air, privacy and useable open spaces; to regulate the
location of higher density developments in order to maintain adequate services;
and to promote and protect the desirable characteristics of the existing
residential development. This District may be appropriate for areas designated
as transitional areas in the Long Range Land Use Plan.
   (4)   B-1 - General Business District. The B-1 General Business District is
established to accommodate a wide range of commercial development, along with
outdoor storage and display, in select areas, so as not to disrupt and intrude
upon residential areas. The purposes of this District are to promote, upgrade,
and maintain the functional and aesthetic qualities of the District through the
use of site plan review, and to protect the residential character of adjacent
areas.
   (5)   B-2 - Professional Office District. The B-2 Professional Office
District is designed to provide an environment exclusively for and conducive to
the development of professional services and other office uses in locations
which are served by arterial roadways. The regulations contained in this
chapter are established to protect and ensure compatibility with adjacent
residential development. This District may be appropriate for areas designated
as transitional areas in the Long Range Land Use Plan.
   (6)   B-3 - Neighborhood Business District. The purpose of the B-
3 Neighborhood Business District is to allow for small-scale retail commercial
uses and personal service uses designed to serve nearby residential
neighborhoods. Business in the B-3 District shall accommodate such service and
retail uses by maintaining the characteristics of the surrounding residential
uses and providing appropriate buffers to minimize or eliminate impacts on the
residential uses. This District may be appropriate for areas designated as
transitional areas in the Long Range Land Use Plan.
   (7)   B-4 - Highway Business District. The B-4 Highway Business District is
designed to accommodate commercial activities that draw business primarily from
a regional market area and provide services primarily to motorists. The B-
4 District is designed to accommodate land that is typically associated with
interstate travel. The regulations contained in this chapter are established to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the properties within and adjacent to
the District and to ensure the availability of suitable areas for the permitted
uses by prohibiting unrelated uses in such areas.
   (8)   B-5 - Airport Commerce District. The B-5 Airport Commerce District is
designed to accommodate business activities that can provide services related
to airport users including, but not limited to, hotels, car rental facilities
and restaurants. The B-5 District is also designed to accommodate offices,
public facilities, industrial uses and uses not related to the airport that
will not create an impact on the airport operations and are deemed a compatible
use.
   (9)   I-1 - General Industrial District. The I-1 General Industrial District
is established to provide for industrial uses which are generally major
operations and extensive in character for the purpose of repairing, storing,
manufacturing, processing or distributing goods. Such uses require large sites,
open storage and service areas, extensive services and facilities, and ready
access to regional transportation, and normally generate some nuisances, such
as smoke, noise, vibration, dust, glare, air pollution, and water pollution,
but not beyond the District boundary. Such operations shall be in locations
remote from existing or proposed residential areas.
   (10)   PD - Planned Development District. The PD Planned Development
District is established to accommodate, in a unified development, creative and
imaginative planned community design and to permit those innovations in the
technology of land development that are in the best interests of the city. It
is the purpose of this District to:
      (A)   Provide maximum opportunity for orderly, large-scale developments
which benefit the community as a whole by offering a greater choice of living
environments and commercial activities through both residential and commercial
uses;
      (B)   Provide greater flexibility in the spacing of lots and buildings in
order to encourage the following:
         1.)   Provide for pedestrian and vehicular circulation in a safe
manner;
         2.)   Provision of readily accessible recreation areas and green
spaces;
         3.)   Conservation of the natural amenities of the landscape; and
         4.)   Creation of functional and interesting residential, business,
and mixed-use areas.
      (C)   Permit suitable associated commercial development consistent with
the demand created by planned residential development and compatible with the
existing and proposed use of lands adjacent to the planned development;
      (D)   Encourage sound planning principles in the arrangement of
buildings, the preservation of open space, the utilization of topography and
other site features; and
      (E)   Allow for creative development that conforms to the goals and
objectives set forth in the Long Range Land Use Plan.
(Prior Code, § 1225.03) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.073 ALLOWED USES.
   (1)    Table 157.085-1  lists the permitted and conditional uses within all
zoning districts. Use specific standards for permitted and conditional uses are
provided in §
157.086.
   (2)    Table 157.087-1  lists the accessory uses, as permitted or
conditionally permitted, in all zoning districts. Use specific standards for
accessory uses are provided in §
157.087(5).
   (3)    Table 157.088-1  lists the temporary uses allowed within all zoning
districts.
(Prior Code, § 1225.04) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.074 SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (1)   Section
157.101 provides development standards applicable to sites within residential
districts.
   (2)   Section
157.102 provides development standards applicable to open space subdivisions in
the R-R and R-1 Districts.
   (3)   Table  157.103-1  lists the site development standards for conditional
uses in the R-R and R-1 Districts.
   (4)   Table  157.104-1  lists the site development standards for business
districts.
   (5)   Sections
157.115 through
157.119 provide development standards applicable to planned development
districts.
(Prior Code, § 1225.05) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
USE REGULATIONS
§ 157.085 TABLE OF ALLOWED USES.
   (1)   Generally.
Table
157.085-1 below lists the uses allowed within all zoning districts. Each of the
listed uses is defined in §
157.171.
   (2)   Explanation of table abbreviations and columns.
      (A)   Permitted uses (P). A “P” in a cell indicates that a use is
permitted by right in the respective zoning district. Permitted uses are
subject to all other applicable regulations of this Code, including the use
specific standards set forth in this chapter and the development standards of
§§
157.100 through
157.104 and
157.130 through
157.142.
      (B)   Conditional uses (C). A “C” in a cell indicates that, in the
respective zoning district, a use is permitted if reviewed and approved as a
conditional use pursuant to §
157.052. Conditional uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of
this Code, including the use specific standards set forth in this subchapter
and the development standards of §§
157.100 through
157.104 and
157.130 through
157.142.
      (C)   Prohibited uses (shaded cells). A shaded cell indicates that the
listed use is prohibited in the respective zoning district.
      (D)   Additional regulations. Regardless of whether a use is permitted by
right or permitted as a conditional use, there may be additional regulations
that are applicable to the use. The existence of these use specific standards
is noted through a cross-reference in the last column of
Table
157.085-1. These standards apply in all districts unless otherwise specified.
      (E)   Unlisted uses.
         1.)   If a zoning permit, site plan review or a certificate of use and
compliance application is submitted for a use that is not listed in
Table
157.085-1, the Planning Director is authorized to classify the new or unlisted
use into an existing land use category that most closely fits the new or
unlisted use. The Planning Director may consult with the PZC and obtain a
motion of concurrence or objection to the use classification through the PZC
hearing process.
         2.)   If no similar use determination can be made, the Planning
Director shall refer the use to the PZC who may initiate an amendment to the
text of this Code to clarify where and how the use should be permitted.
Table 157.085-1: Allowed Uses
Uses                                                   Additional Regulations
P = Permitted   R-R R-1 R-2 B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 B-5 I-1 PD See Section:
C = Conditional
Table 157.085-1: Allowed Uses
Uses                                                         Additional
P = Permitted         R-R R-1 R-2 B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 B-5 I-1 PD Regulations
C = Conditional                                              See Section:
Agricultural Uses
Agriculture - animal
husbandry and keeping P   P                  C   P     157.086(2)
of livestock
Agriculture - raising P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   
of crops
Nurseries and                  P      C   C   C   P      
greenhouses
   Commercial Uses
Airport and airport-                       P   C      
related facilities
Banquet halls                  P         P   P   C   P   
Bars and taverns               P      C   P   P   C   P   
Bed and breakfast     C   C   C                     P   
establishments
Day care centers               P   P   P      C   C   P  157.086(5)
Day care home, Type A
(7 to 12 children, or
4 to 12 children when          C   C   C         C     157.086(5)
4 or more are under
two years old)
Day care home, Type B
(1 to 6 children, no  P   P   P                     P   
3 children are under
two years old)
Drive-through                  C      C   P   P   C   P   
facilities
Financial                      P   P   P   P   P   P   P   
institutions
Funeral homes                  P   C   C   P   P   P      
Hotels and motels              P         P   P   C   P   
Kennels                        P            C   P     157.086(8)
Medical and dental             P   P   C   P   P   C   P   
offices
Motor vehicle body             C         C            
repair
Motor vehicle car              P         P   P         
washes
Motor vehicle fuel             P      C   P   P      P  157.086(3)
sales
Motor vehicle rental           P         P   P   P      
Motor vehicle repair
and service and body           P         P   P   P     157.086(3)
repair
Motor vehicle sales            P      C   P   P         
Offices                        P   P   C   P   P   P   P   
Parking lot                 P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   
Parking lot long                           P   P      
term/deck
Personal service               P   C   C   P   P   C   P   
establishments
Recreation and indoor
entertainment                  P         P   P   P   P   
facilities
Research facilities            P   C   C   P   P   P   P   
and laboratories
Restaurants                    P   C   C   P   P   P   P   
Retail and service             P   C   C   P   P   P   P   
commercial uses
Self-storage                   C            C   P     157.086(11)
facilities
Sexually oriented                       P           157.086(12)
businesses
Social clubs and
fraternal                      P      C   P   P   C   P   
organizations
Theaters                       C      C   P   P      P   
Veterinarian clinics           P   C   C   P   P   P      
Wireless
telecommunications    C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C  157.086(13)
towers
   Industrial Uses
Distribution
facilities, truck                       C   P   P      
terminals and
warehouses
Heavy industrial uses                      C   C      
Light industrial uses                      P   P      
Mineral extraction    C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C     157.086(9)
   Public and Institutional Uses
Active parks,
playgrounds and       C   C   C   P   P   P   P   P   P   P  157.086(1)
recreational
facilities
Cemeteries            C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   P  157.086(4)
Community centers and C   C   C   P   C   C   P   P   P   P   
clubhouses
Educational
facilities (public or C   C   C   P   C   C   P   P   P   P  157.086(6)
private)
Governmental offices  C   C   C   P   P   P   P   P   P   P  157.086(7)
and facilities
Hospitals and clinics          P         P   P   P   P   
Libraries, museums,
galleries and         C   C   C   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   
cultural centers
Passive parks and     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   
conservation areas
Public and private    P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   
utility services
Public safety/service C   C   C   P   C   C   P   P   P   P  157.086(7)
facilities
Religious places of   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   P   
worship
   Residential Uses
Adult family homes (3 P   P   P   C      C   C      C   P   
to 8 adults)
Adult family homes,
transitional (3 to 6  C   C   C   C      C   C   C   C   P   
adults)
Adult group homes (9        C   C      C   C      C   P   
to 16 adults)
Children group homes
(maximum of 10        C   C   C   C      C   C      C   P   
children)
Multi-family                P                     P   
dwellings
Nursing homes and
assisted living             C   C                  P  157.086(10)
facilities
Open space            P   PC  C                     P   
subdivisions
Single-family         P   P   P                     P   
dwellings
Two-family dwellings     C   P                     P   
 
(Prior Code, § 1226.01) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009; Ord. 2010-06, passed
6-8-2010; Ord. 2013-19, passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 2013-26, passed 2-11-2014; Ord.
2018-02, passed 3-13-2018; Ord. 2022-02, passed 3-8-2022; Ord. 2022-15, passed
10-11-2022; Ord. 2024-14, passed 2-11-2025; Ord. 2025-07, passed 7-22-2025)
§ 157.086 USE SPECIFIC REGULATIONS.
   (1)   Active parks, playgrounds and recreational facilities. The following
regulations shall apply to when the principal use of a lot is an active park,
playground or recreational facility.
      (A)   Unless otherwise approved by the PZC, active parks and playgrounds
which include outdoor play areas, tot lots or activity centers designed to be
used by children under eight years of age shall be fully enclosed by a fence
subject to approval by the PZC.
      (B)   All structures shall be located at least 25 feet from all property
lines or as approved by the PZC.
      (C)   Vehicle access points of entrance or exit shall be located a
minimum of 200 feet from the intersection of two major thoroughfares, or a
minimum of 100 feet from the intersection of a major thoroughfare and a local
or collector thoroughfare.
      (D)   Retail business uses shall be only those customarily accessory or
incidental to the main recreational use, such as refreshment, souvenir and
concession stands.
      (E)   The minimum gross lot area or portion of a lot required for golf
courses, country clubs, horse riding academies, and campgrounds for camping in
tents, travel trailers and other vehicles, cabins, or lodges, including day
camps, summer camps, and health camps, shall be subject to review by the PZC.
      (F)   Active parks, playgrounds and recreational facilities within a
subdivision or PD District shall require review and approval by the PZC.
   (2)   Agricultural uses; animal husbandry and keeping of livestock. A lot
may be used for agricultural purposes in accordance with the following
regulations:
      (A)   T he minimum area of a lot for animal and poultry husbandry shall
be five acres. The minimum lot area for raising chicken hens shall be as
follows for single family residential properties;
 
Under 20,000 sq. ft.    0 chickens
20,000 sq. ft. - 1 acre 6 chickens
1 acre - 2 acres        8 chickens
2 acre - 5 acres        4 chickens per acre
 
      (B)   Apiculture, horticulture, floriculture and viticulture shall be
permitted on any size lot; however, buildings and structures accessory to an
agricultural use shall be on a lot with a minimum area of five acres;
      (C)   Dwellings shall conform to the minimum site development
requirements for the applicable zoning district;
      (D)   All structures used for keeping of farm animals, fur-bearing
animals, horses and/or ponies shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the
property line;
      (E)   Fenced enclosures for the keeping of farm animals, fur-bearing
animals, horses and/or ponies closer than five feet from any lot line may be
approved by the PZC as a conditional use according to the procedures, review
criteria and public hearing requirements set forth in §
157.052 under the following conditions:
         1.)   The fenced enclosures shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from
any existing dwelling, except for a dwelling on the same lot as the fenced
enclosure; or
         2.)   Neighboring property owners within 100 feet shall be notified,
in writing, when the proposed placement of the fence is less than five feet
from the lot lines.
      (F)   Chicken hens raised on a parcel less than five acres must be housed
in a wholly enclosed, floored structure for protection from the elements with
an appropriately-sized fenced area; hens shall not run at-large.
         1.)   All structures/coops must be located in the rear yard with a
minimum setback of 20 feet from all property lines and 100 feet from any
adjacent dwelling.
         2.)   All fenced enclosures shall be located in the rear yard with a
minimum setback of 20 feet from all property lines.
         3.)    Roosters are prohibited on parcels smaller than five acres.
         4.)   Property owners proposing to raise chicken hens must obtain a
certificate of use and compliance through the Zoning Division. The property
owner shall submit a site plan showing the proposed location of any structure/
fencing with their application for a certificate of use and compliance. The
Zoning Division will permit a maximum of 100 certificates of use and compliance
per calendar year for chicken rearing.
         5.)   Once a certificate is issued for chickens that is maintained
under this section, the location will be subject to an annual inspection to
ensure that the area is being maintained in a manner that is safe and sanitary
for the animal and does not burden the neighbors of the residence.
         6.)   All shelters/coops must be enclosed and constructed of quality
materials utilizing standard building techniques, be adequately ventilated and
be kept in good condition. A minimum of four square feet of enclosed space per
chicken.
         7.)   All chickens must be kept in a confined yard that provides at
least eight square feet of space per chicken for foraging. Chickens shall be
managed in such a way as to prevent trespassing or creation of nuisance to
surrounding properties or the public right-of-way. No foraging is permitted in
the front yard of the primary structure.
         8.)   Chicken, chicken coops and chicken runs shall be maintained and
shall be regularly cleaned to control dust, odor and waste so as to not create
a nuisance, constitute a safety hazard, health problem or unreasonable
disturbance to surrounding properties.
         9.)   Chicken waste/manure shall only be stored in an enclosed
container or buried in order for it to be used as compost.
         10.)   Chickens shall be kept for personal use. Selling chickens, meat
or breeding of chickens for commercial purposes is prohibited.
         11.)   No on-site slaughtering of chickens.
         12.)   Other poultry or fowl, including ducks, quail, geese or turkeys
are prohibited.
         13.)   In addition to the regulations provided in this chapter,
property owners shall be responsible for adhering to all applicable deed
restrictions and homeowner association requirements. The city will not issue a
certificate of use when a deed restriction and/or homeowners association
requirement prohibits the use.
         14.)   No variances of any type will be granted for chicken rearing or
animal husbandry.
         15.)   Nuisance conditions must be abated within seven days of notice
by the city. Failure to address nuisance conditions may result in certificate
of use and compliance revocation.
   (3)   Motor vehicle fuel sales and motor vehicle repair and service
facilities. In addition to the applicable provisions of this chapter,
automotive fuel sales and automotive repair and service facilities shall comply
with the following:
      (A)   Motor vehicle fuel sales and motor vehicle repair and service
facilities that are located on a corner lot shall have a minimum of 150 feet
frontage on each street to allow for adequate ingress and egress without
creating congestion at an intersection;
      (B)   Fuel pumps and related driveways and paved areas may be erected in
a front yard, but not less than 30 feet from an existing or proposed street
right-of-way, except for lots with frontage on Massillon Road or Arlington
Road, in which case the minimum distance shall be 40 feet from the right-of-way
line;
      (C)   A canopy may be constructed over the pump island; provided that the
canopy shall extend no closer than 20 feet from an existing or planned right-
of-way, except for lots with frontage on Massillon Road or Arlington Road, in
which case the minimum distance shall be 30 feet from the right-of-way line;
      (D)   If repair or service activities are performed on a vehicle, such
vehicle shall be entirely within a building;
      (E)   Outdoor sales, displays and storage shall be in conformance with §
157.141; and
      (F)   On a corner lot, access drives shall be placed as far from the
intersection as possible and shall be limited to no more than one access drive
per fronting street.
   (4)   Cemeteries. The lot or the area of a lot proposed for a cemetery shall
be used for cemetery purposes only and shall meet the following requirements:
      (A)   A new cemetery shall have a minimum area of ten acres. Expansion of
an existing cemetery is exempt from this requirement;
      (B)   The required building setback for all structures, including
mausoleums and maintenance garages, shall be 25 feet from any property line;
      (C)   Graves and burial lots shall be located no less than 15 feet from
all property lines;
      (D)   There shall be access to a collector street so that residential
neighborhoods are not burdened by funeral processions; and
      (E)   For private cemeteries, the owner shall demonstrate to the PZC that
there is adequate administrative and financial capacity to ensure perpetual
maintenance and operation of the cemetery.
   (5)   Day care centers and Type A day care homes.
      (A)   Outdoor play areas, tot lots or activity centers designed to be
used by children under eight years of age shall be fully enclosed by a fence
subject to approval by the PZC.
      (B)   The parking and circulation plan shall include a drop-off/pick-up
point for children.
      (C)   In residential districts, Type A day care homes shall meet the
minimum applicable site development standards established in §§
157.100 through
157.104.
   (6)   Educational facilities. Educational facilities, which have outdoor
play areas, tot lots or activity centers designed to be used by children under
eight years of age shall ensure that the activity areas are fully enclosed by a
fence subject to approval by the PZC.
   (7)   Governmental offices, facilities and public safety/service facilities.
Governmental offices, facilities and public safety/service facilities, shall
meet the minimum site development standards established for the applicable
zoning district.
   (8)   Kennels. In addition to the applicable provisions of this chapter,
kennels shall comply with the following:
      (A)   All structures and activities related to the subject kennel use
shall be located a minimum distance of 50 feet from side and rear property
lines, except that when located adjacent to a residential district, the
following additional restrictions shall apply:
         1.)   All non-soundproofed structures or areas where animals are
confined shall be located a minimum distance of 250 feet from any residential
district; and
         2.)   Soundproofed, air conditioned buildings shall be located a
minimum distance of 100 feet from any residential district.
      (B)   All nonsoundproofed structures for the confinement of animals shall
be screened by a solid fence or wall a minimum of six feet in height located
within 50 feet of the structure;
      (C)   Animals shall be confined in an enclosed building between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; and
      (D)   There shall be no burial or incineration of animals on the
premises.
   (9)   Mineral extraction. Mining, soil, sand and gravel removal and
processing may be conditionally permitted in all zoning districts (except PD
districts); provided that all proposed uses and the continuation through
expansion of existing mining and extracting uses shall, at a minimum, meet the
following conditions and limitations.
      (A)   There shall be a minimum setback of 150 feet from all lot lines,
outside of the site where the mineral extraction is taking place, within which
there shall be no disturbance of land and no mineral extraction. This setback
may be reduced to 100 feet along lot lines that have frontage on a public
right-of-way.
      (B)   All points of entrance or exit shall be located a minimum of 200
feet from the intersection of two major thoroughfares and/or a minimum of 200
feet from the intersection of a major thoroughfare and a local or collector
street.
      (C)   Site locations should be preferred that offer natural or human-made
barriers that would lessen the effect of intrusion into an area.
      (D)   Truck routes shall be established for movement in and out of the
development in such a way as to minimize the wear on public roads and prevent
hazards and damage to other properties in the community.
      (E)   Any temporary structures must be indicated as such on-site plans
submitted to the PZC for approval. Such structures shall not be continued as
permanent structures. The period of continuance shall be set by the PZC. A
temporary use permit for each structure shall be issued by the Zoning Division.
      (F)   Truck parking areas, maneuvering lanes and accessways to public
roads shall be designed to cause no interference with the safe and convenient
movement of automobile and pedestrian traffic on, and adjacent to, the site,
and shall be built and paved or treated to prevent the creation of dust and
drainage problems.
      (G)   All facilities, structures and activities shall meet all county
and/or state health, building, electrical and other applicable codes. In cases
of overlapping codes and/or jurisdictions, the more restrictive shall apply.
      (H)   The area being mined or excavated shall be enclosed by a fence six
feet or more in height for the entire periphery of the development. Fences
shall be adequate to prevent trespass and shall be placed no closer than 50
feet to the top or bottom of any slope.
      (I)   No sand or gravel shall be removed or stored, or overburden stored,
within 100 feet of any lot line not owned or controlled by the developer or
operator of the business, or his or her agent, nor shall such mineral
extraction business be conducted closer to any lot line or road so that areas
contiguous and adjacent thereto do not have adequate lateral support.
      (J)   Equipment and trucks shall be operated no earlier than 7:00 a.m.
nor later than 8:00 p.m., except on Sundays and holidays, when there shall be
no equipment operations.
      (K)   Asphalt, cement or resins shall not be brought to the site to be
processed, nor shall any stone, gravel or sand or another resource not
extracted from the site be processed at the site.
      (L)   A conditional use permit shall pertain to a specific site and
acreage covered by the performance guarantees. Expansion shall require a new or
renewed conditional use permit, which may be applied for any time prior to the
12-month expiration date of the current certificate.
      (M)   A plan showing provisions for control of erosion and sedimentation
during and after the development, construction, extraction or other use of the
site shall be prepared. Such plan shall show proposals for restoration,
rehabilitation and reclamation, where necessary, and shall be accompanied by
documentation indicating the review and recommendation on such plan by the
County Soil and Water Conservation District, the Division of Lands and Soil of
the Department of Natural Resources or other competent agency or soils
scientist.
      (N)   Effective erosion and sediment controls shall be planned and
applied according to the following principles:
         1.)   The smallest practical area of land should be exposed at any one
time during development, construction, extraction or other use;
         2.)   When land is exposed during development, use, extraction and the
like, the exposure should be kept to the shortest practical period of time;
         3.)   Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect
critical areas exposed during development, use and the like;
         4.)   Sediment basins (debris basins, desilting basins or silt traps)
shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters from
land undergoing development, use and the like;
         5.)   Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the
increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after
development, use and the like;
         6.)   The permanent final vegetation and structures shall be installed
as soon as practical in the development, use, restoration, rehabilitation and
the like;
         7.)   The development, extraction or use plan shall be fitted to the
topography and soils so as to create the least erosion potential;
         8.)   Wherever feasible, natural vegetation should be retained and
protected; and
         9.)   All excavations shall be made to either a water producing depth,
such depth to be not less than five feet below the low water mark, or shall be
graded or backfilled with non-noxious, nonflammable and noncombustible solids,
to secure that:
            a.)   The excavated area shall not collect and permit to remain
therein stagnant water; or
            b.)   The surface of such area which is not permanently submerged
is graded or backfilled as necessary to reduce the peaks and depressions
thereof so as to produce a gently running surface that will minimize erosion
due to rainfall and which will be in substantial conformity to the adjoining
land area. The banks of all excavations shall be sloped to the water line at a
slope which shall not be greater than three feet horizontal to one foot
vertical, and said bank shall be needed.
      (O)   A conditional use permit issued for mineral extraction purposes
shall be issued for a period of no more than 12 consecutive months, subject to
renewal for no more than an additional 12-month period; provided that the Mayor
and/or City Council is satisfied that the holder of the conditional use
certificate is complying with this Code, and with all conditions set forth in
the conditional use permit.
      (P)   Regarding all conditional use permits issued pursuant to §
157.052, if either the Mayor or City Council determines that the holder of the
conditional use permit is violating the Zoning Code or any of the conditions
set forth in the conditional use permit, the Mayor or City Council may
authorize the Law Director to immediately notify the certificate holder of the
violation(s) and demand the permit holder to remedy the violation(s) within ten
calendar days of the date of the notice. The Mayor and City Council shall also
have the authority to request the Law Director immediately institute legal
action for a temporary restraining order and/or preliminary injunction against
the permit holder to cease operations until such time that the permit holder
proves that they are conducting operations in compliance with this Code and any
conditions set forth in the conditional use permit.
      (Q)   In addition to the right to seek injunctive relief, the city may
also assess a fine in the amount of $100 for each day a violation of the
conditional use permit exists and/or continues up to a maximum fine of $10,000.
      (R)   A bond or other financial provision acceptable to City Council
guaranteeing performance according to plan and the removal from the site, after
termination of operations, of any abandoned equipment and accessories, shall be
submitted to Council, in an amount per acre, or fraction thereof, of not less
than $2,500, and in a total amount of not less than $25,000. The amount of the
bond or guarantee shall be sufficient to ensure rehabilitation for the number
of acres planned for operations during at least the ensuing 12 consecutive
months. Such bond shall be of the type recognized in the state.
      (S)   The conditions and limitations provided in this division (9), as
well as others deemed necessary by the PZC, shall be specified as conditions
for the issuance of a conditional use permit and shall be so specified on the
certificate.
   (10)   Nursing homes and assisted living facilities. Nursing homes and
assisted living facilities may be permitted, provided that:
      (A)   The minimum lot area shall be two acres;
      (B)   All structures and activities shall be set back a minimum of 50
feet from all lot lines;
      (C)   The density shall not exceed 18 patient rooms per acre; and
      (D)   All site entrance and exit drives shall be located a minimum of 200
feet from the intersection of two main roads and a minimum of 100 feet from
main road and local road intersections.
   (11)   Self-storage facilities. In addition to the applicable provisions of
this chapter, self-service storage facilities shall comply with the following:
      (A)   Buildings shall not exceed one story, with a maximum overall height
of 22 feet;
      (B)   No door shall exceed 15 feet in either height or width;
      (C)   Access to the facility shall be limited to one entrance and one
exit per abutting street;
      (D)   Loading and unloading of storage units shall be oriented towards
the side and rear lot lines; and
      (E)   Outdoor storage of cars, trucks, RVs, campers, trailers, boats and
motorcycles may be permitted as an accessory use within a self-storage
facility, subject to site plan review, per the following conditions.
         1.)   All vehicles shall be registered with current licensing and
operable. The owner/operator of the facility shall be responsible to remove any
vehicle that is unlicensed or inoperable within ten business days’ notification
of the city. Commercial trucks such as semitractor/trailers or trash haulers
shall bot be permitted for outdoor storage.
         2.)   Storage areas shall only be located in the side or rear yard in
the B-1 and B-5 Districts, where the principal use is conditionally permitted,
and only in the side or rear yards in the I-2 District, where the principal use
is permitted. All setbacks shall be equal to the required setback of the
principal use.
         3.)   Screening shall consist of a wall or fence, six feet in height
and dense evergreen vegetation to obscure the storage area when visible from
the public right-of-way. Screening of storage areas from adjacent properties to
the side and rear shall meet the requirements of §
157.136(4). Fence height of six feet shall not extend past the front facade of
the principal building.
         4.)   Parking/storage areas shall be maintained in an orderly fashion
via the delineation of parking spaces at all times. Storage areas shall not
interfere with the flow of vehicular traffic through the site, especially
emergency response vehicles.
         5.)   Any tarps that are provided to cover stored items shall be
secured throughout the duration of the time they are stored. All tarps shall be
tan/brown or earthtone.
         6.)   The surface of all storage areas shall be hard surface pavement
as approved by the RZC. The use of permeable pavement or materials is
encouraged. A typical section of proposed pavement/materials shall be submitted
to RZC for their review and approval.
         7.)   Storm water management/water quality requirements shall be met
per current regulations.
   (12)   Sexually oriented business.
      (A)   A sexually oriented business may only be located in the B-
4 District.
      (B)   A sexually oriented business may be located only in accordance with
the following restrictions:
         1.)   No such business shall be located on any parcel within 500 feet
of any residential zoning district;
         2.)   No such business shall be located on any parcel within 1,000
feet of any public library, public or private educational facility, public
park, or religious place of worship; or
         3.)   No such business shall be located on any parcel within 1,000
feet of another sexually oriented business.
      (C)   For purposes of division (12)(B) of this section, the measurement
of distance shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure
used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted,
to the nearest property line of the premises of a religious place of worship or
public or private educational facility, or to the nearest boundary of an
affected public park, residential zoning district or residential lot.
      (D)   For purposes of division (12)(B) of this section, the distance
between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest
exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
      (E)   No person shall establish, operate or cause the establishment or
operation of any sexually oriented business in violation of the provisions of
this section. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit or limit
the display, sale or rental of descriptive, printed, film or video material, or
any live performance, which, taken as a whole, contains serious literary,
artistic, political, medical, educational or scientific value.
   (13)   Wireless telecommunications towers.
      (A)   General. All new construction, or the placement of equipment
related to wireless telecommunications shall conform to the regulations of the
district in which it is located and to the additional development standards and
supplementary regulations contained herein.
      (B)   Construction standards. Proposed new telecommunications towers
shall comply with the following development standards. Wireless
telecommunications towers/facilities are permitted as a sole use on a lot or
when combined with another use, subject to all existing regulations in each
district and the following.
         1.)   The tower must be set back from any property line or any
existing structure on lots adjacent to the lot on which the tower is to be
located by a distance equal to the vertical height of the tower.
         2.)   The tower must not exceed a height of 150 feet (including
antenna) if designed for use by a single user; 175 feet if designed for use by
two co-users; and 200 feet if designed for use by three co-users. Due to the
proximity of the Akron-Canton Airport, all wireless telecommunications towers
must also receive Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) clearance and
concurrence of the FAA decision by the Airport Director before construction may
proceed.
         3.)   The maximum size of the equipment shelter shall be 300 square
feet, or, if there is more than one shelter, a total of 750 square feet.
         4.)   When a wireless telecommunications tower/facility is to be
located on a property with an existing use:
            a.)   The existing use need not be affiliated with the wireless
telecommunications provider;
            b.)   The wireless telecommunications facility shall be fully
automated and unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for
periodic and necessary maintenance (except during construction or an
emergency);
            c.)   The service access to the equipment shelter shall, whenever
feasible, be provided along the circulation driveways of the existing use; and
            d.)   Security fencing, eight feet in height, shall surround the
tower, the equipment shelter and any guy wires, either completely or
individually, as determined by the PZC.
         5.)   A vegetative screen shall be planted that consists of one row of
a mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees or privet hedge planted five feet on
center maximum. A landscaping plan is required to be submitted that indicates
how the wireless telecommunications facility will be screened from adjoining
properties.
         6.)   Existing vegetation (trees and shrubs) shall be preserved to the
maximum extent possible.
         7.)   Any applicant requesting permission to install a new tower shall
provide evidence of written contact with all wireless service providers who
supply service within a mile of the proposed facility. The applicant shall
inquire about potential co-location opportunities at all technically feasible
locations. The contacted providers shall be requested to respond in writing to
the inquiry within 60 days. The applicant shall present proof of mailing, as
well as responses to the PZC as a means of demonstrating the need for a new
tower. If a contacted wireless service provider fails to respond to a written
request for co-location from the applicant within 60 days, the PZC may accept
the nonresponse as proof that co-location on an existing tower is not feasible.
         8.)   No advertising is permitted anywhere on the facility, with the
exception of identification signage.
         9.)   No trespassing signs shall be posted around the facility, with a
telephone number of who to contact in the event of an emergency.
         10.)   Applicants will provide evidence of legal access to the tower
site and maintain this access regardless of other developments that may take
place on the site.
         11.)   No tower shall be artificially lighted, except to assure safety
or as required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). Security lighting
around the equipment shelter is prohibited, unless specifically requested by
the applicant and a need is proved to the PZC.
         12.)   The tower shall be painted a neutral tone, i.e., desert sand/
khaki, so as to minimize its visibility, unless otherwise required by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or the FAA.
         13.)   Any application to locate an antenna on a building or structure
that is listed in the city’s inventory of historic structures shall be subject
to review by the Historic Preservation Commission.
         14.)   The electromagnetic field levels of the tower shall conform to
the standards developed by the National Council on Radiation Protection and
Measurement (NCRP Report No. 86) or by the American National Standards
Institute and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (ANSI/IEEE
C95.1-1992).
      (C)   Construction in residential districts. The construction of wireless
telecommunications towers/facilities in residential zoning districts shall
conform to all applicable existing zoning regulations, all development
standards contained herein and the following supplementary regulations.
         1.)   In applying for site plan review to construct a wireless
telecommunications tower/facility in any residential district, the applicant
must present substantial evidence as to why it is not technically feasible to
locate in a more appropriate nonresidential zone. Once those efforts to locate
in a nonresidential zone have been exhausted, a wireless telecommunications
facility may be located in a residential district.
         2.)   When the telecommunications facility is located on property with
another principal use, the applicant shall present documentation that the owner
of the property has granted an easement or entered into a lease for the
proposed facility and that vehicular access is provided to the facility.
      (D)   Placement of antennas and equipment. The placing of wireless
telecommunications antennas on any legal tower, building or structure within
the city is determined to be a conditionally permitted use in all zoning
districts. The placement of equipment shall conform to the regulations of the
zone in which it is located, as well as the following.
         1.)   Business and industrial zoning districts. No wireless
telecommunications antenna shall be higher than 20 feet or 20% of the building
height, whichever is greater, above the existing tower, building or structure
in a nonresidential zoning district.
         2.)   Residential zoning districts. No wireless telecommunications
antenna shall be higher than 20 feet above the existing tower, building or
structure in a residential zoning district.
         3.)   Equipment shelters. If the applicant proposes to locate the
telecommunications equipment in a separate shelter (not located on or attached
to the building), the shelter shall comply with all applicable development
standards contained herein. Also, vehicular access to the shelter shall not
interfere with the parking or vehicular circulation on the site for the
principal use.
      (E)   Review and approval of plans. No person or entity shall construct a
wireless telecommunications tower and facility, or place a wireless
telecommunications antenna, on any legal tower, building or structure, without
a site plan review (a public hearing and approval by the PZC), as specified
below.
         1.)   The site plan for the construction of a wireless
telecommunications tower and related facility shall be reviewed and approved
according to the standards and procedures set forth in §§
157.051 and
157.052.
         2.)   The placing of a wireless telecommunications antenna on any
legal tower, building or structure (which may or may not involve co-location
with another wireless service provider) shall be reviewed and approved
according to the standards and procedures set forth in this section of this
Code, and the site plan shall consist of a drawing or depiction which
accurately conveys the following information:
            a.)   A vicinity map indicating the location of the site and the
existing structure;
            b.)   The location of the antenna on the structure;
            c.)   The length of any projection above the existing structure (if
applicable); and
            d.)   The location of the equipment shelter. If the equipment
shelter is separate from the structure, its size, fencing, landscaping,
setbacks and evidence of legal access to the site shall be indicated.
         3.)   All other applicable site plan review procedures, as set forth
in §
157.051 shall also be adhered to.
   (14)   Adult family homes, transitional. An adult family home, transitional
whether new construction or renovation of existing building to accommodate such
use shall meet and adhere to the following additional standards and
supplementary regulations:
      (A)   Twenty-four hour supervision shall be provided by qualified staff
at all transitional family homes;
      (B)   A plan for security of the premises shall be prepared. The PZC may
require security personnel on the premises at all times;
      (C)   No kitchen facilities shall be located in any bedroom;
      (D)   Hard surface parking area shall be provided in compliance with the
Code to accommodate staff/security and occupants; and
      (E)   Certification or licensing (when applicable) by the sponsor state
or federal government agency shall be required within 90 days of issuance of a
zoning permit/certificate of use by the city. Continuing certification/
licensing shall be submitted to the city (Planning Department) in January of
each year.
   (15)   Children group homes. A children’s group home, whether new
construction or renovation of existing building to accommodate such use, shall
meet and adhere to the following additional standards and supplementary
regulations.
      (A)   Twenty-four hour supervision shall be provided by qualified staff
(in accordance with the licensing and requirements issued by the Ohio
Department of Jobs and Family Services) at all children group homes.
      (B)   Planning and Zoning Commission may grant conditional approval
pending receipt of certification or licensing by the Ohio Department of Jobs
and Family Services (ODJFS). Final approval shall not be granted or project
cleared by the Planning Department until receipt of proof of such certification
or licensing. Continuing certification/licensing shall be submitted to the City
(Planning Department) in January of each year.
      (C)   The home must comply with the applicable building and fire codes
for the city, county and state.
      (D)   Hard surface parking area shall be provided in compliance with the
code to accommodate staff/security and occupants.
      (E)   Facilities shall be located on a parcel of land at least two acres
in size.
(Prior Code, § 1226.02) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009; Ord. 2012-3, passed
5-8-2012; Ord. 2017-22, passed 12-12-2017; Ord. 2018-02, passed 3-13-2018; Ord.
2022-02, passed 3-8-2022; Ord. 2022-15, passed 10-11-2022; Ord. 2025-06, passed
5-27-2025)
§ 157.087 ACCESSORY USES.
   (1)   Purpose. This section authorizes the establishment of accessory uses
that are incidental and customarily subordinate to principal uses.
   (2)   General accessory use and structure standards. Accessory uses or
structures shall be permitted provided:
      (A)   The building or use is incidental to and customarily found in
connection with a principal building or use permitted in the district in which
it is located;
      (B)   It is subordinate to and serves the principal building or use;
      (C)   It is subordinate in size, area, extent and purpose to the
principal building or use;
      (D)   It is located on the same lot as the principal use for which it
serves;
      (E)   An owner obtains the required zoning permit, unless exempted in
Table
157.087-1 ;
      (F)   The maximum height of an accessory detached garage shall be 18 feet
in overall height;
      (G)   The maximum height of any other accessory use or building shall be
15 feet in overall height;
      (H)   Accessory uses and structures shall be prohibited in any common
open space area that is preserved by covenant in a subdivision or PD, unless
otherwise authorized by the PZC;
      (I)   Unless otherwise specified in this Code, accessory buildings and
uses shall be located a minimum of five feet from all side and rear lot lines;
and
      (J)   Comply with the maximum lot coverage ratios established in §§
157.100 through
157.104.
   (3)   Table of allowed accessory uses.
      (A)   Generally.
Table
157.087-1  lists the accessory building and uses allowed within all zoning
districts.
      (B)   Explanation of table abbreviations.
         1.)   Permitted uses (P). A “P” in a cell indicates that an accessory
building or use is permitted by right in the respective zoning district.
Permitted accessory uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of
this Code, including the use specific standards set forth in this chapter.
         2.)   Conditional uses (C). A “C” in a cell indicates that, in the
respective zoning district, an accessory building or use is permitted if
reviewed and approved as a conditional use pursuant to §
157.052. Conditional uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of
this Code, including the use-specific standards set forth in this chapter.
         3.)   Prohibited uses (shaded cells). A shaded cell indicates that the
listed accessory building or use is prohibited in the respective zoning
district.
         4.)   Maximum lot coverage provision. The column of
Table
157.087-1  titled “maximum lot coverage” notes if the size of the accessory
building or use shall be used in the calculation of maximum lot coverage of
accessory buildings or uses as defined in §
157.086(3).
         5.)   Permit required. The “permit required” column identifies if a
zoning permit and/or a certificate of use and compliance is required for the
applicable accessory building or use.
         6.)   Yards permitted. The “yards permitted” column identifies what
yards the applicable accessory building or use is permitted in unless otherwise
exempted.
         7.)   Additional regulations. Regardless of whether an accessory
building or use is permitted by right or permitted as a conditional use, there
may be additional regulations that are applicable to the use. The existence of
these use specific standards is noted through a cross-reference in the last
column of
Table
157.087-1 . These standards apply in all districts unless otherwise specified.
Table 157.087-1 Allowed Accessory Uses
Uses                                           Permit Required    Yards
P =         R-R       B-2             Maximum                     Permitted Additional
Permitted   and R- B- and B- B- I- PD Lot      Zoning Certificate F = Front Regulations
C =         R-1 2  1  B-3 4  5  1     Coverage Permit of Use and  S = Side  See
Conditional                                           Compliance  R = Rear  Subsection:
Table 157.087-1 Allowed Accessory Uses
Uses                                             Permit Required    Yards
P =         R-R       B-2             Maximum                       Permitted   Additional
Permitted   and R- B- and B- B- I- PD Lot        Zoning Certificate F = Front   Regulations
C =         R-1 2  1  B-3 4  5  1     Coverage   Permit of Use and  S = Side    See
Conditional                                             Compliance  R = Rear    Subsection:

Accessory                                                                       157.087(5)
dwelling           C  C            P  Yes        Yes    Yes         R           (A)
units
Accessory
garages or  P   P  P  P   P  P  P  P  Yes        Yes    No          R
buildings
Dining                                                              In          157.087(5)
areas or           P  P   P  P  P  P  No         No     Yes         principal   (B)
restaurants                                                         building
                                                                    See         157.087(5)
Fences      P   P  P  P   P  P  P  P  No         No     Yes         additional  (C)
                                                                    regulations
Home                                                                In          157.087(5)
occupations P   P  P  P   P  P  P  P  No         No     Yes         principal   (D)
                                                                    building
Outdoor
storage at                                                                      157.086(11)
self-              C         C  P     No         No     Yes         S or R      (E)
storage
facilities
Private                                                                         157.087(5)
stables or  P                   P  P  Yes        Yes    Yes         R           (E)
kennels
Retail                                                              In
commercial         P  P      P  P  P  No         No     Yes         principal
uses                                                                building
Roadside    P                   P     Yes        Yes    Yes         F, S, or R  157.087(5)
stand                                                                           (F)
Satellite   P   P  P  P   P  P  P  P  No         See additional     R           157.087(5)
dishes                                           regulations                    (G)
Stand alone
automated
teller             P      P  P  P  P  Yes        Yes    Yes         F, S, or R
machines
(ATMs)
Swimming                                                                        157.087(5)
pools       P   P  P      P  P     P  Yes        Yes    No          R           (H)
(outdoor)
Swing or    P   P  P  P   P  C  C  P  No         No     No          R
gym sets
Tennis
courts or   P   P                  P  Yes        Yes    No          R
other ball
courts
Unenclosed  P   P  P  P   P  P  P  P  No         No     No          R
patios
Wood or
solid       P   P  P  P   P  P  P  P  Yes        Yes    No          R           157.087(5)
surface                                                                         (I)
decks
Other                                 As
accessory   C   C  C  C   C  C  C  C  determined
uses                                  by PZC
 
   (4)   Exceptions to the location of accessory buildings and uses.
      (A)   Exemptions. For accessory buildings and uses that may only be
permitted in the rear yard pursuant to
Table
157.087-1 , the following exemptions shall apply.
         1.)   On a corner lot, accessory buildings and uses may be located in
the side yard as illustrated in §
157.100.
         2.)   On a double frontage lot, accessory buildings may be located in
the front yard located to the rear of the principal structure as illustrated in
§
157.100.
      (B)   Attached versus detached accessory buildings.
         1.)   Typical accessory uses, such as a private garage, that are an
integral part of a principal building shall be considered to be part of the
principal use and shall be subject to the site development standards of the
applicable zoning district.
         2.)   Accessory buildings located within five feet of a principal
structure and connected by a permanently enclosed porch, walkway, breezeway or
other similar structure shall be subject to the site development standards of
the applicable zoning district.
         3.)   Accessory buildings located more than five feet from a principal
structure shall be considered a detached accessory building and shall be
subject to the provisions of this section, even if the accessory building is
connected by a permanently enclosed breezeway, walkway or other similar
structure.
   (5)   Use specific standards.
      (A)   Accessory dwelling units.
         1.)   An accessory dwelling unit shall only be permitted when attached
to the principal or another accessory structure and where approved by the PZC.
         2.)   Mobile homes, recreational vehicles and travel trailers shall
not be used as accessory dwelling units.
         3.)   The gross floor area associated with an accessory dwelling unit
shall be at least 400 square feet, but shall not exceed 50% of the gross floor
area of the principal dwelling unit or 800 square feet, whichever is less.
         4.)   There shall be no more than one accessory dwelling unit per
parcel.
         5.)   At least one off-street parking space shall be provided for an
accessory dwelling unit in addition to the required off-street parking serving
the principal use, but in no instance shall more than two off-street parking
spaces be provided with an accessory dwelling unit.
         6.)   The exterior materials of the accessory dwelling unit shall
consist of the same materials as the principal structure.
         7.)   Accessory dwelling units shall not be sold apart from the
principal dwelling unit. Accessory dwelling units shall not be leased or
rented.
      (B)   Dining areas or restaurants.
         1.)   Accessory dining areas or restaurants shall be restricted to 10%
of the gross floor area of the principal building.
         2.)   Accessory dining areas that are outdoors shall be subject to the
applicable standards of §
157.141.
      (C)   Fences.
         1.)   In all districts, fences and walls shall comply with the
following.
            a.)   In a front yard, a fence or wall shall not exceed 36 inches
in height, except that within 20 feet of a public right-of-way, a fence shall
not exceed 24 inches in height.
            b.)   In a side or rear yard in a residential district, a fence or
wall shall not exceed six feet in height.
            c.)   In a side or rear yard in the B-1, B-2 or B-3 Districts, a
fence or wall shall not exceed eight feet in height.
            d.)   In a side or rear yard in the B-4, B-5 or I-1 Districts, a
fence or wall shall not exceed ten feet in height.
            e.)   Decorative fencing used along the boundary of a major
subdivision or a PD development shall require review and approval from the DRB
and PZC.
            f.)   The use of barbed wire, razor wire, electric fence or similar
fencing shall require approval by the DRB and PZC following site plan review
procedures.
            g.)   Barbed wire or razor wire shall not extend more than two feet
above the top of the fence to which it is connected.
            h.)   The installation of any fence shall adhere to a good neighbor
policy where the finished side of the fence is visible to adjacent property
owners and/or the public and support posts are placed on the inside of the
fence.
         2.)   Any fence or wall proposed for a use that requires site plan
review and which is not in a front or required rear or side yard pursuant to
division (5)(C)1.) of this section shall be reviewed and approved as part of a
site plan pursuant to §
157.051. However, when a fence or wall is proposed at a separate time from any
other development for new construction, additions or site renovation, fences or
walls may be approved administratively by the Planning Department (or Zoning
Division staff if designated by the Director of Planning) when the Planning
Department determines that the proposal:
            a.)   Complies with division (5)(C)1.) of this section;
            b.)   Is consistent with any previously approved plan;
            c.)   Is compatible with the current site development if there is
no approved plan; and
            d.)   Will have a minimum adverse impact to the surrounding areas.
         3.)   If, due to the nature of the proposed fence, the Planning
Department through the Zoning Division does not make such a determination, the
request shall be referred to the BZA and considered by the Board according to
the appeals procedures set forth in §
157.055.
         4.)   The construction and use of electric fences shall be permitted
on a limited basis, subject to the following standards and conditions.
            a.)   Electrification.
               i)   The energizer for electric fences shall be a commercial
storage battery not to exceed 12 volts DC that is charged primarily by a solar
panel. A commercial trickle charger may/can supplement the solar panel.
               ii)   The electric charge produced by the fence upon contact
shall not exceed energizer characteristics set forth in paragraph 22.108 and
depicted in Figure 102 of International Electro-Technical Commission (IEC)
Standard No. 60335-2-76.
            b.)   Perimeter fence or wall. No electric fence shall be installed
or used, unless it is completely surrounded by a fence or wall that is not less
than six feet in height.
            c.)   Location. Electric fences shall only be permitted on
nonresidential parcels of land after review and approval by the DRB and PZC.
            d.)   Height. Electric fences shall be no more than to two feet
higher than the perimeter fence/wall.
            e.)   Warning signs. Electric fences shall be clearly identified
with warning signs that read: “Warning- Electric Fence” at intervals of not
less than 60 feet.
            f.)   Permitting. Electric fences shall be governed and regulated
per the Land Development Code. All fence installations require a permit.
            g.)   Accessibility. A Knox Box shall be required and installed per
the standards and directions of the Fire Department.
      (D)   Home occupations - accessory to a dwelling in residential
districts.
         1.)   A home occupation may be conducted in a dwelling unit; provided
that the following standards are maintained.
         2.)   The occupation shall be conducted only by members of the family
residing in the dwelling and no one from outside the family shall be employed
within the dwelling unit.
         3.)   The occupation shall be conducted wholly within a principal
building and any space used for sales, service or production shall occupy no
more than 35% of the total floor area of the dwelling.
         4.)   Homes that serve as a gathering point for employees engaged in
the business that takes place off the premises shall be prohibited. This may
include, but it is not limited to, landscape business offices, construction
offices, or a trucking business where drivers or employees gather at the home
before being dispatched from the home for the purposes of the home occupation.
         5.)   The occupation shall not generate a significantly greater volume
of traffic than would normally be expected in a residential area and all
parking shall be accommodated in the resident’s driveway.
         6.)   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the
dwelling or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation.
         7.)   No home occupation, or any aspect thereof, including the storage
of materials and supplies, shall be conducted in any accessory building or in
an open yard.
      (E)   Private stables or kennels.
         1.)   Private stables for the keeping of one or more horses or ponies
shall be permitted as an accessory use on a lot having a minimum of five acres
and shall be permitted only for the use of the property owner, or a lessee
thereof, and his or her family and/or friends invited to use such animals
without the payment of any fee.
         2.)   Private stables and associated structures, buildings and
structures accessory to a permitted agricultural use, and any fenced enclosure
in which farm animals, fowl, fur-bearing animals, horses or ponies are kept,
shall be set back a minimum of five feet from every lot line. A perimeter fence
shall be permitted along a lot line; provided that such fence does not
constitute a corral or fenced area used for the purpose of containing such
animals.
      (F)   Roadside stand.
         1.)   Roadside stands shall only be permitted for the sale of products
grown on the premises.
         2.)   Roadside stands shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from the
road right-of-way and located in front yard or side yard in relation to primary
structures.
         3.)   Roadside stands shall not exceed 100 square feet in floor area.
      (G)   Satellite dishes. Satellite dishes shall be permitted without a
zoning permit or certificate of use and compliance; provided that such items
are not located in the front yard and are smaller than 18 inches in diameter.
Where such use exceeds 18 inches in diameter, the following shall apply:
         1.)   A zoning permit and a certificate of use and compliance is
required to be issued by the Zoning Division;
         2.)   The satellite dish shall only be located in the rear or side
yard; and
         3.)   The satellite dish shall not exceed ten feet in diameter.
      (H)   Swimming pools.
         1.)   At-grade or below-grade swimming pools. Any swimming pool below-
grade or at-grade, when containing water to a depth of one and one-half feet or
more, shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall with a minimum height
of four feet in order to minimize the attraction of the site to young children.
         2.)   Above-grade swimming pools. Above grade pools, when raised a
minimum of four feet above grade, shall not require fencing. However, access
shall be restricted by a gate to minimize the attraction of the site to young
children.
         3.)   Other requirements.
            a.)   Swimming pools and associated structures (such as, pool deck
and diving board) shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the side and rear
lot line.
            b.)   The construction and operation of a swimming pool shall meet
all state and county regulations.
      (I)   Wood or solid surface decks and porches. Decks and porches shall
meet all applicable safety and building codes.
(Prior Code, § 1226.03) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009; Ord. 2014-15, passed
12-9-2014; Ord. 2017-22, passed 12-12-2017)
§ 157.088 TEMPORARY USES.
   (1)   Purpose. This section allows for the establishment of certain
temporary uses of limited duration and special events; provided that such uses
do not negatively affect adjacent properties; and provided that such uses or
events are discontinued upon the expiration of a set time period. Temporary
uses and special events shall not involve the construction or alteration of any
permanent building or structure.
   (2)   General temporary use standards. Temporary uses, structures or events
shall:
      (A)   Obtain a temporary use permit pursuant to §
157.056(8);
      (B)   Not be detrimental to property or improvements in the surrounding
area or to the public health, safety or general welfare;
      (C)   Be compatible with the principal uses taking place on the site;
      (D)   Not have substantial adverse effects or noise impacts on nearby
residential neighborhoods;
      (E)   Not include permanent alterations to the site;
      (F)   Not maintain temporary signs associated with the use or structure
after the activity ends;
      (G)   Comply with the sign and parking regulations of this Code;
      (H)   Not violate the applicable conditions of approval that apply to a
site or use on the site;
      (I)   Not interfere with the normal operations of any permanent use
located on the property; and
      (J)   Contain sufficient land area to allow the temporary use, structure
or special event to occur, as well as adequate land to accommodate the parking
and traffic movement associated with the temporary use, without disturbing
environmentally sensitive lands.
   (3)   Table of allowed temporary uses.
Table 157.088-1 lists the temporary uses allowed within all zoning districts.
Table 157.088-1: Temporary Uses and Structures
Temporary Use or     Allowable Duration (per Site) Permit Required Districts
Structure per Parcel
Table 157.088-1: Temporary Uses and Structures
Temporary Use Allowable
or            Duration (per Permit Required                               Districts
Structure per Site)
Parcel
Construction                                                              Permitted
dumpster,     Until                                                       in all
trailers or   completion of Temporary use permit                          zoning
equipment     construction2                                               districts
storage1
Garage/yard   3 days per                                                  Permitted
sales/        event; 6                                                    in all
sidewalk      total days    No permit required                            zoning
sales         per calendar                                                districts
              year
Real estate                                                               Permitted
sales office/ 2 years3      Temporary use permit                          in all
model sales                                                               zoning
home                                                                      districts
                                                                          Permitted
Temporary     14 days per   Temporary use permit                          in all
events        calendar year                                               zoning
                                                                          districts
Temporary     Up to 3 times
sales4 and    per year with                                               Permitted
tents for the a maximum of  Temporary use permit and transient vendor’s in all
purpose of    30 days of    license                                       zoning
temporary     sales per                                                   districts
sales         year
                                                                          Permitted
Temporary     Once a year                                                 in all
storage in a  for a total   Temporary use permit                          zoning
portable      of 60 days                                                  districts
container     per year                                                    on a
                                                                          driveway
Temporary
structure (as                                                             Permitted
part of an                                                                in all
educational   2 years3      Temporary use permit                          zoning
facility or                                                               districts
institutional
use)
1   Construction dumpsters, trailers and equipment storage shall not be located on
a public street
2   Construction dumpsters, trailers and equipment storage used during construction
shall be removed prior to the issuance of the certificates of use and compliance
3   Annual extensions may be granted by the Planning Director if conditions warrant
4   Temporary sales must take place on the lot of existing or vacated building and
the temporary use permit application must include a written statement from the
property owner authorizing such sales; the temporary use permit shall be
prominently displayed at the site
 
(Prior Code, § 1226.04) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.089 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (1)   Purpose. In the provisions established by this Code, there exist uses
of land, structures, lots of record, towers and signs that were lawfully
established before this Code was adopted or amended, that now do not conform to
its terms and requirements. The purpose and intent of this section is to
regulate the continued existence of those uses, structures and lots of record
that do not conform to the provisions of this Code, or any amendments thereto.
   (2)   General provisions.
      (A)   Authority to continue. The lawful use of any dwelling or structure
and of any land or premises existing and lawful at the time of the enactment of
this Code, or any amendment thereto, may continue, although such use does not
conform to the provisions of this Code or amendment thereto. Nevertheless,
while it is the intent of this Code that such nonconformities be allowed to
continue until removed, they should not be encouraged to survive. Therefore, no
nonconformity may be moved, extended, altered, expanded or used as grounds for
any other use or structure prohibited elsewhere in the district without the
approval of the BZA, except as otherwise specifically provided for in this
Code.
      (B)   Conditional uses. Any use which is permitted as a conditional use
in a district under the terms of this Code shall not be deemed a nonconforming
use in such district, but shall without further action be considered a
conforming use; provided the use meets all approval criteria and conditions
established by the PZC for the conditional use.
      (C)   Accessory uses. A nonconforming use that is accessory to a
principal use shall not make the principal use nonconforming.
      (D)   Determination of nonconformity status. The burden of establishing
that a nonconformity lawfully exists shall be on the owner of the land on which
the purported nonconformity is located.
      (E)   Exception due to variance. The requirements of this section shall
not apply to a development standard or feature that is the subject of an
approved variance. Where a variance has been granted for a development standard
or feature that does not otherwise conform to the requirements of this Code,
that development standard or feature shall be deemed conforming.
      (F)   Minor repairs and normal maintenance. Minor repairs and normal
maintenance that are required to keep nonconforming uses, structures and lots
of record in a safe condition are permitted; provided the minor repair or
maintenance does not extend, expand or enlarge the nonconforming use, structure
or lot of record. For the purposes of this section, MINOR REPAIR or NORMAL
MAINTENANCE shall mean the following.
         1.)   Maintenance of safe condition. Repairs necessary to maintain a
nonconforming use, structure and lot of record in a safe condition.
         2.)   Correction of damage or deterioration. Repairs necessary to
correct any damage or deterioration to the structural soundness or interior
appearance of a structure without altering the structure.
         3.)   Maintenance of land for safety. Maintenance of land areas to
protect against health hazards and to promote the safety of surrounding uses.
      (G)   Change of tenancy or ownership. Changes of tenancy or ownership of
an existing nonconformity are permitted but shall continue to be subject to the
requirements of this section.
   (3)   Substitution of nonconforming uses. If no structural alterations are
made, a nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another nonconforming
use of the same or a more restricted classification, as determined by the BZA.
Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a more restricted use or to a
conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less restricted
use.
   (4)   Continuation of nonconforming uses. Where, at the time of adoption of
this Code, lawful uses of land exist which would not be permitted by the
regulations imposed by this Code, the uses may be continued so long as they
remain otherwise lawful, provided the following.
      (A)   Any structure existing on or before the effective date of this Code
which does not conform to the provisions of this Code for the district in which
it is located, and which has been or may hereafter be damaged by fire or other
causes to the extent of less than 60% of its replacement value at the time of
destruction or damage, may be restored or reconstructed; provided that such
structure, when completed, will not differ in location or size from the
previously existing structure. However, when the damage or destruction to said
structure is to the extent of 60% or more of its replacement value at the time
of destruction or damage, it shall not be restored except in conformity with
the regulations of the district in which the structure is situated.
      (B)   In the event that a nonconforming use of any dwelling, building or
structure, or of any land or premises, is voluntarily discontinued for a period
of six months or more, any future use of said dwelling, building, structure,
land or premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Code.
      (C)   Any partially completed building, the actual construction of which
has commenced on or before the effective date of this Code, which building or
its intended use, when completed, would not conform to the provisions of this
Code for the district in which it is located, may be completed and used as a
nonconforming use only for the purpose for which it was originally designed;
provided that the building is completed and/or put to use within two years
after the adoption of this Code.
      (D)   Any dwelling existing in a residential district at the time such
district becomes a business or industrial district, shall have the same right
that it had before the zone change without having to apply to the BZA, until it
ceases to be used as a dwelling.
   (5)   Continuation of nonconforming sexually oriented business uses. Any
sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this
Code that is in violation of this Code shall be deemed a nonconforming use. A
sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not
rendered a nonconforming use by the subsequent location of a church, public or
private elementary or secondary school, public park, or library within 1,000
feet, or a residential district within 500 feet, of the sexually oriented
business. When a nonconforming sexually oriented business use of a structure or
premises is voluntarily discontinued or abandoned for more than six months, the
structure, building or premises shall not thereafter be used, except in
conformity with the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
   (6)   Nonconformity due to site conditions. Where a dwelling is
nonconforming only because the front yard setback does not meet the
requirements of this Code, the Zoning Division shall issue a zoning permit for
the extension, enlargement or alteration of said dwelling without requiring an
appeal to the BZA; provided that no other requirement of this Code is violated
and that the extent of the nonconformity is not increased.
   (7)   Variance of the provisions of this chapter.
      (A)   Any dwelling, building or other structure, or any land or premises,
the use of which does not conform to the provisions of this Code or any
amendment thereto, for the district in which it is located, may not be
extended, enlarged or altered for the purpose of any nonconforming use as
carried on in such structure or on such land.
      (B)   The property owner or applicant may apply for a variance with the
BZA to allow for the extension, enlargement or alteration of a nonconforming
use if, in the BZA’s opinion, such variance will not be contrary to the public
interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this
Code will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of this Code
shall be observed and substantial justice done.
   (8)   Modifications for lots of record. Any lot of record or lot for which a
land contract has been issued, or any parcel within an unrecorded allotment of
which at least one-half of the lots are of record or have been sold on land
contract before the effective date of this Code, shall be subject to all of the
requirements of this Code, except that:
      (A)   For any lot having a width less than the minimum dimension
specified in §§
157.100 through
157.104 , each side yard may be 10% of the width of the lot at the building
line, but no less than ten feet wide; and
      (B)   For any lot having an area less than the minimum dimension
specified in §§
157.100 through
157.104 , the rear yard shall be at least 20% of the average depth of the lot,
but no less than 40 feet deep.
(Prior Code, § 1226.05) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
§ 157.100 MEASUREMENTS, COMPUTATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   (1)   Distance measurements. Unless otherwise expressly stated, distances
specified in this Code are to be measured as the length of an imaginary
straight line joining those points.
   (2)   Lot area measurements.
      (A)   Lot area measurements. The area of a lot includes the total area
within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any street right-of-way or other legal
public dedication. For nonconforming lots, see §
157.089.
      (B)   Reductions in lot area prohibited. No lot shall be reduced in area
so that lot area per dwelling unit, lot width, yards, building area or other
requirements of this Code are not maintained.
   (3)   Lot width measurements. Lot width is the horizontal distance between
the side lot lines measured at the required front setback or at the building
line for any irregularly shaped lot.
   (4)   Setbacks and yards.
      (A)   Measurements. Setbacks refer to the unobstructed, unoccupied open
area between the foundation of the structure to the nearest lot line on which
the structure is located. Any projection of the structure that extends more
than two feet from the foundation shall meet the minimum setback requirements.
      (B)   Yards required for buildings. A yard or other open space required
about a building shall not be included as part of a yard or other open space
for another building.
      (C)   Front yard setback.
         1.)   Measurement. The front yard setback shall extend the full width
of the lot and shall be measured from the street right-of-way line to the
structure.
         2.)   Double frontage lot. A double frontage lot shall provide a front
yard setback on both streets. The remaining yards shall meet the side yard
setback requirements.
         3.)   Corner lot. A corner lot shall provide a front yard setback on
all streets. The remaining yards shall meet the side yard setback requirements.
         4.)   Cul-de-sac or curved street lot. For a cul-de-sac lot or a lot
abutting a curved street, the front yard setback shall follow the curve of the
front property line.
      (D)   Architectural projections. Open structures, such as porches,
canopies, balconies, platforms, carports, covered patios and similar
architectural projections, shall be considered parts of the building to which
such open structures are attached and shall not project into the required
minimum front, side or rear yards.
   (5)   Height measurements and requirements.
      (A)   Height measurement.
         1.)   Building height shall be measured at the finished grade at front
of building for any elevation fronting on a public street, including attics,
half-stories, mezzanines and at-grade structured parking, but excluding
features that are completely below grade, such as basements, cellars, crawl
spaces, subbasements and underground parking structures.
         2.)   Where specified in feet, building height shall be measured as
follows:
            a.)   To the tallest point of the roof for flat roofs;
            b.)   To the deck line of mansard roofs; and
            c.)   To one-half the distance between the eaves and ridge for
gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
      (B)   Height limit exceptions. Height limits shall not apply to belfries,
chimneys, church roof structures not intended for human occupancy, church
spires, clock towers, cupolas, domes, flagpoles, monuments, water towers, or
similar structures or appurtenances; provided, however, the following:
         1.)   The appurtenance does not interfere with Federal Aviation
Regulations, being 14 C.F.R. Part 77, Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace;
         2.)   The appurtenance does not extend more than 15 feet above the
maximum permitted building height, except as allowed in this Code;
         3.)   The appurtenance is not constructed for the purpose of providing
additional floor area in the building;
         4.)   The appurtenance complies with the screening requirements for
mechanical equipment and appurtenances in §§
157.136,
157.137 and
157.139; and
         5.)   Alternative energy systems; provided they meet requirements of
the applicable code regulating their use.
      (C)   Additional height allowance for appurtenances. All appurtenances,
as referenced in division (5)(B) of this section that exceed 15 feet above the
maximum permitted building height shall be permitted only upon approval by the
PZC.
(Prior Code, § 1227.01) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.101 SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (1)   Site development standards for permitted uses. Development shall be
subject to the dimensional standards in
Table 157.101-1, unless otherwise modified in the use specific standards or if
specific site development standards exist for the conditional use in §
157.103.
Table 157.101-1: Residential Site Development Standards
  R-R R-1                      R-2
      Without Sewer With Sewer
Table 157.101-1: Residential Site Development Standards
                                 R-R    R-1                      R-2
                                        Without Sewer With Sewer
Site development standards for open space residential subdivisions are located
in §
157.102
Minimum Lot Area (Square Feet)
                  Single-family  55,000 43,560        21,780     21,780
                  dwelling
Minimum lot area  Two-family     N/A    65,340        43,560     30,000
                  dwellings
                  Multi-family   N/A    N/A           N/A        130,680
                  dwellings
   Maximum Density
Maximum density of multi- family N/A    N/A           N/A        8.5 units per
dwellings                                                        acre
   Minimum Lot Width (Feet)
                  Single-family  120    120           85         85
Minimum lot width dwellings
at the building   Two-family     N/A    150           120        100
line              dwellings
                  Multi-family   N/A    N/A           N/A        120
                  dwellings
Minimum lot frontage1            85     85            85         85
   Minimum Setbacks (Feet)
Front2                           50     50            40         40
Side (one side)                  15     15            10         10
Side (total of both sides)       40     40            20         20
Rear                             60     60            50         50
   Maximum Overall Building Height (Feet)
Maximum height of principal      36     36            36         48
buildings
1   The continuous frontage element of this standard may be reduced to 50 feet
by the Planning and Zoning Commission for lots fronting on a permanent cul-de-
sac or other curved street fronts (e.g., knuckles); provided that the width of
any such lot shall increase from the front lot line to the required width at
the building line
2   The minimum front yard setback shall be equal to the depth of existing
front yards on the developed lots adjacent to or the subject lot if the
developed lots are within 300 feet on the same block when 50% of such lots
have a uniform building setback which is greater or less than required
 
   (2)   Minimum floor area requirements.
 
Table 157.101-2: Minimum Floor Area Requirements for Residential Dwellings
Unit Type                Minimum Square Feet in the Minimum Square Feet in all
                         R-R District               Other Districts
One-story single-family  1,500                      900
dwellings
Multiple story single-   900 on the first floor     750 on the first floor
family dwellings
Multi-family dwelling                               500 plus 150 for each
units or apartments in a N/A                        bedroom
mixed-use building
 
   (3)   Maximum lot coverage/maximum accessory use square footage.
      (A)   
Table 157.101-3 defines the maximum lot coverage by principal structures and
accessory structures in residential districts.
 
Table 157.101-3: Maximum Lot Coverage for Residential Uses
                           Maximum Lot Coverage by Maximum Lot Coverage by
Lot Size                   Principal Structures    Accessory Uses and
                                                   Structures1
Up to 12,000 square feet   60%                     10%
12,001 to 20,000 square    50%                     10%
feet
20,001 or more square feet 45%                     15% with a maximum of 2,500
                                                   square feet
1   This coverage does not include the lot area covered by the principal
structure. Accessory uses and structures that count toward this lot coverage
are identified in §
157.087.
 
      (B)   In no case shall the total footprint of all accessory structures
and buildings exceed the total footprint of the principal structure.
   (4)   Number of principal uses per lot. Only one principally permitted use
may be permitted on a single lot with the exception of multi-family dwellings
in the R-2 District where multiple dwellings may be located on a single lot.
For the purposes of this provision, a two-family dwelling and a multi-family
dwelling shall each be considered a single principal use. A secondary living
unit may be considered as a conditionally permitted use (mother-in-law suite).
   (5)   Centralized water/sewer requirement. All development in the R-
2 District shall be connected to an approved centralized sewer system and
public water system.
   (6)   Open space requirements. The following open space requirements shall
apply to any subdivision not subject to the open space residential subdivision
requirements of §
157.102.
      (A)   Any subdivision greater than 15 acres in the R-1 District must
reserve a minimum of 10% of the gross acres, excluding existing public
easements and rights-of-way, as permanent open space.
      (B)   Any development in the R-2 District must reserve a minimum of 15%
of the gross acres, exclusive of public or private right-of-ways, parking
areas, land fragments between buildings or between buildings and parking areas,
and minimum yards between property lines and buildings or parking areas.
   (7)   Multiple-family dwellings. Multiple-family dwellings may be permitted
in the R-2 or PD Districts in accordance with the following provisions.
      (A)   In order to ensure and maintain individual privacy, dwellings in a
multiple-family development shall be arranged and spaced in compliance with the
Table 157.101-4.
 
Table 157.101-4: Dimensional Standards for Multi-Family Dwellings
                                      50 feet; however, if the buildings are
   Minimum building separation     designed with primary living areas
                                      directly facing one another, the minimum
                                      separation shall be 85 feet
                                      25 feet plus 1 additional foot of setback
                                      for every 2 feet of wall length greater
   Minimum side and rear yard setbathan 35 feet; this setback shall only
                                      apply when the adjacent walls are
                                      parallel to one another or are within 45
                                      degrees of parallel
 
      (B)   The minimum building separation may be reduced by the PZC (through
site plan review or PD plan approval) if they determine that adequate screening
will be provided to ensure privacy for tenants.
      (C)   The arrangement of units within each building and between buildings
shall maximize the privacy of each unit by providing screening walls and
private yards where appropriate.
      (D)   Dwelling units in a multi-family dwelling shall meet the minimum
floor area requirements as established in division (2) of this section.
      (E)   There shall be a maximum impervious surface ratio of 70% for lots
developed for multi-family dwellings.
(Prior Code, § 1227.02) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.102 OPEN SPACE RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   (1)   Open space subdivisions in the R-R District. Open space subdivision
plans may be permitted in the R-R District; provided that they conform to the
requirements set forth below.
      (A)   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area requirement of the R-
R District may be reduced to a minimum of 43,560 square feet.
      (B)   Minimum site development standards. The required site development
standards established in
Table 157.101-1 may be reduced as specified in
Table 157.102-1 below, but only for proposed lots that will have access from an
interior local street.
 
Table 157.102-1: Site Development Standards for
Open Space Subdivisions in the R-R District
Standard                      Minimum Requirement (Feet)
Front yard setback            50
Lot frontage                  85
Lot width at building line    100
Rear yard setback             60
Side yard setback (each side) 15
 
      (C)   Required open space. An open space subdivision must reserve a
minimum of 25% of the gross area, excluding rights-of-way, as permanent open
space.
      (D)   Minimum project size. An open space subdivision project shall
contain a minimum of 15 gross acres.
      (E)   Permitted uses. Only single-family dwellings and accessory uses
permitted within the R-R District may be permitted.
      (F)   Control of open space.
         1.)   Open space shall be in the form of a conservation easement for
preservation of undisturbed natural land areas, and may be owned and maintained
by a homeowner’s or condominium association, or dedication of lands to the city
for park or recreational purposes may be permitted if approved by the city.
         2.)   All conservation easement documents shall be submitted to the
Planning Department for review and must specify the ownership and use of the
land and provide adequate provisions for the perpetual care and maintenance of
the open space. The conservation easement documents shall be recorded along
with the final plat upon City Council approval.
      (G)   County Health Department approval. Any proposed open space
subdivision plan project that will be located within an area not served by
public sewage treatment must demonstrate approval of any proposed on-site or
alternative sewage treatment system by the County Health Department, including
department comment on the proposed individual lot sizes in the project.
   (2)   Open space subdivisions as a permitted use in the R-1 District. Open
space subdivisions with minimum lot areas of 17,000 square feet may be
permitted in the R-1 District; provided they conform to the requirements set
forth below. Open space subdivisions with minimum lot areas of 13,600 square
feet may be permitted as a conditional use in the R-1 District; provided they
conform to the requirements set forth in this section.
      (A)   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area requirement of the R-
1 District may be reduced to a minimum of 17,000 square feet.
      (B)   Minimum site development standards. The required site development
standards established in
Table 157.101-1 may be reduced as specified in
Table 157.102-2 of this section, but only for proposed lots that will have
access from an interior local street.
 
Table 157.102-2: Site Development Standards for
Open Space Subdivisions in the R-1 District
Standard                      Minimum Requirement (Feet)
Front yard setback            40
Lot frontage                  85
Lot width at building line    85
Rear yard setback             40
Side yard setback (each side) 10
 
      (C)   Required open space. An open space subdivision must reserve a
minimum of 20% of the gross area, excluding rights-of-way, as permanent open
space.
      (D)   Minimum project size. An open space subdivision project shall
contain a minimum of ten gross acres.
      (E)   Permitted uses. Only single-family dwellings and accessory uses
permitted within the R-1 District may be permitted.
      (F)   Control of open space.
         1.)   Open space shall be in the form of a conservation easement for
preservation of undisturbed natural land areas, and may be owned and maintained
by a homeowner’s or condominium association, or dedication of lands to the city
for park or recreational purposes may be permitted if approved by the city.
         2.)   All conservation easement documents shall be submitted to the
Planning Department for review and must specify the ownership and use of the
land, and provide adequate provisions for the perpetual care and maintenance of
the open space. The conservation easement documents shall be recorded along
with the final plat upon City Council approval.
   (3)   Open space subdivisions as a conditional use in the R-1 District. Open
space subdivision plans may be permitted as a conditional use in the R-
1 District; provided they conform to the requirements set forth below.
      (A)   Conditional use permit. The open space subdivision shall be subject
to the review procedure established in §
157.052.
      (B)   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area requirement of the R-
1 District may be reduced to a minimum of 13,600 square feet.
      (C)   Minimum site development standards. The required site development
standards established in
Table 157.101-1 may be reduced as specified in
Table 157.102-3 below, but only for proposed lots that will have access from an
interior local street.
 
Table 157.102-3: Site Development Standards for Open Space
Subdivisions as Conditional Uses in the R-1 District
Standard                      Minimum Requirement (Feet)
Front yard setback            40
Lot frontage                  75
Lot width at building line    75
Rear yard setback             40
Side yard setback (each side) 10
 
      (D)   Required open space. An open space subdivision as a conditional use
must reserve a minimum of 30% of the gross area, excluding right-of-ways, as
permanent open space.
      (E)   Minimum project size. An open space subdivision project shall
contain a minimum of ten gross acres and must adhere to the standards of the
subdivision regulations.
      (F)   Permitted uses. Only single-family dwellings and accessory uses
permitted within the R-1 District may be permitted.
      (G)   Control of open space.
         1.)   Open space shall be in the form of a conservation easement for
preservation of undisturbed natural land areas, and may be owned and maintained
by a homeowner’s or condominium association, or dedication of lands to the city
for park or recreational purposes may be permitted if approved by the city.
         2.)   All conservation easement documents shall be submitted to the
Planning Department for review and must specify the ownership and use of the
land, and provide adequate provisions for the perpetual care and maintenance of
the open space. The conservation easement documents shall be recorded along
with the final plat upon City Council approval.
(Prior Code, § 1227.03) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.103 SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONAL USES IN THE R-R AND R-
1 DISTRICTS.
   
Table 157.103-1 establishes site development standards for certain conditional
uses in addition to any conditions or other regulations that may be applicable
to the use.
Table 157.103-1: Site Development Standards for Conditional Uses
          Minimum Lot   Minimum Building Minimum Parking
 Minimum  Width at the  Setback          Setback
 Lot Area Building Line Front Side and   Front Side and Rear1
                              Rear1, 2
Table 157.103-1: Site Development Standards for Conditional Uses
                            Minimum Lot   Minimum Building Minimum Parking
                   Minimum  Width at the  Setback          Setback
                   Lot Area Building Line Front Side and   Front Side and Rear1
                                                Rear1, 2
Public and Institutional Uses
Community centers  1 acre   150           75    30         50    20
Educational
facilities (public 3 acres  200           75    30         50    20
or private)
Libraries,
museums, galleries 1 acre   150           75    30         50    20
and cultural
centers
Public safety      1 acre   150           50    30         50    20
facilities
Religious places   1 acre   150           75    30         50    20
of worship
1   Side yard setbacks shall be measured from each side
2   The minimum setback shall be increased by one foot for each foot of
building wall length greater than 30 feet, up to 100 feet
 
(Prior Code, § 1227.04) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.104 SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR BUSINESS DISTRICTS.
   Development shall be subject to the dimensional standards in
Table 157.104-1, unless otherwise modified in the use specific standards or if
specific site development standards exist for a conditional use in §
157.103.
Table 157.104-1: Business Site Development Standards
 B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 B-5 I-1
Table 157.104-1: Business Site Development Standards
                         B-1  B-2  B-3    B-4  B-5  I-1
Minimum Lot Area (Acres)
Minimum lot area         1    1    1      1    1    1
   Minimum Lot Width (Feet)
Minimum lot width at the 150  150  100    150  150  150
building line
   Minimum Building Setback (Feet)
Front                    50   50   35     50   50   50
Side (each side)         25 or the height of the building, whichever is greater
Rear                     25 or the height of the building, whichever is greater
   Maximum Overall Building Height (Feet)
Maximum height of        48   60   36     60   60   60
principal buildings
   Maximum Building Footprint (square feet)
Maximum footprint size   None None 10,000 None None None
   Maximum Lot Coverage
Maximum lot coverage by
buildings or accessory   33%  33%  25%    33%  33%  33%
uses (excluding parking
areas)
Maximum lot coverage by  75%  75%  65%    70%  70%  70%
impervious surfaces
 
(Prior Code, § 1227.05) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
§ 157.115 PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS REQUIRE A DISTRICT CHANGE.
   In addition to the provisions of this chapter regarding the development of a
PD District, an application request for any type of PD District included in
this chapter is also subject to the procedures set forth in §
157.048. The original establishment and application of a PD District shall be
regarded as and subject to the same requirements as a district change.
(Prior Code, § 1228.01) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009; Ord. 2013-03, passed
2-26-2013)
§ 157.116 PERMITTED USES.
   (1)   All uses in any type of PD District are subject to review by the DRB;
approval of a conceptual site plan by the PZC and City Council; and review of a
final site plan by the DRB and approval of a final site plan by the PZC
pursuant to §§
157.048(6) and
157.051.
   (2)   
Table 157.087-1  illustrates the permitted uses within a PD District subject to
the provisions of this chapter.
   (3)   The PZC and City Council may further limit the specific types of uses
permitted within the PD District or place conditions on uses during the map
amendment process.
   (4)   Permitted residential accessory uses shall include those accessory
uses that are permitted in the R-1 District and comply with all applicable
sections of this Code.
   (5)   Permitted nonresidential accessory uses shall include those accessory
uses that are permitted in the B-1 District and comply with all applicable
sections of this Code.
   (6)   Uses not specifically listed as permitted by these districts may be
permitted if the PZC determines the uses to be of the same general character as
the above permitted uses.
(Prior Code, § 1228.02) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009; Ord. 2013-03, passed
2-26-2013; Ord. 2016-01, passed 4-26-2016)
§ 157.117 GENERAL PROJECT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The following provisions shall apply to any type of PD District, unless
expressly stated.
   (1)   Gross project area. The gross area of a tract of land proposed to be
developed in a PD District shall be as noted in
Table 157.118-1  and in §
157.119(1). All land within the development shall be contiguous and shall not
be divided into segments by any limited access highway, railroad right-of-way
or tract of land (other than streets or rights-of-way for pipelines or electric
transmission lines) not owned by the developer of the planned development.
   (2)   Mixed use PD definition. As referred to within this chapter, mixed-use
PDs are those planned developments which include a central area of
nonresidential uses and/or mixed use buildings that comprises at least 50% of
the total project area.
   (3)   Minimum open space requirements.
      (A)   The minimum gross project area of a nonresidential planned
development to be dedicated as open space is noted in §
157.119(1). The minimum gross project areas of a residential or mixed use
planned development are noted in
Table 157.118-1 .
      (B)   The following areas shall not be counted toward compliance with
open space requirements:
         1.)   Private yards not subject to an open space or conservation
easement;
         2.)   Public or private streets or rights-of-way, including sidewalks;
         3.)   Open parking areas and driveways for dwellings;
         4.)   Land covered by structures not designated for active
recreational uses; and
         5.)   Designated outdoor storage areas.
      (C)   Improved areas.
         1.)   A minimum of 25% of the required open space shall be reserved
for active recreational uses which may include, but are not limited to, pools,
playgrounds, tennis courts, jogging/walking trails, community centers, improved
ponds, public plazas (that may serve as gathering places for residents) or
other improved area that may be used by the public as approved by the PZC.
         2.)   Improved open space shall be evenly distributed throughout the
planned development, unless otherwise approved by the PZC.
      (D)   Required common open space may include bike or hike paths,
parkland, open areas, bridle paths, open drainageways, swimming pools,
clubhouses, tennis courts, golf courses, parking areas for any of the above,
and other lands of essentially open or undisturbed or improved character,
exclusive of off-street parking areas and street rights-of-way. Land area
occupied by storm water management devices, including retention ponds, may be
counted towards the open space requirement when such features are treated as a
site amenity as approved by the PZC; detention ponds shall not be counted
towards open space.
      (E)   Wetlands qualify as common open space if recommended for
preservation and placed in an easement.
      (F)   Public utility and similar easements and rights-of-way are not
acceptable for common open space dedication, unless such land or right-of-way
is useable as a trail or similar purpose and has been approved by the PZC.
      (G)   Disposition of common open space.
         1.)   Control of common open space shall be accomplished through the
use of a conservation easement for the preservation of undisturbed natural land
areas and may be owned by the homeowner’s or condominium association.
         2.)   Open space may be dedicated to the city for park and
recreational purposes only if the city agrees to accept such dedication by vote
of City Council.
         3.)   The required amount of common space land may also be dedicated
to the city who will enter into a perpetual easement with a homeowner’s or
condominium association.
         4.)   The homeowner’s or condominium association shall make adequate
provisions for perpetual care and maintenance of all common areas in the legal
articles creating such organization. The legal articles relating to the
organization of the homeowner’s or condominium association shall be subject to
review and approval by the PZC.
         5.)   Where a homeowner’s or condominium association becomes defunct,
the city may assess the property owners for the cost of maintenance.
         6.)   The responsibility for the maintenance of all open spaces shall
be specified by the developer before approval of the final development plan.
   (4)   Private improvements.
      (A)   All improvements shall meet or exceed the standards for public
improvements. Bonds shall be posted per §
157.050(9).
      (B)   Central sanitary sewer and water facilities shall be required for
all development within a PD District.
      (C)   Other utilities, including, but not limited to, telephone, cable
television and electrical systems, shall be provided for in all developments
and shall be underground to the maximum extent feasible.
      (D)   Storm water retention/detention facilities should be grouped
together wherever possible to provide a water feature that can become a site
amenity.
      (E)   Site grading and retention/detention facilities shall be designed
to drain the site adequately without creating a negative impact to the drainage
characteristics of the neighboring properties.
      (F)   Storm drain grate inlets shall be permanently marked with no
dumping to indicate that dumping is prohibited due to drainage into natural
waterways.
   (5)   General site development.
      (A)   Chain link fences are permitted only when they are painted black
and not visible from any public right-of-way or parking areas with more than
five parking spaces. Slats may be used in chain link fencing if approved by the
PZC.
      (B)   All dumpsters, mechanical equipment, service entrances, loading
areas and outdoor storage shall be located behind buildings and be screened in
accordance with this chapter. Equipment located on a rooftop is permitted if
screened in accordance with the provisions of this Code.
      (C)   The construction materials and colors of walls and fences that are
visible from any public right-of-way or visible from parking areas with more
than five parking spaces shall be uniform and compatible with the architectural
style, color, and building materials of the principal building and its
surroundings and as approved by the DRB and the PZC.
   (6)   Vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
      (A)   Cul-de-sacs shall be discouraged, unless there is unique topography
or other hardships. The use of cul-de-sacs shall require approval by the PZC
and in no case shall more than 20% of the lots have frontage on a cul-de-sac.
      (B)   Sidewalks shall be provided on each side of every street and shall
be creatively developed to interconnect different land use areas and open
spaces.
      (C)   Pedestrian connections shall be provided between sidewalks and
buildings.
      (D)   Sidewalks in residential areas shall be a minimum of five feet in
width.
      (E)   Sidewalks in nonresidential or mixed use areas shall be of a
minimum to allow for six feet of clearance around any outdoor dining areas or
streetscaping elements, such as benches, trees and the like.
   (7)   Building design.
      (A)   All elevations of a building shall be subject to review. A front
facade shall be architecturally emphasized although all sides of a building
shall be architecturally consistent with the front facade.
      (B)   Buildings shall be architecturally oriented to the street or a
public right-of-way and the main entrance shall be located on the street facade
or facing the public right-of-way. In cases where there is an anti-access
easement or access is not permitted from a particular road or public right-of-
way, the building shall not be required to face the subject road or right-of-
way.
      (C)   Buildings shall be comprised of materials that provide for minimal
maintenance, provide a high quality of craftsmanship and aesthetics, and are
compatible with adjacent properties. Primary materials shall consist of brick,
stone and other decorative masonry products (i.e., no standard concrete masonry
units). The following shall be utilized by the DRB and PZC when reviewing
building materials as they apply discretion to the design of the building,
taking into account the scale and use of the building and design of the facades
(i.e., windows, doors and other design features) to achieve aesthetically-
complete principal and nonprincipal facades:
         1.)   Single-story multi-family buildings shall average a minimum of
60% primary materials on all principal facades and a minimum of 50% on all
nonprincipal facades, exclusive of glass, windows and doors;
         2.)   Multiple story multi-family buildings shall average a minimum of
65% primary materials on all principal facades and a minimum of 50% on all
nonprincipal facades, exclusive of glass, windows and doors;
         3.)   Commercial buildings shall average a minimum of 70% primary
materials on all principal and a minimum of 60% nonprincipal facades, exclusive
of glass, windows and doors;
         4.)   Industrial buildings shall average a minimum of 60% primary
materials on all principal and nonprincipal facades, exclusive of glass,
windows and doors;
         5.)   Mixed-use buildings shall average a minimum of 70% primary
materials on all principal facades and a minimum of 60% on all nonprincipal
facades, exclusive of glass, windows and doors;
         6.)   Nonmasonry materials, such as stucco, Exterior Insulation and
Finish System (EIFS), decorative wood/vinyl sidings and architectural metals,
may be permitted but shall be secondary, exclusive of gable areas;
         7.)   The DRB and PZC may allow other alternative material(s) as a
primary material if it is the basis of an acceptable facade and/or qualifies as
a material that meets the intent of this section; and
         8.)   The DRB shall review and make a recommendation to the PZC. The
PZC shall consider the DRB’s recommendation but retain discretion to determine
the final use of primary and secondary materials as they apply to the various
uses. The PZC shall also take into account the exposure to adjacent developed
properties and/or land for future development. The DRB and PZC may apply
discretion to the percentages noted by either requiring a greater percentage or
permitting a lesser percentage of primary materials.
      (D)   Flat rooflines are permitted with the use of cornices, parapets or
some form of architectural emphasis along the roofline.
      (E)   Colors.
         1.)   The use of neon lights or bright colors, as determined by the
PZC, for building materials shall be restricted to a maximum of 10% of each
building facade. The total area of neon or bright colors cannot be aggregated
onto one facade.
         2.)   All vents, gutters, downspouts, flashing, electrical conduits
and the like shall match the color of the adjacent surface, unless approved by
the DRB and PZC to be used expressly as a trim or accent element.
         3.)   The chosen color scheme should help tie all of the parts of the
building together. Typically, the color that is used in a storefront area
should be repeated in the upper story windows or cornice area.
(Prior Code, § 1228.03) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009; Ord. 2013-03, passed
2-26-2013; Ord. 2016-01, passed 4-26-2016)
§ 157.118 RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (1)   Residential density and open space requirements.
      (A)   The maximum development densities and open space requirements of
residential development in a residential or mixed use PD shall be based upon
the type of development proposed within the development as illustrated in
Table 157.118-1 .
Table 157.118-1: Residential Density and Open Space
   TyMinimum Gross Acreage Maximum Density % of Open Space
Table 157.118-1: Residential Density and Open Space
   Type             Minimum Gross Acreage Maximum Density   % of Open Space
Common ownership -     5                     6 units per acre  15%
attached detached
Fee simple lots -         5               8 units per acre  15%
attached/detached
Mixed use - PD         8                     15 units per acre 18%
Multi-family/apartment
- common ownership,
i.e., single parcel    3                     15 units per acre 18%
(Massillon Road
Corridor*)
Multi-family/apartment
- common ownership,    5                     12 units per acre 18%
i.e., single parcel
Senior restricted      3                     20 units per acre 15%
apartment**
*   See Figure 157.118-1
**   This shall mean a building or group of buildings containing dwelling
units for households whose heads, or spouses, or sole members are at least 62
years of age or are handicapped as defined in Title II, § 201 of the Housing
and Community Development Act of 1974, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 1437A et seq.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4c34b21a634639eec02525999691581e5bede4c8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4583.png]
 
Figure 157.118-1
      (B)   The maximum density shall be calculated by dividing the total
number of proposed units by the gross acreage of the entire development
including land for open space, rights-of-way and other public dedications.
   (2)   Minimum floor area requirements. Dwelling units in a multi-family
dwelling shall meet the minimum floor area requirements as established in §
157.101(2).
   (3)   Area and yard requirements for residential uses.
      (A)   The minimum lot size for residential uses shall be as follows:
         1.)   Single-family detached dwellings shall have a minimum lot size
of 5,000 square feet;
         2.)   Attached dwellings with four or fewer units, that are not part
of a mixed use building, shall have a minimum lot size of 7,500 square feet;
and
         3.)   Attached dwellings with more than four units, that are not part
of a mixed use building, shall have a minimum lot size equal to 2,500 square
feet per dwelling unit.
      (B)   There shall be a minimum lot width of 40 feet for all residential
uses.
      (C)   All residential uses that have frontage along an arterial street
shall have a minimum front yard setback of 30 feet.
      (D)   Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, all other residential
building setbacks, which include front yard on a nonarterial street and side/
rear yard, shall be established as part of the planned development review
process. Generally, these building setbacks should be less than those required
in a traditional development.
   (4)   Single-family and two-family dwelling standards. The following
standards shall apply to all lots for single-family and two-family dwellings.
      (A)   Single-family and two-family dwellings shall not exceed 36 feet in
overall height.
      (B)   Dwellings shall have a maximum front yard setback of 20 feet if the
residence is part of a mixed use PD, unless frontage is along an arterial
street, as stipulated in division (3)(C) of this section. Setbacks for
residential PDs shall be as approved by PZC.
      (C)   All dwellings in a residential area are encouraged to have a front
porch, facing the primary street, that extends along a minimum of 50% of the
front elevation.
      (D)   Principal and accessory buildings or structures may not cover more
than 70% of the lot.
      (E)   At least one parking space shall be provided within an enclosed
garage whether attached or detached from the main dwelling.
      (F)   One accessory garage may be permitted; provided it is located in
the rear yard.
      (G)   One accessory dwelling unit may be constructed above a detached
accessory garage. In such case, the accessory structure shall not exceed 24
feet in overall height.
      (H)   Accessory uses shall be subject to the regulations of §
157.087, unless otherwise exempted in this chapter.
      (I)   Garages and parking areas other than driveways shall be designed as
follows.
         1.)   Garages may be accessed from a rear alley where approved by the
PZC and City Council. If alleys are approved, the rear yard setback shall not
apply to accessory garages.
         2.)   Front loading garages shall be flush or setback from the front
building line.
         3.)   Access to a detached accessory garage or a side loading garage
may be made by a driveway along the side of the principal building; provided
the driveway is set back a minimum of two feet from side lot lines.
   (5)   Multi-family dwelling standards. The following standards shall apply
to all multi-family dwellings or mixed use buildings with attached multi-family
units (apartments).
      (A)   Areas designated for multi-family dwellings may include all forms
of attached housing including two-family dwellings and residential dwelling
units located above businesses.
      (B)   Multi-family dwellings shall not exceed 60 feet in overall height
in a residential PD or 75 feet as part of a mixed-use building.
      (C)   Parking in the front yard of any multi-family or mixed use
buildings with residential uses shall be limited to one access drive and one
double bay of parking stalls  (see
Figure 157.119-1).
      (D)   On-street parking shall be permissible; provided the planned
development is designed to include on-street parking.
      (E)   Building setbacks shall meet the requirements set forth in
divisions (3)(C) and (3)(D) of this section.
   (6)   Common ownership of parcels upon which two or more dwellings are
constructed. Before a zoning permit is issued for the construction of units
where two or more dwellings are to be clustered on one parcel of land, the
owner of such parcel shall be bound by a covenant running with the land,
approved by the city’s legal counsel, that so long as any such dwellings are
upon such parcel of land, such parcel upon which such group is erected shall
remain in one parcel. No division of property shall be allowed unless granted
by the PZC and City Council through an approved subdivision.
(Prior Code, § 1228.04) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009; Ord. 2013-03, passed
2-26-2013)
§ 157.119 NONRESIDENTIAL AND MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (1)   Project area and open space. The gross project area of land proposed
to be developed in a nonresidential PD district (i.e., all commercial uses
proposed) shall be three acres. The open space required shall be 15% of the
gross project area.
   (2)   Height and setback requirements.
      (A)   Nonresidential buildings and mixed use buildings shall not exceed
80 feet in overall height.
      (B)   Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, building setbacks shall
be established as part of the planned development review process.
   (3)   Nonresidential and mixed use building standards. The following
standards shall apply to all nonresidential or mixed use buildings:
      (A)   Buildings shall be oriented toward the major street. Buildings
located on an intersection shall have the main entrance oriented toward the
major street and any facade facing other streets shall have a similar
architectural style(s);
      (B)   The ground floor of the buildings should be designed to support
retail businesses, personal services, restaurants, cafes and other uses that
will encourage street level activities;
      (C)   Offices or residential should be developed on the second, third and
fourth floors of multi-floor buildings;
      (D)   On-street parking shall be permissible; provided the planned
development is designed to include on-street parking;
      (E)   Ground-mounted, attached signs, awning signs and projecting signs
shall be permitted to identify businesses in accordance with §
157.135. Attached signage is encouraged when buildings are at the minimum front
setback;
      (F)   Open spaces between buildings that create courtyards or walkways to
the rear of the property or parking areas are strongly encouraged;
      (G)   Buildings and parking areas shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet
from the right-of-way. Sidewalks may be located in this setback if an easement
is provided; and
      (H)   Parking in the front yard of any nonresidential building shall be
limited to one access drive (two if corner lot) and one double bay of parking
stalls  (see
Figure 157.119-1).
   Figure 157.119-1: Parking configuration as permitted.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4c34b21a634639eec02525999691581e5bede4c8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4496.png]
 
(Prior Code, § 1228.05) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009; Ord. 2013-03, passed
2-26-2013)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
§ 157.130 GENERAL SUBDIVISION DESIGN AND REGULATIONS.
   (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to support the well-planned
development of the city though the establishment of general subdivision design
standards applicable to all subdivisions.
   (2)   Applicability. Unless otherwise noted, the standards of this section
shall apply to all subdivisions in the city.
   (3)   General layout and design provisions.
      (A)   Name of the subdivision. The name of the subdivision shall not
duplicate the name of an existing subdivision in the city.
      (B)   Compliance with other provisions of this Code. All subdivisions
shall comply with all other applicable regulations of this Code, including, but
not limited to:
         1.)   The requirements of the zoning district in which the property is
located;
         2.)   The requirements relative to specific uses and dimensional
standards; and
         3.)   Generally applicable development standards.
      (C)   Homeowner’s association. Where there are common areas proposed as
part of a subdivision that are to be deeded to a homeowner’s association, a
homeowner’s association shall be required and all documents related to the
association shall be on file prior to final plat approval and subsequently
recorded.
      (D)   Natural features. Subdivisions should be planned to take advantage
of the topography of the land, to economize in the construction of drainage
facilities, to reduce the amount of grading and to minimize destruction of
trees and topsoil.
      (E)   Flood hazards. If any portion of the land within the subdivision is
subject to flooding or other hazards, due consideration shall be given to such
problems in the design of the subdivision. Land subject to flooding and land
otherwise uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for
such other uses that may increase danger to health, life or property, or
aggravate the flood hazard as delineated on the FEMA floodplain maps or
detailed engineering studies.
   (4)   Construction specifications. All construction of streets, sidewalks
and infrastructure shall conform to the latest edition of the Ohio Department
of Transportation Construction and Material Specifications and any amendments
thereto. The City Engineer and/or the agencies having jurisdiction over
sanitary sewer or water (where applicable), may also require adjustments in
design to conform to special conditions inherent within a particular
subdivision including, but not limited to, swamps, quicksand, springs and
landslides.
   (5)   Infrastructure requirements.
      (A)   All subdivision of lands into parcels less than 32,670 square feet
and/or less than 100 feet in width at the building line shall have a
centralized sanitary sewer.
      (B)   All subdivision of lands into parcels, all of which are 32,670
square feet or more and/or 100 feet or more in width at the building line, may
be required to have centralized sanitary sewer and/or water facilities if they
are reasonably available as determined by the PZC.
      (C)   All sanitary sewage systems that will be dedicated to and operated
by the county, as approved by the County Council and the County Executive
through the agency having jurisdiction over sanitary sewer, shall conform to
the design standards, specifications and procedures of the agency having
jurisdiction over sanitary sewer as adopted by County Council and as approved
by the County Executive pursuant to § 3.04 of the Summit County Charter.
      (D)   All public roadways shall meet the typical specifications on record
with the Planning Department and Engineering Department. Any deviation from the
typical specifications requires approval by the PZC.
   (6)   Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided for all roadway sections,
unless waived by the PZC. All sidewalks shall be five feet in width and shown
on the subdivision improvement plans. Sidewalks shall meet the typical
specification on record with the City’s Planning Department and Engineering
Department. In cases where a proposed sidewalk will connect with an existing
sidewalk of narrower dimensions, the new sidewalk shall transition to the
existing sidewalk via taper.
   (7)   Street lighting district. Street lighting fixtures shall be installed
by the developer on all streets within major subdivisions where sidewalks are
required, the number and location of which shall be determined by engineering
studies performed by the authority having jurisdiction over electric power, and
shall conform to the specifications established by such authority and the City
Engineer. The developer shall submit, at the time of the PZC approval, a
petition to create a street lighting district so that legislation creating said
district will be approved simultaneously with the plat and performance bond.
   (8)   Street trees. Street trees shall be required along all streets where
sidewalks are required. The developer shall provide, on the subdivision
improvement plans, the locations of new trees to be planted in the street
right-of-way in conjunction with the requirements of sidewalk installations and
in accordance with the proposed street lighting district layout. Tree variety
shall be from a list of approved trees available from the Planning Department
or as approved by a consultant to the city.
   (9)   Easements.
      (A)   General.
         1.)   Adequate easements along rear or side lot lines, or elsewhere as
requested by the city, shall be provided for utilities and drainage where
necessary. A 12-foot easement on each front lot line for utilities shall be
required.
         2.)   All plats shall include the following wording: The undersigned
owners of the land platted by this document, do hereby grant unto the Ohio
Edison Company (OE) or authorized electrical power provider, Dominion East Ohio
(DEO) or authorized natural gas provider, the locally franchised cable
provider, the telecommunications provider, their successor and assigns, a 12-
foot wide easement (as it abuts the dedicated streets herein), at the front of
each lot, being parallel with and contiguous to the public right-of-way within
this allotment. This easement to be used to install, operate, maintain and
serve distribution lines, conduits, cables, wiring or other appurtenances for
the supply of electric, gas, communication and video signals for public or
private use. The city reserves the temporary work rights within the easement
for itself and providers of storm water, sanitary sewer and public water
supply, as authorized and approved by the city. Utilization of this easement
shall be in compliance with the following exhibit.
         3.)   This easement allows for the providers of said utilities or
services the right to remove trees and landscaping without liability as
required to maintain, operate or construct these facilities, and the right of
access, as needed for exercising the purposes of this easement.
   Figure 157.130-1: Example illustration of an easement.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4c34b21a634639eec02525999691581e5bede4c8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4500.png]
 
      (B)   Utility lines. All utility lines shall be located underground.
   (10)   Soil studies. The City Engineer reserves the right to require a soil
study where, in their opinion, the existing soil conditions are below average
and may also require adjustments in design to compensate for the existing
conditions.
   (11)   Erosion and sedimentation control.
      (A)   When the developer intends to remove or disturb the natural
topsoil, trees and other vegetation, or where the developer intends to change
the surface contour of a proposed subdivision, he or she shall prepare an
erosion control plan (ECP) and have such plan approved by the County Soil and
Water Conservation District and the city. The ECP shall be included in the
improvement drawings. Additionally, a land disturbance permit shall be
required.
      (B)   In general, erosion and sedimentation control work shall consist
of, but not be limited to, grading, soil preparation, fertilizing, seeding and
mulching as necessary to establish a sufficient growth of grass or other ground
cover that minimizes damage to subdivision areas and to adjoining properties.
The City Engineer and the County Soil and Water Conservation District will have
the work inspected to the extent that they determine is necessary to ensure
that the developer has complied with the approved plans.
   (12)   Oversize and/or off-site improvements.
      (A)   Oversize and/or off-site extensions of utilities, pavements and
other improvements shall be designed and constructed to facilitate the orderly
development of nearby land that is an integral part of the neighborhood service
or drainage area.
      (B)   Where the City Engineer determines that improvements in excess of
the size needed to serve the proposed subdivision are necessary, the developer
shall install improvements required to serve his or her subdivision, plus the
additional oversize and/or off-site improvements required.
   (13)   Approval. All necessary improvement plans for proposed roads, storm
sewers and drainage facilities shall be approved by the City Engineer, and all
improvement plans for sanitary sewer and water supply systems shall be approved
by the agencies having jurisdiction over sanitary sewer or water, if necessary,
prior to approval of the final plat by the City Engineer.
   (14)   Construction and inspection of improvements.
      (A)   Cooperation of developer and/or contractor. The developer and/or
contractor shall have available on the project site at all times one approved
copy of all required plans and specifications. He or she shall cooperate with
the City Engineer’s inspector and/or the inspectors for agencies having
jurisdiction over sanitary sewer or water (where applicable), and with other
contractors in every way possible. The developer and/or contractor shall, at
all times, have a competent representative acting as his or her agent on the
project. The representative shall be capable of reading and thoroughly
understanding the plans and specifications and promptly supplying such
materials, tools, plat equipment and labor as may be required. A representative
shall be furnished regardless of the amount of work sublet.
      (B)   Inspections.
         1.)   The City Engineer shall be responsible for the inspection of all
street, structure and drainage improvements. The developer, his or her
engineer, or his or her contractor shall give notice to the City Engineer at
least 24 hours in advance of any construction of physical public improvements.
The agencies having jurisdiction over sanitary sewer or water shall be
responsible for inspection of all sanitary (sewage) and water supply system
improvements. The following operations will be inspected by the City Engineer’s
office:
            a.)   Preliminary grading;
            b.)   Backfilling of all trenches and excavations in the right-of-
way;
            c.)   Preparation of the subgrade;
            d.)   Setting of forms;
            e.)   Paving (rigid and flexible);
            f.)   Inlet construction;
            g.)   Curing of rigid pavement;
            h.)   Removal of forms and berm compaction;
            i.)   Sealing of joints;
            j.)   Storm sewer construction;
            k.)   Any construction of utilities within the street right-of-way;
and
            l.)   Any construction of structures within the right-of-way.
         2.)   Any of the above listed construction operations that are
performed without advance notice to the City Engineer’s office may result in
coring of the pavement, subgrade boring and nonacceptance of the improvement if
it does not meet the specifications of the City Engineer. Costs to provide
sufficient proof that any work performed is acceptable shall be the
responsibility of the contractor.
      (C)   Inspection fees. The fees shall cover the actual wage, salary or
contract cost of the inspection service, plus overhead, as determined by the
City Engineer and/or the agencies having jurisdiction over sanitary sewer or
water (where applicable), to cover such items as employee benefits, engineering
service and transportation. The developer shall be held responsible for all
inspection fees, which will be payable monthly. The performance bond posted by
the developer guarantees the payment of all inspection fees and no bonds will
be released until all current inspection fees have been paid in full.
      (D)   Roadway construction. All work shall be done in conformance with
the approved improvement plans and the Ohio Department of Transportation
Construction and Material Specifications, as supplied by the City Engineer’s
notes. This information shall be available upon request from the City
Engineer’s office.
      (E)   Construction staking. The setting and marking of all line, profile
and grade stakes necessary for the layout of the work in accordance with the
construction plans will be performed under the supervision of a registered
professional surveyor. Should any misunderstanding arise as to the intent or
meaning of the construction plans, or any discrepancy appear in the same, or in
the proper methods of setting and marking of the construction stakes, the
decision of the City Engineer in such cases shall be final. Pavement and pipe
grade stakes shall be set at 25-foot intervals on horizontal and vertical
curves and for all grades less than 1%. Tangent pavement grades and pipe grades
over 1% may be set at a maximum interval of 50 feet. The City Engineer’s
inspector may ask for additional grade stakes if it is deemed necessary. A
laser control method as approved by the City Engineer may be substituted for
the above.
      (F)   Testing. All material supplied shall be plant inspected as directed
by the City Engineer. Compaction tests shall be made in fill areas in the
right-of-way and on the subgrade prior to paving, as directed by the City
Engineer. Pavement tests shall be conducted on site as directed by the City
Engineer. The City Engineer reserves the right to order pavement cores made if
conditions warrant. The testing mentioned above shall be done by a private
testing laboratory acceptable to the City Engineer and shall be done at no cost
to the city.
      (G)   Field changes. Approval of final plans shall not prevent the City
Engineer or his or her agent from ordering needed changes he or she deems
necessary in the field as work progresses. This extra work shall be at the
developer’s expense. If it becomes necessary to modify the improvements as
approved due to unforeseen circumstances, the developer shall inform the City
Engineer, in writing, of the conditions requiring modification. Written
authorization from the City Engineer to make the required modification must be
received by the developer and/or the developer’s engineer before proceeding
with the construction of the improvement.
      (H)   Street name signs, stop signs and other required regulatory
signage. The developer shall be responsible for the cost of the signs and
installation of street name signs, stop signs and other required regulatory
signs as agreed upon and authorized at the preconstruction meeting with the
city prior to the start of construction. The materials, construction, methods
and location shall be approved so as to meet city standards and regulations.
Installation shall be complete at such time as the hard surface is open to
construction vehicles servicing individual sites within the subdivision. No
zoning permits shall be issued for structures within the subdivision prior to
the installation of street name signs.
   (15)   Final acceptance of improvements in major subdivisions.
      (A)   Monuments. Monuments shall be set where shown on the approved
subdivision plat. Before final acceptance of the improvement, the developer
shall have his or her registered professional surveyor certify to the City
Engineer, in writing, that all required monuments and iron pins are in place
and that any monuments or pins that were removed during construction have been
replaced.
      (B)   As built drawings. At the completion of the construction and before
acceptance, the developer’s engineer shall update for the City Engineer and the
agencies having jurisdiction over sanitary sewer or water (where applicable),
the set of linen or Mylar tracings for permanent record, showing the locations,
sizes and elevations of all improvements as constructed. An electronic media
version shall also be submitted in a program compatible with the city’s
computer systems.
      (C)   Final inspection. Upon completion of all improvements, including
roads, grading, culverts, seeding, mulching, monumentation, street name signs
and other items, the developer shall notify the City Engineer and/or the
agencies having jurisdiction over sanitary sewer or water (where applicable),
by letter, that all of the improvements have been completed. The Planning
Department will then schedule an inspection of the completed improvements with
the City Engineer and Service Director. The developer, his or her engineer and
a city representative may accompany the City Engineer or his or her
representative on the inspection. Any discrepancies shall be recorded and the
developer and the contractor will be furnished a copy of this report, and shall
be expected to proceed as soon as possible with any corrections. Another final
inspection will be made for acceptance.
      (D)   Recommendation for acceptance. If the construction is found to be
satisfactory and all inspection monies are paid, the City Engineer, Service
Director, Planning Director and/or the agencies having jurisdiction over
sanitary sewer or water (where applicable), will make a recommendation to the
Mayor for final acceptance of the improvements and release of the performance
bond and acceptance of the maintenance bond.
   (16)   Maintenance bond period.
      (A)   Maintenance of improvements.
         1.)   The developer shall be responsible for the maintenance of the
improvements during the construction period and for a minimum period of two
years after release of the performance bond and acceptance of the maintenance
bond. The developer is responsible to request that the city inspect the
improvements. Upon inspection by the city, the developer shall be notified of
the need for any corrections to be made to the improvements. Should the
developer fail to perform such necessary improvements within the time
specified, the city may perform said improvements, at which time the developer
will forfeit a portion of the cash maintenance bond to pay for said
improvements.
         2.)   The maintenance of sanitary sewer and water supply systems shall
be the responsibility of the agencies having jurisdiction over sanitary sewer
or water or the owner of said service line, upon acceptance by either the city
or the respective representative of the owner, subject to call on any bonds if
repair work is necessary within a one-year period after acceptance.
      (B)   Repair of damage. Any damage done to the improvements by
construction traffic, local traffic or any other means shall be repaired, or
the damaged materials replaced, before the next phase of construction is begun.
      (C)   Snow and ice removal. Prior to the release of the performance bond,
the developer shall perform all work necessary to keep the road passable for
automobile traffic to service all families living in the subdivision. The roads
shall be open for emergency equipment at all times for all occupied dwellings.
Should the developer fail to provide a passable roadway, the city may request
all costs and expenses incurred in maintaining said roadway from the bonding
company. Upon the release of the performance bond, the city shall accept
responsibility for the snow and ice removal on accepted roads, even though they
may be covered by a maintenance bond.
      (D)   Mud removal. The developer and his or her contractor shall be
responsible for the removal of mud or other debris that may become located on
the pavement surface. Should the developer fail to perform the said removal, he
or she shall be liable for all costs and expenses incurred in the removal of
mud or debris.
(Prior Code, § 1229.01) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009; Ord. 2018-13, passed
8-28-2018)
§ 157.131 TRANSPORTATION AND ACCESS.
   (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to support the creation of a
highly connected transportation system within the city in order to:
      (A)   Provide choices for drivers, bicyclists and pedestrians;
      (B)   Increase the effectiveness of municipal service delivery;
      (C)   Promote walking and bicycling as an alternative mode of
transportation;
      (D)   Connect neighborhoods to each other and to local destinations;
      (E)   Reduce vehicle miles of travel and travel time;
      (F)   Reduce emergency response time; and
      (G)   Mitigate traffic impacts of new development.
   (2)   Applicability. The standards of this section shall apply to all
development in the city.
   (3)   Traffic impact study required. To promote efficient access management,
the Planning Director may request a traffic impact study be conducted by the
developer for any project he or she feels warrants the study at the time of
submission of the preliminary plan, general plan or site plan. The Planning
Director may base his or her decision on one or more of the following:
      (A)   The proposed development generates 100 or more added new peak hour
trips to and/or from the site during the adjacent roadway’s peak hours or
during the development’s peak hour, and the proposed development generates more
than 1,000 trips daily;
      (B)   The development is within 500 feet of a high-accident (five or more
per year) intersection or section of roadway;
      (C)   One or more of the proposed access drives to the development is
within 500 feet of a public roadway intersection or within 250 feet of a drive
that is a high traffic volume generator as determined by the City Engineer;
      (D)   The traffic generated by the proposed development will increase the
ADT by 25% or more on roadways in adjacent neighborhoods, as determined by the
City Engineer;
      (E)   Traffic volumes of 10,000 ADT or higher exist on roadways adjacent
to the proposed development; or
      (F)   The City Engineer determines that other conditions exist in the
vicinity of the proposed development that may be negatively impacted by the
development.
   (4)   General provisions.
      (A)   General circulation.
         1.)   Site limitations and site layout. Uses, buildings, parking
areas, drives and other site features shall be designed to be suitable for the
site location and conditions, and shall not create on-site or off-site traffic
impacts which exceed those normally expected to be caused by uses in the
district.
         2.)   Public street access. Curb cuts and drives providing access
between a site and a public or private street shall be designed to:
            a.)   Minimize unnecessary impacts on the street, including, but
not limited to, poor visibility, steep grades, slowing or obstruction of
traffic, causing unusual, confusing or sudden traffic movements, or unnecessary
points of conflict with vehicles on the street and with vehicles in nearby
access drives;
            b.)   Minimize negative impacts on pedestrians by providing good
visibility between pedestrians and vehicles, and by providing safe pedestrian
walking and standing areas;
            c.)   Create points of access appropriate for the configuration of
the property and the proposed use, but in no greater number than necessary to
provide reasonable access to the site;
            d.)   Provide sufficient distance between the street and potential
points of vehicular or pedestrian conflict within the site (including, but not
limited to, cars backing into travel lanes, driveway or parking aisle
intersections, pedestrian crossings, or loading areas) to prevent obstruction
of drives and traffic backups in the street;
            e.)   Provide a landscaped median where a curb cut is designed to
accommodate more than three lanes of traffic; provided that priority shall be
given to proper alignment and sight lines coordinated with other drives in the
area. The width of any such median shall not be calculated into the total width
of the driveway; and
            f.)   Reconstruct or eliminate existing nonconforming access, such
as oversized curb cuts or parking lots which cause obstruction of street
traffic, to comply with the provisions of this Code.
         3.)   Cross access with abutting sites. Where physically feasible and
appropriate for reducing points of conflict in the street, property owners
requesting approval for more than one access drive on a public street frontage
shall, as directed by the PZC or the Planning Department, make a written
request for joint access drives to the owners of the abutting properties having
frontage on the same street. The applicant shall provide to the city a copy of
the request and any response. Such provision shall not apply to single-family
and two-family dwellings.
      (B)   Guardrails. A guardrail shall be installed as required by the City
Engineer. The guardrail shall be in accordance with state standards. The
subdivider shall submit details to the City Engineer for approval.
      (C)   Drives and driveway culverts. For drives and driveways along a city
highway, where a road opening permit is required from the Department of Public
Service, a bond may be required and the City Engineer’s specifications must be
complied with.
      (D)   Bridges. Bridges, being, by definition, a structure of greater than
a ten-foot span, shall be designed in accordance with the latest design
regulations as practiced in the Bureau of Bridges and approved by the City
Engineer. A copy of all bridge plans shall also be forwarded to the County
Engineer for review and comment. Reference shall also be made to current
standard bridge drawings. Design flood elevations shall be indicated on plan
profile sheets and on structure site plans.
   (5)   Street design standards.
      (A)   Arrangement.
         1.)   The arrangement, character, extent, width and location of all
streets shall conform to the Long Range Land Use Plan. Proposed streets and
public access to adjacent unplatted lands shall be designed so that the entire
area can be served with a coordinated public street system.
         2.)   The width of any right-of-way should be provided so that all
underground utilities can be located outside of pavement areas.
         3.)   All underground utilities should be placed within a utility
easement in accordance with §
157.130(9).
      (B)   Dedication. Unless otherwise approved as a private street, all
street rights-of-way shall be dedicated to the public in fee simple.
      (C)   Private streets.
         1.)   Private streets shall comply with the design standards and
bonding requirements of this chapter. All references in this section to the
public right-of-way shall apply to private street lots.
         2.)   The private street access shall provide perpetual access for
authorized emergency vehicles, public and private utility maintenance and
service personnel, solid waste collection services, the U.S. Postal Services,
and government employees in pursuit of their official duties.
         3.)   Gates on private streets shall only be permitted with approval
from the PZC and the Fire Division.
         4.)   The city may, but is not obligated to, accept private streets
for public access and maintenance. The procedure for requesting the city to
accept private streets shall be as follows:
            a.)   A petition shall be submitted to City Council, signed by all
property owners with access to the subject private street;
            b.)   All of the streets and roadways shall be in a condition that
is acceptable to the city at the time the petition is submitted;
            c.)   All access control structures, signage and other structures
not consistent with a public street shall be removed;
            d.)   If any maintenance or repair of the private streets is
required in order for acceptance, the city may use any outstanding balance of
funds established through a homeowner’s association or the city may assess each
individual property owner on a fair and equitable basis as determined by the
City Engineer; and
            e.)   Each lot owner shall execute an instrument of dedication for
filing of record, the form of which shall be approved by the Law Director.
      (D)   Classification.
         1.)   Major arterial thoroughfares shall be planned for continuation
of movement of traffic between points of heavy traffic generation and from one
section of the community to another. Said thoroughfare shall contain as few
intersections with minor streets as possible.
         2.)   Local streets shall provide direct and full access to each lot
and shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
The street system shall be so designed that all proposed streets shall be in
general conformity to a plan for the most advantageous development of the
entire neighborhood. The streets shall be extended to the boundaries of the
tract to be recorded, unless prevented by topography or other physical
conditions, or unless, in the opinion of the PZC, such extension is not
necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision
with the development of adjacent tracts.
         3.)   Parallel streets may be required along an existing or proposed
major arterial thoroughfare to provide access to lots along such major arterial
thoroughfares.
      (E)   Street design. Streets shall be designed in accordance with the
city’s typical street standards as available in the City Engineer’s office.
      (F)   Half streets. Half streets shall be prohibited, except where there
is an existing half street adjacent to the subdivision, in which case the
remaining half of the street shall be platted.
      (G)   Cul-de-sac and dead-end streets.
         1.)   Dead-end streets or cul-de-sacs will be approved only when
necessitated by topography or other physical conditions or where they are
appropriate for the type of development contemplated.
         2.)   A street designed to be a permanent cul-de-sac, which contains
central water service and fire hydrants for its full length, may serve up to 25
lots; otherwise a permanent cul-de-sac shall not be longer than 1,000 feet.
Permanent cul-de-sacs shall be provided at the closed end with a paved turn-
around having an outside pavement radius of at least 37.5 feet and a street
right-of-way line radius of at least 50 feet or such greater dimension agreed
upon by the developer and the City Engineer.
         3.)   If a cul-de-sac is of a temporary nature and a future extension
into adjacent land is anticipated, then said turning circle beyond the normal
street width shall be in the nature of an easement. Such easements shall be
automatically vacated to abutting property owners when said dead-end street is
legally extended into adjacent land. If such dead-end street extends only the
depth of the corner lot past a street intersection, no turn-around will be
required. Subdividers shall be required to provide a two-foot reservation strip
in the name of the city at the end of all dead-end streets. This strip will
become public highway only upon extension of the dedicated street. The
developer extending the street will be responsible for removing the temporary
portions of the cul-de-sac, regrading, seeding and the like.
      (H)   Corner radii. Property lines at street intersections shall be
rounded with a radius of not less than 25 feet or as required by the City
Engineer.
      (I)   Vertical alignment. Simple parabolic vertical curves shall be used
to effect a gradual change between tangent grades where the algebraic
difference of grades in percent is greater than 0.50.
      (J)   Horizontal alignment. Angles in the alignment of street centerlines
shall be connected by a curve with a radius of not less than 300 feet for local
streets, 800 feet for collector and industrial streets, and 1,200 feet for
major arterial thoroughfares. Between reverse curves, there shall be a tangent
distance of 100 feet.
      (K)   Intersections.
         1.)   No more than four road legs will be permitted at any
intersection, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.
         2.)   Road intersection shall be at 90 degrees where practical, but in
no case less than 70 degrees.
         3.)   Each intersecting road shall have a tangent distance of at least
150 feet for local roads or a curve with a minimum 1,400 feet radius.
         4.)   Those roads intersecting each other from opposite sides shall be
directly opposite where possible. Street jogs with centerline off-sets shall be
prohibited, unless specifically approved by the PZC and the City Engineer.
         5.)   The minimum radius of right-of-way lines at intersection corners
shall be 25 feet.
         6.)   The intersection of subdivision roads shall have a minimum
horizontal sight distance of 400 feet.
         7.)   Back slopes shall be cut back to aid the sight distance as
required by the City Engineer.
         8.)   There shall be a minimum separation of 300 feet between
intersections.
      (L)   Boulevards and roadway islands. Boulevards and roadway islands
shall be permitted only when approved by the City Engineer and City Council.
      (M)   Curbs and gutters. Concrete curbs and gutters shall conform to
typical drawings as approved by the City Engineer. In addition, a ramp with a
nonslip surface shall be built into the curb at each pedestrian crosswalk so
that the sidewalk and street blend to a common level. Such ramps shall be
constructed in accordance with state standards insofar as feasible.
   (6)   Sidewalks and pedestrian facilities. All site elements shall be
located and designed in a manner which promotes safe and efficient movement of
pedestrians to, from and within the site. Pedestrian facilities and site
elements which affect pedestrian movement shall comply with the following
guidelines.
      (A)   Where physically possible and appropriate to the nature of the
abutting uses, on-site sidewalks shall be aligned to connect with similar
sidewalks on abutting sites.
      (B)   City Council may require the construction and dedication of
walkways and connecting sidewalks where it finds that such walkways are
necessary for pedestrian circulation between a proposed subdivision and
commercial uses, schools, parks and other public facilities. A minimum easement
width dedication shall be 20 feet and said sidewalk or walkway shall be a
minimum of five feet in width.
      (C)   Pedestrian facilities and parking lots and other areas which will
be utilized by pedestrians, shall be designed to facilitate pedestrian use,
with special attention given to use by persons with mobility limitations and by
persons transporting children or packages between vehicles and buildings. Where
main pedestrian routes are designed with steps or steep grades, alternative
routes shall be provided to comply with handicapped accessibility standards.
      (D)   Signs, pavement markings and/or special surface materials shall be
installed in any location on a site where necessary to promote pedestrian
safety at crossings of vehicular drives. Pedestrian crossings of major drives
shall be located and marked in a manner to encourage safe crossing.
      (E)   Bike storage racks and other bike-friendly facilities shall be
required where a site abuts or is in proximity to a bike route.
(Prior Code, § 1229.02) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.132 DRAINAGE STANDARDS.
   (1)   Applicability. The standards of this section shall apply to all
development in the city.
   (2)   Drainage design.
      (A)   No development will be approved unless there is an outlet for all
storm water. Provisions shall be made to accommodate effectively the increased
runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after
development. It may be necessary to direct surface water to a drainage ditch,
stream or existing storm system which has the capacity to carry the flow. No
natural drainage course shall be altered and no fill, buildings or structures
shall be placed in, on or over it, unless provision is made for the flow of
water in a manner satisfactory to the City Engineer. An easement shall be
provided on both sides of an existing surface drainage course for the purpose
of maintaining, protecting, widening, deepening, enclosing or otherwise
improving such stream for drainage purposes.
      (B)   If the same is across private property, a right-of-way or easement
must be obtained by the subdivider or developer in the name of the city, as
reviewed and approved by the Planning Department and the City Engineer. These
rights-of-way or easements should be shown on the plat, site plan or
construction plans, as applicable. A copy of the recorded easement shall be
furnished to the Planning Department.
      (C)   Storm sewer laterals will be provided as directed by the City
Engineer for each (house) lot on a street having a curb and gutter.
      (D)   The design criteria for the drainage system shall be based on the
Ohio Department of Transportation design policy and the criteria established by
the City Engineer’s office. This criteria shall apply to development along
existing roads, as well as those requiring new roads to be constructed. This
criteria shall be available upon request from the City Engineer’s office.
         1.)   Road drainage system. The road storm drainage system shall serve
as the local drainage system. It shall be designed to carry roadway, adjacent
land and residential or commercial development storm water drainage, as
applicable. To prevent excessive pipe sizes, storm sewers shall drain into
natural waterways as soon as possible.
         2.)   Off-road drainage system. The design of the off-road drainage
system shall include the watershed affecting the development and shall be
extended to a watercourse or ditch adequate to receive the storm drainage.
      (E)   Storm water management requirements.
         1.)   The design and construction of storm water management facilities
shall require the review and approval of the City Engineer in accordance with
the technical criteria described in the County Storm Water Management Program
Guidelines as referred to by the city.
         2.)   Allowable types of storm water management facilities include,
but are not limited to:
            a.)    Retention ponds;
            b.)   Detention basins;
            c.)   Underground storage tanks;
            d.)   Rooftop storage areas;
            e.)   Parking lot storage areas;
            f.)   Infiltration/recharge ditches; and
            g.)   Swales/screening areas.
         3.)   All project sites or development areas required to implement
storm water management practices and facilities shall, at a minimum, limit the
peak rate of discharge from the project site or development area to the
downstream receiving watercourse as follows:
            a.)   Storm water management measures shall be required to maintain
the post development peak discharge at a level equal to or less than the
predevelopment peak discharge rate for a 24-hour duration, two-year frequency
storm event;
            b.)   Storm water management facilities shall be designed to
control the volume, timing and rate of flows; and
            c.)   Velocity reduction devices must be placed at all outlet
points, where necessary, to provide a nonerosive flow velocity to the receiving
watercourse. The City Engineer may waive these requirements if the
characteristics of the receiving watercourse, project site or development area
are such that this type of control would be contrary to accepted engineering
practice or detrimental to the environment.
      (F)   Wetlands. Wetlands will be identified on the improvement drawings.
If they are going to be changed in any manner, the developer must contact the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. The County Soil and Water Conservation District
has a copy of the wetland resource maps for the county and the city. The County
Soil and Water Conservation District will point out such wetlands in its review
of the preliminary plan. If a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers permit is required,
the permit number shall be shown on the final plat.
   (3)   Drainage system design and protection.
      (A)   Flood hazard. If any portion of the land within a subdivision is
subject to flooding (floodplains from the federal floodplain map), sewer
overflow, elevations or other hazards, due consideration shall be given to such
problems in the design of the subdivision, and the floodplain must be shown on
the improvement plans and plat.
      (B)   Dams or basins (embankments). Copies of detailed drawings of
proposed dams or basins and all calculations shall be submitted to the City
Engineer for approval. The developer or his or her engineer shall apply for a
permit from the Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water, if
applicable, and any other applicable agencies.
      (C)   Protection of drainage systems.
         1.)   The subdivider shall adequately protect all ditches (roadways
and watercourses) to the satisfaction of the City Engineer as shown by
calculations made in accordance with the policy of the Ohio Department of
Transportation and the subdivision drainage criteria of the City Engineer.
         2.)   In all cases, any drainage facilities within a subdivision shall
be in a stable condition, free from either erosion or sedimentation, and/or
other debris. Any damage resulting from erosion, scour, silting of drainageways
or blockage of storm drainage systems on and off the development, caused by the
construction, shall be corrected at the developer’s expense.
      (D)   Drainage outlets. Where the City Engineer finds it necessary to
clean, alter or reconstruct a natural drainage course or storm sewer system
outside the development boundary to provide a storm water outlet, or to prevent
damage to other properties due to an increased or accelerated flow, the outlet
shall be provided and constructed at the expense of the developer and in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the City Engineer.
      (E)   Drainage drawings. The developer’s engineer shall make a complete
study of the drainage area contributing to the development and submit copies of
all data and calculation sheets to the City Engineer for review and approval.
   (4)   Drainage easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a drainageway,
a storm sewer or drainage easement conforming substantially to the lines of
such drainageway shall be provided. The easement shall be a minimum of 20 feet,
or as the City Engineer and the PZC may require.
(Prior Code, § 1229.03) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.133 LOT LAYOUT AND GENERAL SITE REGULATIONS.
   (1)   Blocks.
      (A)   Residential block lengths. The long dimension of a residential
block shall not exceed 1,500 feet.
      (B)   Commercial or industrial blocks. Blocks intended to be used for
commercial or industrial purposes shall be designed specifically for such uses
with adequate space set aside for off-street parking and loading facilities.
      (C)   Pedestrian walkways (crosswalks).
         1.)   Pedestrian walkways not less than ten feet wide, or of such
greater width as is deemed necessary by the Planning Department, shall be
required across streets where the Planning Department or the City Engineer
determines that pedestrian access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers,
transportation and other community facilities is necessary.
         2.)   Paving, fencing and other improvements may be required by the
PZC.
   (2)   Lots.
      (A)   Conformity to dimensional standards. The lot size, width and depth,
and the minimum building setback lines, shall, as a minimum, conform to this
Code.
      (B)   Access to public streets. The subdivision of land, whether as a
major or minor subdivision, shall provide each lot with 85 feet of continuous
frontage on a dedicated street. This standard may be reduced to 50 feet by the
PZC for lots fronting on a permanent cul-de-sac or other curved street
frontages (e.g., knuckles).
      (C)   Double frontage lots.
         1.)   Lots shall be laid out so that there are no double frontages,
except:
            a.)   Where extreme conditions in elevation prevent access to the
lot from one of the streets; or
            b.)   Where it is necessary to separate residential lots from major
arterial thoroughfares.
         2.)   Where double frontage lots are created adjacent to major
arterial thoroughfares, a reserve strip along the major arterial thoroughfares
shall be deeded to the City Council, as approved by the Mayor, by resolution or
ordinance pursuant to the City Charter. The plat shall state that there shall
be no right of access across such reserve strip. The Planning Department may
require that a decorative six-foot high solid board fence or masonry fence be
constructed or that a ten-foot wide planting screen be provided.
      (D)   Construction on two or more lots. When a building is proposed to be
constructed on two or more adjacent recorded lots or tracts of land, such lots
shall be combined and the new legal description or replat document depicting
one lot shall be recorded.
      (E)   Access to public thoroughfares. No building shall be erected on a
lot which does not abut on at least one public thoroughfare, or at least one
private road built in accordance with public thoroughfare standards and
specifications, except upon presentation to Council of evidence of the
existence of a cash bond sufficient to ensure construction of said thoroughfare
or private road.
      (F)   Visual obstructions. On a corner lot, no visual obstruction of
living or nonliving material in excess of two feet in height is permitted
within a 30-foot radius from the intersection of the road rights-of-way.
   (3)   Lot lines. Lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial
to street lines. Lot lines should follow municipal, township and county
boundary lines rather than cross them.
   (4)   Lot depth. No lot depth shall exceed four and one-half times the lot
width or be less than one and one-half times the lot width at the minimum
building setback line, unless otherwise exempted. The lot width shall be
measured at the minimum building setback line.
   (5)   Public facilities and open space.
      (A)   Public facilities. The design of subdivisions should provide for
parks, playgrounds or other sites for public use as required by the PZC. There
shall be a time period of not more than six months during which the developer
and public agency can agree upon compensation to the developer and the quantity
of property needed for a public facility. If an agreement is not reached within
this six-month period, the property will be returned to its original design. If
there is an adopted land use and thoroughfare or comprehensive plan for the
area, such public facilities shall conform to such plan.
      (B)   Natural features. The developer is encouraged to give consideration
to preserving outstanding natural features, such as scenic spots, water bodies
or exceptionally fine groves of trees.
   (6)   Easements. Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines
shall be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be of such widths as
may be reasonably necessary for the utilities using the easement. It shall be
the subdivider or developer’s responsibility to determine appropriate easement
widths as required by the utility company.
(Prior Code, § 1229.04) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.134 PARKING, LOADING AND STACKING REGULATIONS.
   (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prevent and alleviate the
congestion of public streets, to minimize the detrimental effects of vehicular
use areas on adjacent properties, and to promote the safety and welfare of the
public by establishing minimum requirements for parking and loading areas.
   (2)   Applicability. Off-street parking, loading and stacking facilities
shall be provided in conformity with this section as a condition precedent to
occupancy of a residential, business, industrial or recreational use, and at
any time a building, structure or use of land is enlarged, expanded or
increased in capacity or use.
   (3)   Rules for computations. The following rules shall apply when computing
parking, loading or stacking spaces.
      (A)   On-street parking. On-street parking spaces shall not be counted
toward off-street parking space requirements.
      (B)   Multiple uses. Unless otherwise noted or approved as part of a
shared parking agreement, off-street parking areas serving more than one use
shall provide parking in an amount equal to the combined total of the
requirements for each use.
      (C)   Fractions. When a measurement of the number of required spaces
results in a fractional number, any fraction of one-half or less shall be
rounded down to the next lower whole number and any fraction of more than one-
half shall be rounded up to the next higher whole number.
      (D)   Area measurements.
         1.)   Unless otherwise specifically noted, all square footage-based
standards shall be computed based on gross floor area of all floors in a
nonresidential building.
         2.)   Up to 20% of the total gross floor area may be excluded from the
calculation if the floor area is used for storage, packaging of merchandise or
maintenance.
      (E)   Occupancy or capacity based standards.
         1.)   For the purpose of computing requirements based on employees,
students, residents, or occupants, calculations shall be based on the largest
number of persons working on a single shift, the maximum enrollment, or the
maximum fire-rated capacity, whichever is applicable, and whichever results in
a greater number of spaces.
         2.)   In hospitals, bassinets shall not be counted as beds.
         3.)   In the case of benches, pews and similar seating accommodations,
each 18 inches thereof shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of
determining applicable requirements.
      (F)   Unlisted uses.
         1.)   Upon receiving an application for a use not specifically listed
in the schedules below, the Planning Department shall apply the standard
specified for the listed use that is deemed most similar to the proposed use in
regards to use, size and intensity of use.
         2.)   If the Planning Department determines that there is no listed
use similar to the proposed use, intensity or size, they may refer to the
estimates of parking demand based on recommendations of the Institute of
Traffic Engineers (ITE).
   (4)   Parking space requirements.
      (A)   
Table 157.134-1  defines the number of parking spaces required for each use
within the city.
      (B)   A minimum of five spaces is required for any use other than a
single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling, unless approved as a conditional
use pursuant to §
157.052.
      (C)    Whenever the parking requirements of
Table 157.134-1 can be shown by the applicant to result in an excessive number
of parking spaces and that a lesser number of spaces is appropriate and
consistent with this Code, the PZC may approve a reduction in required spaces.
Table 157.134-1: Required Number of Parking Spaces
   U   Required Parking Spaces
Table 157.134-1: Required Number of Parking Spaces
   Use                                  Required Parking Spaces
   Commercial and Office Uses
Amphitheaters, auditoriums, stadiums,   1 space per 3 fixed seats or 1 space
theaters and other places of assembly   per 2 persons of maximum occupancy,
                                        whichever is greater
Banquet halls                           1 space per 2 persons or 1 per 1,000
                                        square feet, whichever is greater
                                        15 spaces per 1,000 square feet or 1
Bars and taverns                        space for each 4 seats, whichever is
                                        greater
                                        2 spaces for the owner or operator,
Bed and breakfast establishment         plus 1 space for each bedroom rented to
                                        the public
Day care centers                        1 space for every 4 students
Financial institutions                  4 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Funeral homes                           1 space per 50 square feet
                                        4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of
Garden store, nurseries or greenhouse   indoor sales area, plus 1 space per
                                        1,000 square feet of greenhouse or net
                                        outdoor sales
Health and fitness centers              5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Hotels and motels                       1 space per room or suite
Kennels                                 2 spaces for drop-off and pick-up of
                                        animals
Medical or dental offices               5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
                                        3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor
Motor vehicle body repair or motor      area, excluding service bays, plus 2
vehicle repair and service              spaces per service bay (service bay may
                                        not be counted as a parking space)
Motor vehicle car washes                1 space minimum and 1 space per
                                        employee
                                        4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor
                                        area, excluding service bays, plus 1
Motor vehicle fuel sales                space per fuel pump or service bay
                                        (service bay may not be counted as a
                                        parking space)
Motor vehicle rental or sales           1 space per 400 square feet of gross
                                        floor area
Offices                                 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Outdoor displays, sales or storage      1 space per 750 square feet
                                        6 spaces per 1,000 square feet or 2
Personal service establishments         spaces per station/chair, whichever is
                                        greater
Pool or billiard hall                   10 spaces per 1,000 square feet
                                        15 spaces per 1,000 square feet or 1
Restaurants                             space for each 4 seats, whichever is
                                        greater
Retail and service commercial uses      4 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Self-storage facilities                 1 space per 20 storage units
Social clubs and fraternal              1 space per 3 fixed seats or 1 space
organizations                           per 2 persons of maximum occupancy,
                                        whichever is greater
                                        1 space per 3 fixed seats or 1 space
Theaters                                per 2 persons of maximum occupancy,
                                        whichever is greater
Veterinarian clinics                    4 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Wireless telecommunication structures   1 space per structure
   Industrial Uses
Distribution facilities, truck          2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
terminals and warehouses
Light or heavy industrial or            2 spaces per 1,000 square feet
manufacturing uses
Warehousing or storage                  1 space per 1,500 square feet
   Institutional/Public/Recreational Uses
Ballfields                              20 spaces per field
Bowling alley                           4 spaces per bowling lane
Cemetery                                1 space per 4 seats in a chapel or
                                        place of assembly
                                        10 spaces per 1,000 square feet or 1
Clubs                                   space per 2 persons, whichever is
                                        greater
Colleges, universities and other higher 1 space for each 5 classroom seats,
educational facilities                  plus 1 space for each auditorium seat
                                        3 spaces per classroom or 1 space for
Elementary or middle/junior schools     every 3 seats in auditoriums or
                                        assembly halls, whichever is greater
Golf courses                            8 spaces per hole
Golf driving ranges or miniature golf   2 spaces per tee
courses
                                        1 space for every 2 patient beds, plus
Hospitals                               outpatient clinics, laboratories,
                                        pharmacies and other similar uses shall
                                        have 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Indoor recreational facility            2 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Libraries, museums and galleries        3 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Parks or playgrounds not otherwise      1 space per 10,000 square feet of park
specified                               or playground area
Racquetball, handball and tennis courts 5 spaces per court
                                        1 space per 3 fixed seats in the main
Religious places of worship             assembly room or 1 space per 3 persons
                                        of occupancy, whichever is greater
Senior high schools                     1 space per 5 students of capacity
Skating rinks                           5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Swimming pool                           20 spaces per 1,000 square feet of pool
                                        area
Tennis courts                           4 spaces per court
Volleyball courts                       15 spaces per court
   Residential Uses
Housing reserved for older adults (65   1 space per bed
years or older)
Multi-family dwellings                  2 spaces per dwelling unit
Nursing homes and assisted living       1 space per 3 beds
facilities
Open space subdivisions                 2 spaces per dwelling unit1
Single-family dwellings                 2 spaces per dwelling unit1
Two-family dwellings                    2 spaces per dwelling unit1
1   A minimum of one parking space shall be located within an attached or
detached parking garage
 
      (D)   Company vehicle and equipment parking. Additional parking spaces
shall be required for company vehicles and equipment. Parking facilities
required for customer and employee parking shall not be used for storage of
company vehicles and equipment, including, but not limited to, company trucks,
landscaping equipment and the like. Exceptions may be granted if:
         1.)   The applicant can demonstrate that the storage will occur only
during nonpeak hours for customer demand;
         2.)   The vehicles are stored in an area which is appropriately
screened from the public street; and
         3.)   The storage area is approved by the PZC on the site plan.
   (5)   Stacking space requirements.
      (A)   Applicability. All nonresidential uses with drive-through
facilities shall be subject to the stacking space requirements of this section.
      (B)   Minimum number of stacking spaces. The number of required stacking
spaces shall be as provided for in
Table 157.134-2; see
Figure 157.134-1 for illustration of stacking spaces.
   Table 157.134-2: Stacking Space Requirements
Activity Minimum Stacking Spaces   Measured From
         (Per Lane/Service Window)
   Table 157.134-2: Stacking Space Requirements
Activity                           Minimum Stacking Spaces   Measured From
                                   (Per Lane/Service Window)
Financial institution or automated 4                         Teller or window
teller machine (atm)
Fuel or gasoline pump island       2                         Pump island
Full service motor vehicle wash    7                         Washing bay
Other                              A minimum of 6 spaces per lane or window
Restaurant                         8                         Pick-up window
Self-service motor vehicle wash    4                         Washing bay
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4c34b21a634639eec02525999691581e5bede4c8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4502.png]
 
   Figure 157.134-1: Illustration of stacking space requirements.
      (C)   Design and layout.
         1.)   Drive-up facilities shall be located on that part of a site
which is most distant from or most screened from existing or planned abutting
sensitive uses (such as residences or offices) on abutting properties, except
where existing uses are nonconforming. Where site conditions necessitate
locating a drive-up facility near to a sensitive use, the area between the uses
shall be heavily screened as directed by the PZC.
         2.)   Drive-up facilities, their stacking areas and routes of access
shall be located so as to not interfere with vehicles or pedestrian movement on
the public street or within the site. Stacking areas for drive-up facilities
shall not be the sole or primary site egress route. Stacking areas shall not
utilize parking or aisles required for access to parking.
         3.)   Drive-up facilities which utilize microphones or other audible
signals shall be designed to minimize sound impacts upon abutting uses. Hours
of operation shall be as approved by the PZC.
         4.)   Stacking spaces shall be a minimum of ten feet by 20 feet in
size.
         5.)   Stacking spaces may not impede on- or off-site traffic movements
or movements in or out of off-street parking spaces.
         6.)   Stacking spaces shall be separated from other internal driveways
by surface markings. Raised medians may be required where deemed necessary by
the PZC for the purpose of traffic movement and safety.
   (6)   Loading space requirements.
      (A)   Applicability. All nonresidential uses with structures with a gross
floor area in excess of 8,000 square feet shall be subject to the off-street
loading requirements of this section.
      (B)   Number of off-street loading spaces required. Off-street loading
spaces shall be provided in accordance with the schedule set forth in
Table 157.134-3 and shall not conflict or overlap with any areas used for
parking.
Table 157.134-3: Off-Street Loading Requirements
Gross Floor Area of Structure Number of Required
(Square Feet)                 Loading Spaces
Table 157.134-3: Off-Street Loading Requirements
Gross Floor Area of Structure Number of Required
(Square Feet)                 Loading Spaces
0 - 8,000                     0
8,001 - 50,000                1
50,001 - 100,000              2
100,001 - 200,000             3
200,001 - 400,000             4
Each additional 200,000       1
 
      (C)   General design standards. Every loading space shall be designed,
constructed and maintained in accordance with the standards and requirements
set forth below.
         1.)   Loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the building
or structure to which they are accessory. No loading space shall be located in
any required front yard, nor shall it permit any vehicle to extend into any
front yard or across any lot lines of a more restrictive district while the
vehicle is being loaded or unloaded.
         2.)   Loading facilities for receipt or shipping of equipment,
material or waste shall be located on rear or side facades of a building which
are not visible from a public street or from an existing or planned residential
area.
         3.)   No required loading space shall be less than 12 feet in width or
40 feet in length or have a vertical clearance of less than 14 feet.
         4.)   Loading spaces shall be designed and arranged to provide access
to a street or alley in a manner that will create the least possible
interference with traffic movement and parking lot circulation. The Zoning
Division shall approve access to and from loading spaces.
         5.)   Loading areas shall not create additional curb cuts, unless
approved by the PZC.
         6.)   All loading areas shall be clearly marked and distinguishable
from parking spaces.
         7.)   No part of any truck or van that is being loaded or unloaded may
extend into the right-of-way of a public thoroughfare.
         8.)   Loading spaces shall be designed with sufficient apron area to
accommodate truck-turning movements and to prevent backing of trucks onto any
street right-of-way.
   (7)   Design of vehicular use areas. All vehicular use areas, including off-
street parking, loading and stacking areas, shall meet the following
provisions, unless otherwise provided for in this Code.
      (A)   General guidelines for vehicular use areas.
         1.)   Parking facilities shall be designed for storage of customer and
employee vehicles in a manner suited to the nature of the use and its vehicular
impacts, including the number and frequency of visits, length of visits and
vehicle types.
         2.)   Parking facilities shall be designed with adequate locations for
storage of plowed snow.
         3.)   Parking facilities shall be designed to facilitate cleaning of
pavement and to minimize locations where litter and other waste collects.
         4.)   Parking facilities shall be designed to comply with all specific
standards and guidelines of this Code, but applicants shall seek to minimize
the amount of pavement required to comply, and no provision of this Code shall
be interpreted to require the construction of paved areas not deemed necessary
by the PZC for the functioning of the use and its parking facility.
         5.)   Parking facilities shall be equipped with waste containers
sufficient in location, type and volume for customer use.
         6.)   Parking and loading areas shall be lighted to allow for safe
movement of both vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
         7.)   Where parking is not provided near the main entrance of a
building, space(s) shall be provided for drop-off/pick-up of a person with
mobility limitations. Special attention to this need shall be given where
frequent drop-offs/pick-ups are likely, such as medical facilities and
restaurants. Such drop-off/pick-up sites may be located in drives; provided
that they do not unduly interfere with movement into or out of the site from
the street.
         8.)   Buildings and uses which involve frequent loading of bulky
merchandise by customers (for example, grocery stores or building supply
stores), shall provide adequate drive-up loading spaces and corrals for the
collection of any shopping carts. The location and design of cart corrals shall
be as approved by the PZC.
         9.)   Site elements shall be designed to provide safe and speedy
access for police, fire and emergency medical service.
      (B)   Location and setback requirements.
         1.)   Vehicular use areas shall be located on the same lot as the
principal use they serve, unless the spaces meet the requirements of division
(8)(C) below.
         2.)   Vehicular use areas shall be located, to the maximum extent
feasible, in the rear or on the side of buildings.
         3.)   Location of off-street residential parking spaces.
            a.)   For any residential use or parcel, off-street parking shall
be prohibited in the front yard with the exception of driveways providing
access from the street to the parking area.
            b.)   Within ten feet of the right-of-way, the maximum width of the
driveway for a single-family or two-family use shall be 24 feet.
         4.)   No part of a vehicular use area designed for five vehicles or
more shall be closer than five feet from the side and rear lot line of any lot
in a nonresidential district, unless it is adjacent to a residential district
where it shall be set back 50 feet from the property line adjacent to the
residential district. All setback areas shall be landscaped with grass and
planting areas and shall be well maintained.
         5.)   Vehicular use areas shall be set back from the edge of buildings
to provide for sidewalk and landscape treatments in front of the building.
         6.)   There shall be a minimum ten-foot front yard buffer area
beginning at the right-of-way line of any street. The area within such buffer
yard shall be landscaped in accordance with §
157.136(6), and maintained in good condition.
         7.)   All vehicular use areas for five vehicles or more shall be
screened on any side that adjoins or faces a property in any residential
district. Such screening shall consist of a solid masonry wall or solid fence
of not less than four and not more than six feet in height. A tight screen of
hardy evergreen shrubbery of not less than four feet in height may be used as
an alternative to the solid masonry wall or solid fence. For uses or properties
subject to §
157.136, the more restrictive landscaping, screening or buffering shall apply.
         8.)   No entrance to or exit from a vehicular use area designed for
five vehicles or more shall be closer than 50 feet to the right-of-way line of
intersecting public streets or signalized intersection.  See Figure 157.134-2 .
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4c34b21a634639eec02525999691581e5bede4c8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4506.png]
 
   Figure 157.134-2 : Illustration of vehicular use access.
      (C)   Access.
         1.)   Adequate access to a public street, easement or shared access to
an adjacent property shall be provided for each parking space with a driveway
width of at least 24 feet, but no wider than 40 feet, at the property line for
all multi-family dwellings and nonresidential uses. See
Figure
157.134-2 .
         2.)   All parking spaces shall be entered and exited along parking
aisles arranged perpendicular to access drives or aisles to the maximum extent
feasible. Parking spaces shall not be located along entry drives within 30 feet
of the right-of-way (see
Figure 157.134-3 ). This distance may be reduced to ten feet for access from a
secondary street when the lot is a corner lot with access to two public
streets.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4c34b21a634639eec02525999691581e5bede4c8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4510.png]
 
   Figure 157.134-3 : Ingress and egress into parking areas.
         3.)   Driveways shall be located so loading and unloading activities
will not hinder vehicular ingress and egress.
         4.)   To the maximum extent feasible, all uses shall provide paved,
concrete or paved pedestrian linkages to existing trail systems, parks,
schools, adjacent developments and mass transit stations or stops. Such
pedestrian linkages shall be a minimum of five feet in width.
         5.)   To the maximum extent feasible, provisions for primary access
along secondary streets shall be provided to minimize traffic congestion on
primary arterial streets.
         6.)   Lots having 250 feet or less of public street frontage shall be
permitted one, two-way access drive or a pair of one-way drives.
         7.)   Lots having more than 250 feet of public street frontage shall
be permitted two, two-way access drives or a pair of one-way drives. The
minimum spacing shall be determined by the layout of the project, subject to
site plan review.
         8.)   Shared access may be provided and is encouraged; provided that a
legal shared access agreement is submitted and approved by the Law Director
that provides for the rights of the respective parties to use the shared access
drives. This agreement shall include provisions, evidence of deed restrictions
or other recorded covenants that ensure that the access will be properly
maintained during the life of the development.
      (D)   Design standards.
         1.)   Minimum size. The minimum size of a parking space may be altered
based on aisle width and angle of parking. Parking stalls shall conform to the
minimum standards set forth in
Table 157.134-4 and
Figure 157.134-4.
         2.)   Alternative design. Parking stalls may be designed at 10' in
width x 18' in length. Use of this alternative design shall be for the purpose
of conserving hard surface area, not to maximize the number of parking stalls
on a site and is permitted with the following conditions.
            a.)   Green space, in addition to the minimum site requirement,
shall be provided on the site in the amount of 20 square feet per 10' x 18'
parking stall proposed. This additional amount of green space is the difference
in area between 10' x 20' and 10' x 18' parking stalls. The number of 10' x 18'
stalls proposed shall not exceed the maximum number of 10' x 20' stalls that
would meet the impervious surface area ratio of the site.
            b.)   Requests for variances shall not be permitted for impervious
surface area ratio if 10' x 18' parking stalls are proposed.
            c.)     The 10' x 18' stall size shall apply to all parking
configurations shown in
Table 157.134-4, with the exception of parallel parking and shall meet all
applicable provisions of this code.
            d.)   Requests for the use of any parking stall that is less than
ten feet in width shall require a variance and the provision of additional on-
site green space. The required amount of such green space shall be determined
by taking the difference in land area of the proposed stall and a standard 10'
x 20' (200 square feet) stall. No variances shall be permitted for impervious
surface area ratio when any stall less than ten feet in width is proposed.
 
Table 157.134-4: Parking Area Dimensions
             One-Way     Two-Way     Parking Stall Parking Stall
Angle of     Maneuvering Maneuvering Width         Length
Parking      Aisle Width Aisle Width (Feet)        (Feet)
(Degrees)    (Feet)      (Feet)      “B”       “C”
             “A”     “A”
0 - parallel 12          20          10            24
30 - 53      13          20          10            20
54 - 75      18          22          10            20
76 - 90      22          22          10            20
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4c34b21a634639eec02525999691581e5bede4c8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4514.png]
 
   Figure 157.134-4: Parking space dimensional requirements.
         3.)   Maneuverability areas. The following provisions shall be
followed to maintain efficient maneuverability.
            a.)   Turn around area. Where more than three parking spaces are
served by a single driveway, a turnaround area shall be provided, or other
provisions made, to permit cars to exit the parking lot without backing onto
any street or sidewalk. See maneuvering aisle widths in
Table 157.134-4 and
Figure 157.134-4.
            b.)   Back-up area. Each parking space shall be provided with a
sufficient back-up area so as to permit egress in one maneuver, consisting of
one backward and forward movement. See maneuvering aisle widths in
Table 157.134-4 and
Figure 157.134-4.
         4.)   Surface.
            a.)   All vehicular use areas shall be constructed of hard surfaced
bituminous concrete or asphalt, free from dust and so drained that surface
waters therefrom are not permitted to discharge over or onto public sidewalks,
roadways or other premises.
            b.)   Exceptions to division (7)(D)4.)(a) of this section shall be
that:
               i.)   Off-street parking areas, driveways and aisles for
residential uses on lots larger than one acre in area; and
               ii.)   Pavers that allow for grass to grow through them may be
permitted as part of a permitted landbanked parking area as described in
division (8)(A) of this section.
         5.)   Continuous curbs.
            a.)    Continuous curbs shall be made of asphalt, concrete, stone
or other similar material and shall have a minimum height of six inches and a
minimum width of six inches. They shall form a noninterrupted edge around all
landscaped areas adjacent to parking and maneuverability areas that are not
protected by wheel stops. Exceptions may be made where a curb cut provides for
drainage or storm water management. See
Figure 157.134-5.
            b.)   Continuous curbs shall be required along all parking areas
facing a street right-of-way.
            c.)   Continuous curbs shall be required to surround parking areas
in all business districts for parking lots with 20 or more parking spaces.
            d.)   Wheel stops shall not be used when a continuous curb is
provided.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4c34b21a634639eec02525999691581e5bede4c8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4518.png]
 
   Figure 157.134-5: Wheel stop or continuous curb placement.
         6.)   Wheel stops. Each wheel stop shall be a singular block of
reinforced concrete, stone or other durable material with a minimum height of
six inches, a minimum width of six inches and a minimum length of eight feet.
Wheel stops are to be securely attached to the ground and may be used only at
the end of parking stalls. Wheel stops may be attached up to two feet from the
rear edge of the parking space. See
Figure 157.134-6.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4c34b21a634639eec02525999691581e5bede4c8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4524.png]
 
   See Figure 157.134-6: Wheel stop placement.
         7.)   Placement. Wheel stops and/or continuous curbs shall be located
a minimum of four feet from any structures, buildings, walls or plant material
to prevent a vehicle from driving onto the landscaped area or hitting any
structure or plant material at the edge of a parking area with the exception of
where the area is an open grass area with no landscaping. See See
Figure 157.134-5.
         8.)   Striping.
            a.)   The individual parking spaces (stalls) shall be striped
according to the approved layout of the parking area.
            b.)   Striping shall be maintained in a clearly visible condition.
      (E)   Parking requirements for physically disabled. Applicants shall
provide parking spaces for the physically disabled as required by the Ohio
Basic Building Code and shall include all necessary markings, striping, and
signage.
      (F)   Walkway connections to public sidewalks.
         1.)   Where a sidewalk exists in a public right-of-way adjacent to the
site, or is required to be constructed as part of the development approval, a
pedestrian connection shall be constructed from the building to the sidewalk.
         2.)   The pedestrian connections shall be constructed of asphalt,
concrete or of hard surface pavers.
         3.)   The pedestrian connection may be created as part of a driveway;
provided that it is delineated with a minimum of a painted line and the portion
utilized for vehicular traffic is not reduced from the minimum width
requirements.
         4.)   The pedestrian connection shall have a minimum width of three
feet.
      (G)   Fire Code. All parking and loading plans shall conform to all
requirements set forth in the Fire Code as adopted by the city and as approved
by the Fire Division.
      (H)   Maintenance of vehicular use areas. All vehicular use areas shall
be provided with satisfactory access to a street, easement, shared access road
or alley by means of a solid and dust free driveway that meets the requirements
of this section. All vehicular use areas shall be developed and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (8)   Alternative parking. The following are permitted methods of
accommodating parking as an alternative to constructing the required number of
parking spaces on an individual lot.
      (A)   Landbanked parking. A portion of the required parking spaces may
remain landscaped and unpaved or paved with pervious pavers; provided that the
parking and unpaved areas complies with the following standards and is
authorized by the PZC. See
Figure 157.134-7.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4c34b21a634639eec02525999691581e5bede4c8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4528.png]
 
   Figure 157.134-7: Example of landbanked parking.
         1.)   The site plan shall denote the location and layout of that
portion of the parking area that currently is deemed unrequired. The plan shall
indicate that the landbanked parking spaces will be constructed according to
this Code in the event that the Planning Department determines at any time that
all or any portion of this parking is necessary.
         2.)   At no time shall any portion of the required parking area that
is so designated for future construction be used for the construction of any
structure or paved surface with the exception that pervious pavers may be used
to provide temporary parking; provided that the pavers allow for grass and
other vegetation to grow through the material.
         3.)   At no time shall any portion of the required parking or loading
that is so designated for future construction as provided herein be counted as
open space or other nonpaved areas required by other provisions of this Code.
         4.)   The owner shall initiate construction of the approved future
parking area(s), as identified on the approved site plan, within three months
of the receipt of a certified letter or a letter through normal postal service
(in the event that the certified letter is not accepted) sent to the owner of
record from the Planning Department identifying that such parking is determined
to be necessary.
      (B)   Shared parking. A portion of the required parking spaces may be
located on an adjacent property if the parking area complies with the following
standards and is authorized by the PZC.
         1.)   Shared parking is encouraged and permitted if the multiple uses
that the shared parking will benefit can cooperatively establish and operate
the facilities.
         2.)   Shared parking shall not account for more than 25% of the
required parking spaces as established in
Table 157.134-1 .
         3.)   The applicant shall have the burden of proof for reduction of
the total number of parking spaces and shall document and submit information
substantiating their request. Shared parking may be approved if:
            a.)   A sufficient number of spaces are provided to meet the
highest demand of the participating uses;
            b.)   The uses are located adjacent to each other;
            c.)   Evidence has been submitted by the parties operating the
shared parking facility, to the satisfaction of the Zoning Division,
documenting the nature of uses and the times when the individual uses will
operate so as to demonstrate the lack of potential conflict between them;
            d.)   The shared parking spaces will not be located in excess of
200 feet from the uses they are intended to serve;
            e.)   A legal shared parking agreement is submitted and approved by
the Law Director which provides for the rights of the respective parties to use
the shared parking areas in a manner adequate to accommodate multiple users or
that parking spaces will be shared at specific times of the day (i.e., one
activity uses the spaces during day time hours and another activity uses the
spaces during evening hours). This agreement shall include provisions, evidence
of deed restrictions or other recorded covenants that ensure that the spaces
will be properly maintained during the life of the development.
            f.)   The approved shared parking agreement shall be filed with the
application for a zoning permit and shall be filed with the County Fiscal
Officer and recorded in a manner as to encumber all properties involved in the
shared parking agreement; and
            g.)   No zoning permit will be issued until proof of recordation of
the agreement is provided to the Zoning Division.
      (C)   Off-site parking. Off-site parking is not encouraged, however, a
portion of the required parking spaces may be located on a separate lot from
the lot on which the principal use is located if the off-site parking complies
with the following standards and is authorized by the PZC.
         1.)   Off-site parking shall be reviewed as a conditional use by the
PZC.
         2.)   Off-site parking shall not be used to satisfy the off-street
parking standards for residential uses, hospitals, bars (if not incidental to a
restaurant) or convenience stores and other convenience-oriented uses. Required
parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities shall not be located in
an off-site parking facility.
         3.)   No off-site parking space shall be located more than 500 feet
from the primary entrance of the use served, measured along the shortest legal,
practical walking route. This route may include crossing a right-of-way;
provided it uses a legal crosswalk.
         4.)   Off-site parking shall not be permitted on a vacant lot in a
residential zoning district unless permitted by the PZC.
         5.)   The off-site parking that is proposed to be used shall exist
prior to the agreement and shall be associated with an existing use.
         6.)   Off-site parking areas shall adhere to the regulations of the
same or a more intensive zoning classification than that required for the use
served.
         7.)   In the event that an off-site parking area is not under the same
ownership as the principal use served, a written off-site parking agreement
shall be required.
         8.)   An off-site parking agreement shall be submitted and approved as
to form by the Law Director. This agreement shall include provisions, evidence
of deed restrictions or other recorded covenants that ensure that the spaces
will be properly maintained during the life of the development.
         9.)   The off-site parking agreement approved by the Law Director
shall be filed with the application for a zoning permit and shall be recorded
as a deed restriction or covenant in a manner as to encumber all properties
involved in the off-site parking agreement.
         10.)   Final inspection to authorize occupancy shall not be granted
until proof of recordation of the agreement is provided to the Zoning Division.
         11.)   Off-site parking shall be used and maintained solely for
parking as long as the use, as recorded and approved, exists. The off-site
parking agreement may be terminated when the additional site is no longer
necessary, there is a change of use or the approved conditions are no longer
applicable.
   (9)   Storage of trailers, recreational vehicles, campers and boats. The
following shall be applicable in all zoning districts, unless approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission as an approved use for outdoor storage under §
157.086(11) and
Table 157.087-1.
      (A)   Trailers (not to include utility trailers, which may be stored in
the driveway of a residence), recreational vehicles, campers and boats may be
stored on private property; provided that such vehicle is located in the rear
and/or side yard no less than ten feet from the property line on a stable
surface (stable defined as concrete, asphalt, permeable or nonpermeable pavers,
or a minimum of three inches of gravel). Vehicles shall not be connected to any
electrical (except during periods of loading and unloading as permitted in
division (9)(F) of this section), water, gas (or fuel source) or sanitary
sewer, and shall not be resided within.
      (B)   Storage/parking of utility trailers, recreational vehicles, campers
and boats on corner lots or double frontage lots shall comply with the minimum
building setback from all property lines. Corner or double frontage lots are
considered to have two front building setback lines.
      (C)   Trailers, recreational vehicles, campers and boats shall not be
used as a dwelling, office or other business, or for storage of any material,
except as may be permitted per code as a temporary construction trailer.
      (D)   In a residential district, no more than one utility trailer,
recreational vehicle, camper or boat exceeding 20 feet in length shall be
stored outdoors on a lot.
      (E)   The trailer, utility trailer, recreational vehicle, camper or boat
must be in a condition such that it can be used for its intended purpose, and
shall be currently licensed and registered with the state and shall be
registered in the name of the property owner and/or tenant of the parcel on
which the vehicle is parked/stored.
      (F)   One trailer, recreational vehicle, camper or boat may be parked in
a driveway area for the purpose of loading/unloading for a period of not more
than 72 consecutive hours in any consecutive 30-day period.
   (10)   Commercial vehicles in residential districts. No commercial vehicle
shall be permitted on a lot in any residential district, except that an
occupant shall be permitted to park one truck not exceeding three-fourths of a
ton capacity that is used in connection with said occupant’s livelihood;
provided that such truck is wholly enclosed within a garage.
(Prior Code, § 1229.05) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009; Ord. 2013-02, passed
2-26-2013; Ord. 2021-03, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 2022-02, passed 3-8-2022; Ord.
2022-07, passed 6-28-2022)
§ 157.135 SIGNS.
   (1)   Purpose.
      (A)   The purpose of this section is to promote the general health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the city, and maintain high property
values by:
         1.)   Providing reasonable, yet appropriate, conditions for
identifying businesses or services rendered in nonresidential zoning districts;
         2.)   Controlling the size, location and design of permanent signs so
that the appearance of such signs will be aesthetically harmonious with their
surroundings;
         3.)   Eliminating any conflict that would be hazardous between
business or identification signs and traffic-control signs and devices;
         4.)   Ensuring that signs are located and designed to maintain a safe
and orderly pedestrian and vehicular environment; and
         5.)   Reducing sign clutter.
      (B)   In establishing the objectives in division (1)(A) of this section,
the city has determined that, without adequate regulation and design standards,
signs are a nuisance. The number of signs in the city is excessive and unduly
distracting to motorists and pedestrians, creates a traffic hazard and, in some
places, reduces the effectiveness of signs needed to direct the public. As the
appearance of the city is marred by the excessive number, oversized and poorly
designed signs, both business and residential property values are adversely
affected. Therefore, the number of such distracting signs ought to be reduced
and signs permitted shall conform to the standards of this Code in order to
reduce these effects. All signs not conforming with the provisions of this
section are declared a nuisance. It is further declared that the regulations
contained in this section are the minimum regulations necessary to abate the
nuisance(s) and to achieve the purposes of this Code.
   (2)   Applicability. A zoning permit is required to erect any sign (except
as otherwise provided in this division (2)), and no permit shall be issued
until such signs have been reviewed according to the following.
      (A)   The PZC shall have the responsibility to review and make decisions
on freestanding signs.
      (B)   The Zoning Division shall have the responsibility to review and
make decisions on attached signs, directional signs and temporary signs.
      (C)   The Zoning Division shall authorize the issuance of a permit for
such sign when the Zoning Division determines that the sign complies with all
provisions of this section. The Zoning Division may refer the decision on any
of the above signs to the PZC for consideration if the Zoning Division
determines that the sign, as proposed, is more appropriately the responsibility
of the PZC.
      (D)   For multi-tenant buildings in business or industrial districts, and
for individual buildings located in business and industrial parks, the PZC may
approve with the development plans for new buildings, or at the time a specific
sign request is made for a tenant identification sign in an existing building,
basic sign parameters as to the location, size and style of each tenant sign,
and authorize the Zoning Division to specifically approve the subsequent
individual tenant signs upon specific application when such proposed signs
comply with the parameters established by this Code.
   (3)   Calculating sign area and height.
      (A)   Sign area.
         1.)   For a sign that is framed, outlined, painted and otherwise
prepared and intended to provide a background for a sign display, the area
dimensions shall include the entire portion within such background or frame.
         2.)   For a sign comprised of individual letters, figures or elements
on a wall or similar surface, or an irregularly shaped freestanding sign, the
area of the sign shall encompass a regular geometric shape, or a combination of
regular geometric shapes, which forms or approximates the perimeter of all the
elements in the display. When separate elements are organized to form a single
sign, but the elements are separated by open space, the area shall be
calculated by determining the geometric form, or combination of forms, which
comprises all the display area, including the space between the elements.
         3.)   The sign area shall include the frame, but shall not include the
pole or other structural support, unless such pole or structural support is
illuminated or otherwise so designated to constitute a display surface or
device.
      (B)   Clearance from electrical lines. Signs shall maintain a minimum
horizontal clearance of eight feet in addition to the fall radius and a
vertical clearance of at least eight feet from electrical lines and in
accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Code, as revised.
      (C)   Double-faced signs.
         1.)   A freestanding sign shall have no more than two display
surfaces.
         2.)   Display surfaces may be arranged back-to-back and parallel to
each other or in a V shape.
         3.)   A V-shaped sign is permitted; provided that it does not exceed
ten feet in height from the average grade, it has identical display surfaces in
terms of size, color and copy, and its display surfaces do not exceed a 90-
degree angle to each other.
      (D)   Height for freestanding signs. The height of a sign shall be
measured from the average grade under the sign to the top of the highest
element of the sign or support structure.
      (E)   Determination of building and tenant frontage. The length of the
building or unit of the building which faces the principal street, or the
length of the wall of the building or unit which contains the main entrance to
the uses therein, shall be considered the building frontage. In the case of an
irregular wall surface, a straight line extended along such wall surface shall
be used to measure the length. Only one exterior wall of any business shall be
considered its frontage. The portion of a building which is owned or leased by
a single tenant shall be considered a building unit. The length of a unit is
that portion of the building so occupied by a single activity and calculated
proportionally in the same manner as the building frontage.
   (4)   General sign standards. In addition to ensuring compliance with the
numerical standards of this section, the PZC, when approving signs, shall
consider the proposed general design, arrangement, texture, material, colors,
lighting, placement and appropriateness of the proposed sign in relationship to
other signs and other structures, both on the premises and in the surrounding
area, and approve only signs which are consistent with the intent, purposes,
standards and criteria of this section. Specific standards for determining the
appropriateness of the sign shall include, but not be limited to, the
following.
      (A)   The size, style and location of the sign shall be appropriate to
the activity of the site as prescribed elsewhere in this Code.
      (B)   The sign shall complement the building and adjacent buildings by
being designed and placed to enhance the architecture.
      (C)   A sign should be constructed with a minimum of different types of
material so as to provide a consistent overall appearance.
      (D)   All signs shall be made, constructed and erected in a professional
and workmanlike manner and with materials which are durable for the intended
life of the sign.
      (E)   Signs shall be placed at the grade approved by the PZC.
      (F)   Signs in the right-of-way; obstructing vision or traffic.
         1.)   No signs shall be placed in any public right-of-way, except
publicly-owned signs, such as traffic-control signs, city identification signs
and directional signage as permitted in this section.
         2.)   No sign or other advertising structure as regulated by this
section shall be erected:
            a.)   At the intersection of streets in such a manner as to
obstruct free and clear vision; or
            b.)   At any location where, by reason of the position, shape or
color, it may interfere with traffic, obstruct the view of traffic or be
confused with the use of words, such as stop, danger or any other word, phrase,
symbol or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse
traffic.
      (G)   Illumination. The light from any illuminated sign or from any light
source shall be so shaded, shielded or directed that the light intensity or
brightness shall not adversely affect surrounding or facing residential
districts, or adversely affect the safe vision and operation of vehicles moving
on public or private roads, highways or parking areas. Light shall not directly
shine or reflect on or into residential structures.
      (H)   Message changes.
         1.)   Changeable copy may be included as part of the sign message.
Changeable copy may be in the form of manually-operated reader boards or
electronic message centers. The maximum height limit shall be 12 inches on
electronic message copy and a limit of 50% of the total signage may be used for
changeable copy with manually-operated copy.
         2.)   All freestanding signage featuring electronic message centers
shall be ground-mounted with a maximum height of ten feet. The display area of
an electronic message center shall not exceed 50% of the total sign face area
of the sign. For any site that qualifies for a sign area bonus, pursuant to
divisions (8)(B)4.) or (8)(B)6.) of this section, the display area of any sign
shall not exceed 20 square feet.
         3.)   The electronic display area for a fuel price at a gasoline
station shall not exceed 3.3 square feet per fuel type. The total display area
of all electronic copy shall not exceed 20 square feet.
         4.)   Electronic message centers shall be legible and shall not move
or flash in such a manner (i.e., in speed or intensity) so as to be a
distraction or disturbance to passing pedestrians or motorists or to adjacent
residential districts.
         5.)   Applicants shall provide a certain percentage of time to be
allotted to community/civic related messages.
         6.)   Electronic message centers with commercial messages shall be
limited to sign copy only (text only) and shall not include any graphics,
unless it is completely stationary and does not move or flash in such a manner
so as to be a distraction or disturbance to passing pedestrians or motorists or
to adjacent residential districts.
         7.)   No moving or flashing parts are permitted on any sign within the
city.
      (I)   Address signs. All proposed freestanding identification signs shall
incorporate the site or building address number, in a legible manner, to assist
the general public and emergency response personnel. The area of such address
number shall not be calculated toward the total permitted sign face area of the
sign.
      (J)   Required landscape area for signs.
         1.)   Unless otherwise provided in this section, all permanent
freestanding signs shall be located in a landscaped area with a minimum area
equal to the total sign area.
         2.)   The landscape area for permanent freestanding signs shall
consist of shrubs, flowers and/or ground cover. This area shall be in addition
to any landscape or screening areas required in §
157.136.
   (5)   Prohibited signs. The following types of signs are prohibited in all
districts:
      (A)   Abandoned signs:
         1.)   Any sign existing that no longer advertises a bona fide business
conducted on the premises or a product sold on the premises for a period of six
months shall be deemed abandoned;
         2.)   Such a sign shall be removed by the owner, agent or person
having the beneficial use of the building or structure within 30 days after
notification to the owner from the Zoning Division; and
         3.)   All signs shall be in conformance with division (10) of this
section;
      (B)   No sign shall contain or consist of banners, posters, pennants,
ribbons, streamers, spinners or other similar moving devices for the purpose of
advertising or attracting attention for commercial or advertising purposes,
except where otherwise permitted in this section;
      (C)   Air activated graphics or balloons used for commercial or
advertising reasons shall not be permitted, except where otherwise permitted in
this section;
      (D)   No persons shall erect any additional attractions, devices or
objects, or continue in the operation of such signs for the purpose or result
of which is to attract attention to a business or business services and/or
which serves to divert the attention of the public whether such devices or
objects are stationary, mobile, or otherwise revolve, rotate, or move;
      (E)   Signs shall not be placed on vehicles or trailers that are parked
or located for the primary purpose of displaying such signs. This does not
apply to portable signs or lettering on buses, taxis or vehicles operating
during the normal course of business;
      (F)   Signs imitating or resembling official traffic or governmental
signs or signals;
      (G)   No person shall display upon any sign or other advertising
structure any obscene, indecent or immoral matter;
      (H)   Signs that consist of lights that revolve or flash are prohibited
in all districts with the exception of electronic information signs;
      (I)   Bench signs;
      (J)   Snipe signs;
      (K)   Graffiti;
      (L)   Roof signs; and
      (M)   Off-premises sign.
   (6)   Signs not requiring a zoning permit. The following sign types shall be
exempted from zoning permit requirements, but shall be in conformance with all
other requirements of this section:
      (A)   State, federal, institutional or other patriotic flags;
      (B)   Any sign authorized by a governmental agency may be installed as
provided by applicable law;
      (C)   One nonilluminated nameplate in a residential zoning district or
planned residential district with a maximum sign area of two square feet;
      (D)   Commemorative plaques placed by recognized historical or park
agencies;
      (E)   Mailbox identification when such is an integral part of such
mailbox;
      (F)   Warning signs, including no hunting, no trespassing, keep off
grass, no dumping or signs of a similar nature; provided that they do not
exceed four square feet in area;
      (G)   Garage sale signs (which term shall include the terms yard sale,
porch sale, house sale, toy sale or similar terms) in a house, garage or yard;
provided:
         1.)   There is a maximum of two signs on the property holding the
sale;
         2.)   The signs shall not be displayed more than two days in advance
of the sale;
         3.)   All signs must be removed on the last day of the sale; and
         4.)   The signs shall not be placed in the public right-of-way or on
utility poles.
   (7)   Signs permitted in residential zoning districts. The following signs
may be permitted in an R-R, R-1, R-2 or for residential uses in a PD District.
      (A)   Permanent signs. Permanent ground-mounted signs for a subdivision,
multi-family dwelling development, public/institutional use or commercial
enterprise permitted in a residential zoning district (bed and breakfast,
kennel, riding stable and the like); provided that the sign meets the following
requirements:
         1.)   The sign(s) must be reviewed and approved by the PZC through the
site plan review process;
         2.)   One permanent freestanding sign may be permitted at each
entrance to the subdivision, development or use unless otherwise approved by
the PZC;
         3.)   The sign shall be a ground-mounted sign;
         4.)   The sign shall be set back a minimum 15 feet from the public
right-of-way and 20 feet from any adjacent property lines;
         5.)   The sign face does not exceed 20 square feet in area on a single
side. The total sign face area may be distributed into two signs at each
entrance as approved by the PZC;
         6.)   No such sign or any portion of the structure shall exceed eight
feet in height;
         7.)   The sign may only be illuminated through external lighting;
         8.)   The applicant obtains a zoning permit for the sign after PZC
approval;
         9.)   Additional signs may be authorized by the PZC through the
subdivision review process or as part of a planned development; and
         10.)   For multi-family dwelling developments or institutional uses,
the PZC may approve greater sign areas than specified above if it determines
that, because of the large size of the facility or its site, the proposed
larger sign will be consistent with the objectives, intent and criteria of this
section.
      (B)   Temporary signs.
         1.)   Temporary signs not requiring a permit. Up to two temporary
signs may be permitted at any given time on any one parcel. These temporary
signs may be displayed for an unspecified amount of time; provided:
            a.)   These signs do not contain any commercial messages, except
for the sale or leasing of the property on which the sign is located;
            b.)   The temporary signs shall not exceed six square feet in sign
area;
            c.)   The signs shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from the
right-of-way and 20 feet from all lot lines; and
            d.)   The signs do not exceed four feet in height.
         2.)   Temporary signs in residential districts. Temporary signs may be
permitted with a zoning permit.
            a.)   One temporary sign may be displayed on a vacant site or for a
project that is under development; provided that the sign area does not exceed
32 square feet in area for a new subdivision or 20 square feet for development
on a single-family lot. Such signs shall be removed within 30 days of the
completion of the development or construction project.
            b.)   One temporary sign may be displayed on site used for public
or institutional uses under the following provisions.
               i.)   The temporary sign shall be displayed for not more than 30
days per zoning permit and not to exceed 90 days per year.
               ii.)   There shall be a limit of one sign per parcel and such
sign shall not exceed 32 square feet per side with a maximum of two sides.
               iii.)   The sign shall not be illuminated, unless authorized by
the BZA through the variance process.
   (8)   Signs permitted in nonresidential zoning districts. The following
signs may be permitted in all zoning districts, except the R-R, R-1 and R-
2 Districts, and except for residential uses in the PD Districts.
      (A)   Maximum area of all permanent signs.
         1.)   The maximum sign area for all permanent signs in a
nonresidential district shall be equal to two square feet per each lineal foot
of building or tenant frontage.
         2.)   The maximum area for all permanent signs shall include the sum
of the areas of all freestanding (ground or pole mounted) signs, directional
signage and attached signage; provided that window signs that occupy less than
10% of the window area shall be exempt from this calculation.
         3.)   Additional allowances in business and industrial districts.
            a.)   For any use which is on a corner lot or has a customer
entrance facing a parking lot (when such parking lot does not face the main
street), the maximum allowable area for signs may be increased for each such
additional frontage.
            b.)   The increase for each such frontage shall be equal to 40% of
the allowable sign area if the additional frontage is considered the principal
frontage. However, no sign area on any bonus frontage shall exceed one square
foot per linear foot of frontage.
      (B)   Freestanding identification signs.
         1.)   Freestanding signs are only permitted when the principal
building is set back from the street right-of-way a minimum of 25 feet and the
parcel has a minimum lot frontage of 100 feet.
         2.)   One freestanding sign with a maximum area of 40 square feet per
sign face, or 30 square feet per sign face if V-shaped, is permitted per
project or development. The freestanding signs can be ground-mounted or pole-
mounted.
         3.)   The maximum height of all freestanding signs shall be 16 feet.
         4.)   Bonus for freestanding signs on large lots.
            a.)   The allowable area of any freestanding sign may be increased
by ten square feet of sign area for every 100 lineal feet of lot frontage, or
fraction thereof, greater than 300 lineal feet.
            b.)   The total allowable sign area of freestanding signs,
according to the provisions of this section, may be distributed to one
freestanding sign for each 250 feet of the lot frontage, or fraction thereof.
            c.)   The maximum area of a single freestanding sign shall,
however, in no case, exceed 60 square feet per sign face.
            d.)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the total
allowable sign area for all signs shall comply with division (8)(A) of this
section.
         5.)   No portion of any freestanding sign shall be closer to the
street right-of-way than a distance equal to the height of the sign or ten
feet, whichever is greater. A freestanding sign shall also be a minimum of 90
feet from any residential zoning district and a minimum of ten feet from any
side property line.
         6.)   One additional freestanding sign may be permitted for a corner
lot; provided:
            a.)   The corner lot has a total frontage, on both street
frontages, of at least 300 feet;
            b.)   The second freestanding sign is clearly located to provide
identification along the secondary street;
            c.)   The total area of both freestanding signs shall not exceed 70
square feet;
            d.)   Two signs may only be utilized when spaced a minimum of 200
feet apart as measured along the street right-of-way; and
            e.)   The two signs may be aggregated into a single sign at the
corner; provided that the area of the single freestanding sign face shall not
exceed 60 square feet if arranged back-to-back and 50 square feet if arranged
in a V-shape.
         7.)   When a freestanding sign is permitted on a site with more than
one tenant, it is the property owner’s responsibility to determine if the
allowable area shall be devoted to the identification of the building or the
project, be a directory for a select group of tenants, or all tenants, in the
project, or be for project identification or a tenant directory in combination.
      (C)   Directional signage. Directional signage shall be permitted as
follows:
         1.)   Directional signage shall be permanent and ground-mounted with a
maximum height of three feet;
         2.)   The sign may be located within ten feet of the intersection of a
public street and a private driveway or within a vehicular use area but not
within the right-of-way; and
         3.)   The signs may not exceed four square feet in area.
      (D)   Attached signage.
         1.)   Attached signage shall include all types of signage that are
attached to the principal building, including wall signs, window signs (over
the 10% allowed by division (8)(A)2.) of this section), projecting signs,
fascia signs, awning signs, canopy signs and marquee signs.
         2.)   Awnings, canopies, fascia or marquees shall be designated as
permanent parts of the building and shall meet all of the requirements of all
applicable building and electrical codes.
         3.)   Attached signs shall not extend more than 18 inches from the
building as measured from the face of the building.
         4.)   Projecting signs shall provide a minimum clearance of eight feet
when projecting over a sidewalk or other right-of-way.
      (E)   Temporary signs in nonresidential districts.
         1.)   Temporary signs not requiring a permit. One temporary sign may
be permitted at any given time on any one parcel. This temporary sign may be
displayed for an unspecified amount of time provided:
            a.)   The sign does not contain any commercial messages, except for
the sale or leasing of the property on which the sign is located;
            b.)   The temporary sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in sign
area;
            c.)   The sign shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the
right-of-way and 20 feet from all lot lines;
            d.)   The signs shall not exceed ten feet in height; and
            e.)   If the lot is a corner lot, there may be one additional sign
on the secondary frontage; provided it meets the same standards as identified
above and there is a minimum separation of 200 feet as measured along the
street right-of-way line.
         2.)   Temporary signs requiring a zoning permit. The following
temporary signs may be permitted only after applying for and receiving a zoning
permit.
            a.)   One temporary sign may be displayed on a vacant site or for a
project that is under development; provided that the sign area does not exceed
32 square feet in area and ten feet in height. The sign shall be removed within
30 days of the completion of the development or construction project.
            b.)   Temporary promotional signs, banners, pennants or flags
(other than institutional, state, federal or other patriotic flags) intended to
promote or advertise special events shall be reviewed by the Zoning Division
and may be denied if considered excessive.
   (9)   Special sign districts.
      (A)   Arlington Road/I-77 Sign District.
         1.)   A special sign district is established as illustrated in
Figure 157.135-1 .
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4c34b21a634639eec02525999691581e5bede4c8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4532.png]
 
   Figure 157.135-1 : Special sign district.
         2.)   Freestanding signs in the Arlington Road/I-77 Special Sign
District may exceed the sign height; provided for in the underlying zoning
district, but shall in no instance exceed 45 feet in height.
         3.)   The maximum sign area shall be 120 square feet, per sign face.
         4.)   In this special sign district, signs shall be set back 15 feet
from the right-of-way and any side or rear property line.
         5.)   Electronic message centers shall meet the standards as outlined
in this section for electronic message centers, but in no case shall be
permitted on freestanding signs intended for highway visibility.
      (B)   Greensburg Area Sign District.
         1.)   A special sign district is established as illustrated in
Figure 157.135-1 .
         2.)   Freestanding identification signs in the Greensburg Area Sign
District shall have a maximum overall height of eight feet.
         3.)   For residential structures legally converted for commercial uses
and new commercial buildings designed with a residential character, simple
design elements are encouraged for all freestanding signs and their support
structures. This includes the use of a limited number of shapes, colors and
materials in order to complement the building being identified. Materials,
including, but not limited to, vinyl, foamboard, high-density urethane, PVC or
other type of durable product that enhance the style and character of the
district are considered appropriate. In all other cases, the requirements of §
157.137(6) shall apply.
         4.)   Freestanding signs may only be illuminated through external
lighting, which must meet the shielding requirements of this Code.
         5.)   The display area of an electronic message center shall not
exceed 12 inches in height and 20% of the total sign face area.
         6.)   Freestanding identification signs shall have a minimum setback
of ten feet from the public right-of-way and any side or rear property line.
         7.)   The maximum area of freestanding identification signs shall be
40 square feet per sign face.
         8.)   The provisions of division (8)(B)1.) of this section shall not
apply within the District. Any freestanding sign identifying a principal
building that is set back less than 25 feet from the public right-of-way and/or
is situated on a parcel with less than 100 feet of public street frontage shall
be permitted if it is set back a minimum of five feet from the right-of-way and
has a maximum area of 30 square feet per sign face.
   (10)   Maintenance.
      (A)   The owner of the property on which the sign is located is required
to maintain the sign in a condition fit for the intended use and in good
repair.
      (B)   A sign in good repair shall be free of peeling or faded paint,
shall not be stained, shall not show uneven soiling or rust streaks, shall not
have chipped, cracked, broken, or bent letters, panels or framing, shall not
otherwise show deterioration, and shall comply with all other applicable
maintenance standards of the city.
      (C)   If the sign is deemed by the Zoning Division to be in an unsafe
condition, such sign shall be considered an unsafe structure, and all
applicable codes for the repair and removal of such sign shall be adhered to.
      (D)   Whenever any sign, either conforming or nonconforming to this
section, is required to be removed for the purpose of repair, relettering or
repainting, the same may be done without a permit or any payment of fees
provided that there is no alteration or enlargement to the structure or the
mounting of the sign itself, and that the sign is accessory to a legally
permitted or nonconforming use.
   (11)   Alteration and removal of nonconforming signs.
      (A)   Consistent with the purposes of this Code, every graphic or other
sign in violation of any provision of this section shall only be removed,
altered or replaced so as to conform to the provisions of this section and this
Code, and any sign which, on the effective date of this Code, or any amendment
thereto, does not comply with the regulations provided in this section and this
Code, shall be deemed nonconforming.
      (B)   Nonconforming signs shall be removed, and any subsequent
modification or replacement (excluding routine maintenance pursuant to division
(10) of this section) shall conform to all requirements of this section:
         1.)   When more than 50% of the value of the sign has been destroyed
or been removed;
         2.)   When the use for which the nonconforming sign is accessory is
vacant for 90 consecutive days; or
         3.)   Following five years from the date of the adoption of this
section, or five years from the date of any amendment to this section, which
made the sign nonconforming.
      (C)   A nonconforming sign shall not be altered, modified or
reconstructed other than to comply with this section, except:
         1.)   When the existing use has new ownership which results in a
change of the name of the use or the business on the property;
         2.)   When the space is reoccupied by a similar use and the new
occupant requires no external building or site renovation; and
         3.)   When such replacement sign pursuant to division (11)(A) or (B)
of this section may be accomplished without any alteration or change to the
structure, framing, erection or location of the sign, unless such changes
conform to this section.
(Prior Code, § 1229.06) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009; Ord. 2012-19, passed
9-25-2012; Ord. 2015-10, passed 7-14-2015)
§ 157.136 LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING.
   (1)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to promote and protect the
public health, safety and general welfare by providing for the planting,
maintenance, and preservation of trees, shrubs and other plants within the
city. The intent of this section is to promote this purpose by:
      (A)   Protecting property values and the quality of life;
      (B)   Protecting of residents and visitors through proper buffering and
screening;
      (C)   Mitigating against erosion and sedimentation;
      (D)   Enhancing the appearance of public and private areas; and
      (E)   Ensuring planting, maintenance and restoration of vegetation.
   (2)   Applicability.
      (A)   This section shall apply to new development and any expansion or
change of use that requires landscaping or screening as required by this
section.
      (B)   Single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings shall be exempt
from the provisions of this section.
      (C)   Whenever an existing nonconforming site or use is subject to site
design review, those parts of the site where buffers and screens are required
shall be brought into conformance to protect the abutting uses.
   (3)   Landscaping materials and design standards.
      (A)   Landscaping and screening design guidelines.
         1.)   Landscape plans shall be an integral part of the site design,
accenting and taking advantage of natural grades, drainage patterns, views,
microclimates and other elements of the site and improvements. Landscape plans
shall provide screening and buffering of conflicting uses, identification of
site and building entries, and direction of movement through the site, in
addition to aesthetic enhancement.
         2.)   Landscape plans shall specify a mixture of plant types at
various scales and heights, including trees, shrubs, low shrubs and
groundcover. The design and installation of beds for perennials and annual
flowers and foliage shall be encouraged.
         3.)   Landscaping areas in parking lots shall be designed with a
mixture of trees and shrubs. Planting areas in parking lots and near drives
shall be designed to protect plants from damage by vehicles and plowed snow.
         4.)   Site and building entrances shall be accented by landscaping.
         5.)   Use of native plants and hardy, low maintenance plants
appropriate to the local climate shall be encouraged.
      (B)   Responsibility for installation of landscaping materials.
Landscaping and screening shall be provided by the person in charge of or in
control of developing the property whether as owner, lessee, tenant, occupant
or otherwise (hereinafter referred to as “owner”).
      (C)   Existing landscape material.
         1.)   Unless otherwise noted, existing landscape material in a healthy
condition can be used to satisfy the requirements of this section in whole or
in part.
         2.)   Where existing vegetation is proposed to be retained as a
“natural buffer or screen,” or as part of the landscaping, the nature and
condition of the existing vegetation shall be shown to be acceptable to the
satisfaction of the PZC in terms of hardiness and ability to buffer through all
seasons of the year. Supplementing natural buffers with additional landscaping
plants, fences and walls may be required.
      (D)   Topography, grading and drainage.
         1.)   Site design which is sensitive to and works with natural grades
of the land, in the interest of maintaining the natural appearance of the
landforms and minimizing erosion and maintenance costs, shall be encouraged.
         2.)   Sites shall be designed to protect natural watercourses and to
minimize siltation and erosion.
         3.)   Storm water detention and retention facilities shall, wherever
feasible, be creatively integrated into the design of a site to reduce the
extent of storm water facilities and to provide aesthetic value and interest.
      (E)   Landscaping materials. Existing vegetation shall be preserved as
much as possible in accordance with acceptable nursery industry standards. The
following items are suitable for landscaping materials used individually or in
combination with each other, subject to review and approval PZC through the
site plan review process.
         1.)   Walls and fences.
            a.)   When walls or fences are used to fulfill screening
requirements, they shall be detailed on the site plan. They are to be
constructed of weather-proof materials. This includes pressure treating or
painting of lumber if it is not redwood or cedar and using aluminum or
galvanized hardware. Chain link fences with or without wooden or synthetic slat
material shall not be allowed when used to satisfy the screening requirements
of this section.
            b.)   Walls and fences shall be designed to orient the best, or
most aesthetic side, away from the subject lot so the best side faces the
adjacent lots.
         2.)   Plants. Plant materials used in conformance with these
provisions shall conform to the American Association of Nurserymen and shall
have passed any inspection required under state regulations. Trees shall be
balled and burlapped or in containers. Shrubs, vines and ground covers can be
plants as bare root, as well as balled and burlapped or from containers.
            a.)   Deciduous trees. Deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper
of at least two and one- half inches DBH conforming to acceptable nursery
industry procedures at the time of planting. If deciduous trees are to be used
for screening purposes, additional materials listed in this section shall be
used to create a dense screen.
            b.)   Evergreen trees. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six
feet in height at the time of planting. When used for screening, evergreen
plantings shall be planted at a maximum distance of 15 feet on center to
provide an effective screen.
            c.)   Ornamental trees. Ornamental trees shall have a minimum
height of five feet or a minimum caliper of at least two and one-half inches
DBH conforming to acceptable nursery industry procedures at the time of
planting.
            d.)   Shrubs and hedges. Shrubs and hedges shall be at least 36
inches in height at the time of planting. All shrubs and hedges shall be
designed to provide an effective screen of at least five feet within a period
of four years after planting.
            e.)   Grass and ground cover.
               i.)   Grass shall be planted in species normally grown in
permanent lawns in the county. In swales or other areas subject to erosion,
solid sod shall be sown for immediate protection until complete coverage
otherwise is achieved. Grass areas shall be clean and free of weeds and noxious
pests or diseases. Ground cover shall be planted at a maximum spacing of one
foot on center to provide 75% complete coverage after two growing seasons.
               ii.)   Once the minimum landscape requirements have been met,
any size plant may be installed on a lot to supplement the minimum
requirements.
            f.)   Earth mounds. Earth mounds may be used as a screening
requirement, however, differences in natural elevation between areas requiring
a screen does not constitute an earth mound. Earth mounds shall be constructed
of earthen materials and shall conform to the following:
               i.)   Earth mound shall conform with the grading requirements of
the City Engineer;
               ii.)   The maximum side slope shall be three horizontal to one
vertical (3:1) and the design shall be reviewed by the Zoning Division to
ensure that proper erosion control and prevention practices are utilized;
               iii.)   Berms and earth forms shall be designed with physical
variations in height and alignment throughout its length;
               iv.)   Landscaping plant materials may be installed on berms and
earth mounds and shall be arranged in an irregular pattern to accentuate the
physical variation and achieve a natural appearance;
               v.)   Berms and earth mounds shall be located and designed to
minimize the disturbance of existing trees located on the site or adjacent
thereto;
               vi.)   Adequate ground cover shall be used and maintained to
prevent erosion of the earth mound; and
                   vii.)   No mound wastewater treatment system or other
similar on-site wastewater treatment system shall count toward the screening
requirement.
      (F)   Easements. Nothing shall be planted or installed within any
underground or overhead utility, drainage or gas easement without the consent
of the owner of the easement.
   (4)   Screening between districts.
      (A)   Screening types. The following screening types are hereby
established.
         1.)   Type A screen. Type A screens are intended to provide visual
screening. A Type A screen is a solid fence or wall with a minimum height of
six feet. A fence or wall may be used to create the opaque screen; provided
that at least 50% of the length of the fence or wall along each property line
is landscaped on the outside of the fence or wall, or evergreens are used in
lieu of 50% of the fence or wall. The spacing of the landscaping must comply
with division (4)(C) of this section. All fencing and walls shall be set back
15 feet from the lot line separating the less restrictive zoning district to
allow for maintenance of the applicable yard.
         2.)   Type B screen. Type B screens are intended to provide partial
visual screening and to provide aesthetically pleasing delineation of
boundaries between zoning districts. A Type B screen is a densely planted
screen which need not be opaque for its entire length. At least 50% of the
length of the screen along each property line must be opaque. The remaining 50%
of the length of the screen along each property line may contain any
combination of small shrubs or larger plants that comply with division (4)(C)
of this section. A mound built in accordance with division (3)(E) of this
section may be used instead of shrubs.
         3.)   Type C screen. A Type C screen is intended to separate
functions, such as streets, sidewalks and parking; to provide pleasing visual
effects; and to provide areas to serve environmental functions. A Type C screen
is a less dense planting than Type A or Type B and may include deciduous
plants. At least 50% of the length of the screen must be planted with large or
medium trees and the remaining 50% of the screen length may be any combination
of shrubs, excluding dwarf shrubs, that will comply with division (4)(C) of
this section. A mound built in accordance with division (3)(E) of this section
may be used instead of shrubs.
      (B)   Screening requirements. Screening between zoning districts is
required in accordance with
Table 157.136-1. When more than one zoning abuts the property to be landscaped,
the more restrictive of the screen types shall apply.
Table 157.136-1: Side and Rear Yard Screening Types Between Zoning
Districts
 District Subject Property Zoning
          R-R R-1 R-2 B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 B-5 I-1 PD
Table 157.136-1: Side and Rear Yard Screening Types Between Zoning
Districts
         District Subject Property Zoning
                  R-R R-1 R-2 B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 B-5 I-1 PD
         R-R            C   A   A   A   A   A   A   C
         R-1            C   A   A   A   A   A   A   C
         R-2               A   B   A   A   A   A   B
Adjacent B-1            B               B   B   A
Zoning   B-2            B   C      C   C   C   C   B
District B-3            B               C   C   B
         B-4            A                     A
         B-5            A                  C   A
         I-1            A                     A
         PD                A   A   A   A   A   A    
 
      (C)   Screening standards.
         1.)   When fences or walls are used to fulfill requirements for Type
A, B or C screens, the maximum length of each continuous fence or wall segment
without landscaping shall be 50 feet. Longer segments must be provided with
landscaping in accordance with this section along the outside of a wall or
fence, or planting meeting the screen type requirements in lieu of a fence or
wall segment.
         2.)   Dwarf shrubs and ground cover may be planted on the outside of a
fence or wall, but these will not count toward the screening requirement.
         3.)   If evergreens are used to fulfill the requirements for an opaque
screen, total opacity and a minimum height of six feet shall be required within
three years after issuance of a use and occupancy permit. If the planting does
not meet these requirements within three years, additional plantings or a fence
or wall meeting these requirements shall be constructed and landscaped as
required under this section.
         4.)   Each 50 linear-foot segment of screening, including plantings on
the outside of a wall or fence as described in this section, shall contain
landscaping equivalent to two large trees. For purposes of this section, the
following are considered equivalent and may be used in any combination which
achieves at least the minimum amount required:
            a.)   Two large trees with a maturity height of 40 feet or taller;
            b.)   Three medium or small trees with a maturity height of less
than 40 feet;
            c.)   Ten large shrubs with a maturity height of one foot or
larger; or
            d.)   Fifteen medium or small shrubs with a maturity height of less
than one foot.
         5.)   Berms or mounds may be used to fulfill screening requirements;
provided they meet the requirements of division (3)(E) of this section.
         6.)   No proposed building addition, structure, merchandise display,
parking area or any similar feature shall be located in front of or within a
required screen. Notwithstanding the above, a driveway entrance may cross a
required screen.
         7.)   Required screens must be installed on the subject property,
within the required setback. The minimum width of the screened area is ten
feet. The soil in each screen area must be covered by trees, shrubs, grass,
ground cover, landscape gravel or mulch.
         8.)   All screening shall be free of advertising or other signs,
except for directional signs and other signs for the efficient flow of
vehicles.
         9.)   Whenever, because of unusual size, topography, shape of the
property, location of the property or other unusual conditions, the strict
application of the requirements of this division would result in significant
degradation of the site or adjacent properties, the requirement may be varied
or waived by the PZC; provided that such variance or waiver shall not be
detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or to the orderly
development of the area.
   (5)   Landscaping of vehicular use areas. All development subject to site
plan review shall include the following required landscaping for parking lots.
      (A)   Minimum interior landscaping requirements. For parking areas
designed to accommodate 20 or more vehicles, a minimum of 5% of the land area
within the parking area shall be appropriately designed with landscaped areas
and planted islands in accordance with this section.
      (B)   Landscape island locations.
         1.)   Landscape islands shall be located at the end of each parking
row with a minimum size of 140 square feet for single loaded parking rows and a
minimum size of 280 square feet for double loaded rows.
         2.)   The landscaped islands should be designed, to the maximum extent
feasible, to accommodate storm water runoff. The use of porous pavement and/or
specially designed brick or block is encouraged to increase on-site water
detention for plant material and ground water supplies and to reduce problems
associated with runoff.
      (C)   Planting requirements.
         1.)   Plantings for interior landscaping shall be provided at a rate
of two trees and six shrubs per 15 parking spaces or fraction thereof.
         2.)   Each individual landscaped island shall include a minimum of one
tree and two shrubs.
         3.)   The trees and shrubs shall be distributed throughout the parking
lot islands to decrease the appearance of a single expanse of pavement and to
create a canopy effect.
         4.)   The trees should be of a variety to provide the shade canopy and
have a clear trunk height of at least six feet.
         5.)   The area not covered by the canopy of the tree, but within an
interior landscape area, shall be covered by shrubs, grass, ground cover,
landscape gravel or mulch. Plants in this category may not interfere with
visibility. All plants must be living, thriving and assuming their intended
form.
      (D)   Additional plantings along public streets. Whenever parking areas
consisting of five spaces or more are located such that the parked cars will be
visible from a public street, landscaping, in addition to the required interior
landscaping, shall be required between the street and the parking lot. Such
landscaping shall be a minimum height of three and one-half feet, located
adjacent to the parking lot and shall be placed to effectively obscure a
minimum of 50% of the parking area.
   (6)   Front yard landscaping.
      (A)   In all districts, every part of a front yard shall be open to the
sky, unobstructed, except for parking areas and signs as permitted and
regulated in the district regulations and sign regulations, and shall be
landscaped according to the following minimum requirements.
      (B)   The entire depth and length of the front yard (except as provided
above) shall be permanently protected from soil erosion with grass, trees and
shrubs.
   (7)   Screening of service structures. All development subject to site plan
review shall include the following required screening for loading areas and
service structures.
      (A)   Screening shall consist of an opaque wall or fence, six feet in
height, or dense vegetative planting which effectively obscures 100% of a
loading area when adjacent to residential districts or visible from a public
street.
      (B)   Loading facilities shall be designed to minimize impacts upon
existing or planned uses on abutting properties. Greater amounts of screening
shall be required where the frequency or nature of loading is greater than
typical. Extension of building walls is encouraged to effectively surround,
screen and screen loading areas. Where the height of solid screening cannot
screen loading areas from view of adjacent tall buildings, additional screening
shall be provided with trees.
      (C)   Rubbish areas and dumpsters shall be housed in a wholly enclosed
structure, or completely screened from any parking area or street right-of-way
by a vision-obscuring fence or plant material.
   (8)   Maintenance.
      (A)   All landscaping materials shall be installed and maintained
according to accepted nursery industry procedures. The owner of the property
shall be responsible for the continued property maintenance of all landscaping
materials and shall keep them in a proper, neat and orderly appearance free
from refuse and debris at all times.
      (B)   Unhealthy and dead plants that are required as part of these
requirements shall be replaced within one-year, or by the next planting season,
whichever comes first.
      (C)   Violation of these maintenance practices shall be a violation of
this Code.
(Prior Code, § 1229.07) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.137 SITE PLAN REVIEW STANDARDS.
   (1)   Purpose. The provisions contained in this section are established to
ensure the safe and efficient movement of traffic, promote the development of a
beautiful and well-ordered community, further the goals and objectives of the
Long Range Land Use Plan, and best serve the interest of public health, safety
and general welfare.
   (2)   Applicability.
      (A)   Unless otherwise noted, the standards of this section shall apply
to all new construction, substantial renovation, or expansion of a building or
site improvements related to all uses.
      (B)   Single-family dwellings shall be exempt from the requirements of
this section.
      (C)   In addition to the standards of this section, all development
subject to site plan review shall meet all other applicable standards of this
Code.
   (3)   Minimum performance standards for structures and uses. Every structure
shall be designed, arranged and situated on the site and in relationship to
adjacent uses, every use of land or structure shall be conducted, and every lot
and every structure shall be maintained, in such a manner that:
      (A)   The structure or land will not create a nuisance upon the premises;
      (B)   The structure or land will avoid detrimental or blighting
influences upon the neighborhood;
      (C)   The structure or land will not, by means of noise, toxic gases,
fumes, vapors, odors, radiation, light, heat, fire exposure, hazard, vibration
or electrical interference, or by other means, unreasonably interfere with or
impair the use or enjoyment of neighboring premises, including fluctuation in
line voltage; and
      (D)   The structure or land will not be hazardous to the community on
account of such things as the danger of fire or explosion, even when conducted
under adequate safeguards.
   (4)   Site layout.
      (A)   Relationship to surroundings. Buildings and other structures and
uses shall be located and designed in a manner which reduces or eliminates
negative impacts on existing or planned uses of abutting sites.
      (B)   Yards and setbacks. Yards, setback areas and other unenclosed areas
of a site shall be constructed and maintained as part of a comprehensive design
that contributes to effective use of the site and to the function and quality
appearance of the district in which it is located.
      (C)   Undeveloped areas.
         1.)   Undeveloped areas reserved for future development shall have
locations and configurations which ensure the ability to development the area
in compliance with this Code in terms of vehicular and pedestrian circulation,
access to utilities, potential for compatibility with the initial phases of
development of the site and surroundings, and other characteristics.
         2.)   Undeveloped areas shall be graded and landscaped for typical
maintenance or maintained in a natural state as approved by the PZC.
         3.)   The PZC may require the applicant to submit a sketch site plan
for undeveloped area(s) to evidence the ability for development in compliance
with this Code.
   (5)   Utilities and lighting. All on-site electric and communication
utilities shall be installed underground, as well as all supply lines to the
parcel.
   (6)   Signs.
      (A)   Signs shall be compatible in materials, color, scale, location and
orientation with the site and buildings.
      (B)   Freestanding signs shall be mounted on foundations clad in
materials consistent with the main materials of the building.
      (C)   Signs shall be located to protect sight lines for the safety of
vehicles and pedestrians.
   (7)   Waste storage. The following standards shall apply to waste storage
for all uses, except single-family dwellings.
      (A)   Waste storage areas shall be designed to:
         1.)   Provide sufficient space and containers to safely and completely
store, protect and manage the types and volumes of wastes expected to be
generated by the uses of the property;
         2.)   Minimize noise, odor and visual impacts on abutting properties;
or
         3.)   Maximize efficient storage and removal of the wastes.
      (B)   Screening of waste areas shall consist of walls, low-maintenance
fences, earth mounds, landscaping or a combination of such elements, designed
to be consistent with and complementary to the design of other elements of the
site.
      (C)   When a use is proposed which may generate unusual types or
quantities of waste, the PZC may require the applicant to provide information
sufficient to determine that the proposed waste storage facilities will comply
with these guidelines and other applicable laws and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 1229.08) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.138 TRANSITIONAL AREA STANDARDS.
   The following standards shall apply to areas designated as transitional
areas in the Long Range Land Use Plan.
   (1)   Multi-family dwellings in transitional areas. Multi-family dwellings
may be permitted; provided the uses meet the following additional requirements:
      (A)   The maximum density of development shall be five units per acres;
      (B)   Permitted multi-family dwellings are restricted to townhomes or
rowhouses where units may share common walls but shall not be stacked with
shared ceiling/floors;
      (C)   Each unit shall have a separate exterior entrance to serve as the
main entrance to the dwelling unit; and
      (D)   Multi-family dwellings shall also meet the architectural standards
of §
157.139.
   (2)   Architectural standards for transitional areas.
      (A)   Applicability. The following standards shall apply to all new
nonresidential development in a transitional area.
      (B)   Standards.
         1.)   To the maximum extent feasible, parking areas shall be located
to the side or rear of buildings.
         2.)   Loading spaces shall not face a public street and shall be
screened from view of adjacent residential property.
         3.)   Exterior building materials shall be consistent with those used
in the neighboring residential areas. Generally, these materials include brick,
wood and stone. Other materials may be used only if the applicant demonstrates
that they are consistent with the neighborhood.
         4.)   Building heights and rooflines for nonresidential uses shall be
consistent with those in neighboring residential areas.
         5.)   Each building facade shall be articulated with a recess,
projection or offset. These may include covered porches, covered box or bay
windows, or similar features. The wall shall not extend more than three times
its length without an additional offset. The offset shall extend for at least
five feet.
         6.)   Each building facade visible from a public street or oriented to
an adjoining residential district shall be a finished facade. All roof- or
ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall be enclosed or screened from view.
         7.)   Lighting shall comply with the requirements of §
157.140, and light fixtures shall be of a material and style that is consistent
with the neighboring residential areas.
(Prior Code, § 1229.09) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.139 ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS.
   (1)   Purpose. The purpose of these regulations are to further the goals and
implement policies in the Long Range Land Use Plan by:
      (A)   Encouraging visual design interest and a pedestrian site design for
large-scale buildings;
      (B)   Reducing the massive scale and uniform, monolithic appearances of
large structures;
      (C)   Promoting a safe and comfortable pedestrian oriented site with a
mixture of uses and sizes of structures;
      (D)   Demonstrating careful attention to local community design issues
will also ensure a greater likelihood of reuse of the structure for subsequent
tenants;
      (E)   Furthering the design excellence and architectural creativity that
typifies development in the city; and
      (F)   Encouraging designs tailored to the community.
   (2)   Applicability. Unless otherwise noted, the provisions of this section
shall apply to all development within the city.
   (3)   General review guidelines.
      (A)   Applicability. The provisions of this division shall apply to all
development subject to site plan review.
      (B)   Architectural style.
         1.)   Sites and structures shall be designed using architectural
styles or variations of styles and elements which contribute to a high quality
of design in the city, and which are compatible and complementary with nearby
high quality structures.
         2.)   Nothing in this Code shall be interpreted as a prohibition
against the use of any style of design; provided that the style is executed in
a manner conforming with all provisions of this Code, and unless such style is
specifically prohibited in a special design district.
      (C)   Height, width, scale and proportion.
         1.)   Structures shall be designed with a height, width, scale and
proportion which is consistent and compatible with existing structures on the
same, abutting and nearby properties when such structures are determined by the
PZC to be appropriate for their location and in conformance with this Code.
         2.)   No structure shall be constructed with a width that unduly
limits accessibility to the rear of the structure or to other areas of the site
that may be subject to future development.
      (D)   Orientation.
         1.)   The orientation of structures and uses shall be designed to
promote efficient use of the site and appropriate relationships with abutting
sites and improvements in the district.
         2.)   Alternative orientations shall be permitted where necessary to
minimize disruption of natural grades, to promote positive site drainage or to
preserve natural vegetation.
         3.)   Entries for customers, employees and service activities shall be
appropriately located and sized relative to parking, walkways and loading areas
on site, and to the public street and circulation patterns of abutting sites.
         4.)   Design elements and materials shall be consistently applied to
facades facing public streets. Lesser amounts of detailing, fewer windows and
other variations from the main facades may be approved for rear or side facades
not visible from the public street.
      (E)   Building materials.
         1.)   Materials specified for exterior surfaces of structures
(including buildings, walls, fences and signs) and for landscape features, such
as pavements and retaining walls, shall be good quality, durable, low
maintenance and appropriate for the exposure, local weather conditions and
application.
         2.)   Buildings shall be comprised of materials that provide for
minimal maintenance, provide a high quality of craftsmanship and aesthetics,
and are compatible with adjacent properties. Primary materials shall consist of
brick, stone and other decorative masonry products (i.e., no standard concrete
masonry units).
            a.)   The following shall be utilized by the DRB and PZC when
reviewing building materials as they apply discretion to the design of the
building, taking into account the scale and use of the building, and design of
the facades (i.e., windows, doors and other design features) to achieve
aesthetically-complete principal and nonprincipal facades.
               i.)   Single-story multi-family buildings shall average a
minimum of 60% primary materials on all principal facades and a minimum of 50%
on all nonprincipal facades, exclusive of glass, windows and doors.
               ii.)   Multiple story multi-family buildings shall average a
minimum of 65% primary materials on all principal facades and a minimum of 50%
on all nonprincipal facades, exclusive of glass, windows and doors.
               iii.)   Commercial buildings shall average a minimum of 70%
primary materials on all principal and a minimum of 60% nonprincipal facades,
exclusive of glass, windows and doors.
               iv.)   Industrial buildings shall average a minimum of 60%
primary materials on all principal and nonprincipal facades, exclusive of
glass, windows and doors.
               v.)   Mixed-use buildings shall average a minimum of 70% primary
materials on all principal facades and a minimum of 60% on all nonprincipal
facades, exclusive of glass, windows and doors.
               vi.)   Nonmasonry materials, such as stucco, exterior insulation
and finish system (EIFS), decorative wood/vinyl sidings, and architectural
metals, may be permitted but shall be secondary, exclusive of gable areas.
            b.)   The DRB and PZC may allow other alternative material(s) as a
primary material if it is the basis of an acceptable facade and/or qualifies as
a material that meets the intent of this section.
            c.)   The DRB shall review and make a recommendation to the PZC.
The PZC shall consider the DRB’s recommendation but retain discretion to
determine the final use of primary and secondary materials as they apply to the
various uses. The PZC shall also take into account the exposure to adjacent
developed properties and/or land for future development. The DRB and PZC may
apply discretion to the percentages noted by either requiring a greater
percentage or permitting a lesser percentage of primary materials.
         3.)   Use of materials which have colors, tones and textures which are
compatible with or complementary to the predominant colors, tones and textures
of existing buildings and other features on abutting and nearby properties
shall be encouraged when such existing structures are determined by the PZC to
be appropriate for their location and in conformance with this Code. Creative
use of diverse materials or diverse colors of the same materials (such as bands
of contrasting brick within a wall or column) shall be encouraged.
      (F)   Roofs.
         1.)   Roofs shall be designed to provide adequate, low maintenance
protection for structures in a manner compatible with and complementary to the
roofs of existing structures on the same, abutting and nearby properties, where
such existing structures are determined by the PZC to be appropriate for their
location and in conformance with this Code.
         2.)   Pitched roofs with articulated roof lines (including the
introduction of dormers and other roof features appropriate to the building
design) and textured surface materials shall be encouraged.
         3.)   Construction of a low slope roof shall be discouraged where
visible from any property having a natural grade higher than the roof.
      (G)   Entrances and windows.
         1.)   The locations of entrances and windows shall be functionally
related to other site elements, including walkways, parking areas, and
landscaped areas and to other built elements on the same and abutting sites.
         2.)   The main customer entrance shall be located on the main wall of
the building and oriented toward the public street, except where an alternative
orientation is justified by site characteristics and is approved by the PZC.
         3.)   All doors shall open directly onto paved walkways. All vehicle
doors shall open onto paved drives.
         4.)   Entries and windows shall be emphasized and articulated with
decorative elements, such as trim, architectural detailing, building forms,
canopies and covered entries as appropriate for their uses and positions within
the site and building design. The design of entries and windows shall be
coordinated with other elements of the building facade.
      (H)   Architectural details.
         1.)   Architectural details and features shall be appropriate for the
design or style of the building. The use of unrelated elements, excessive
details or poorly scaled or poorly positioned elements shall be prohibited.
         2.)   Unadorned or undifferentiated walls shall be prohibited, except
where designed as a decorative feature integral to the overall design of the
site and building.
      (I)   Building-mounted utilities/mechanical.
         1.)   The locations, dimensions and colors of proposed roof-mounted
equipment, ducts and other roof-mounted elements not related to the roof
structure, shall be designed to minimize their visibility from the ground on or
off-site or from abutting properties. Screening shall be installed where
necessary to accomplish this objective.
         2.)   Utility service connections shall be installed underground.
Locations where utilities and metering are exposed on exterior walls shall be
located out of public view or substantially screened with fences or walls
designed to match or complement the design of the building.
      (J)   Accessory structures. With the exception of two-family dwellings,
all accessory structures shall be designed in a manner compatible with the
design of the main structure.
   (4)   Residential design standards.
      (A)   Applicability.
         1.)   The anti-monotony standards of division (4)(B) of this section
shall apply to new two-family dwelling developments where more than ten
residential structures are to be developed.
         2.)   The multi-family design standards of division (4)(C) of this
section shall apply to all multi-family dwellings containing five or more
units.
      (B)   Anti-monotony standards.
         1.)   Single-family or two-family dwellings in proximity to each other
on the street shall not look alike. For the purposes of this requirement,
dwellings in proximity shall mean the lot on either side of the subject
property and the lots direct across the street from those three lots.
         2.)   Residential dwellings shall differ from one another in two of
the following:
            a.)   Wall or siding materials;
            b.)   Architectural style;
            c.)   Major addition features such as porches or turrets;
            d.)   Roof type or shape;
            e.)   Building footprint; or
            f.)   Window and door orientation.
         3.)   No requirement of these standards shall be interpreted to
require a particular architectural style for any building.
      (C)   Multi-family design standards.
         1.)   Each multi-family building shall be articulated by at least two
of the following features within each 36-foot length of the facade:
            a.)   Recesses, projections or offsets of at least two feet in the
wall plane;
            b.)   Distinct individual entrances with functional porches or
patios;
            c.)   Chimneys that project from the wall plane;
            d.)   Balconies; or
            e.)   Covered box or bay windows.
         2.)   No individual building footprint shall be larger than 10,000
square feet.
         3.)   Buildings shall have one of the roof types described below. The
minimum pitch of any sloped roof shall be 6:12. Buildings shall have at least
three roof planes that are directly related to building facade articulations.
            a.)   Sloped roofs;
            b.)   Combined flat and sloped roofs; provided that the sloped
portion(s) forms a substantial part of the building and is related to the
integral structure, entries and activity areas; or
            c.)   Flat roofs with building massing stepped or terraced back to
form usable roof terrace area(s).
         4.)   Each building shall be landscaped in accordance with the
provisions of §
157.136.
   (5)   Architectural standards for large nonresidential buildings.
      (A)   Applicability. The regulations of this section shall apply to the
following development in the nonresidential districts and planned development
districts:
         1.)   New construction equal to or exceeding 50,000 gross square feet;
         2.)   Additions of 15,000 square feet to an existing building with
50,000 square feet or more of gross floor area. Additionally, these
requirements shall apply to the structure portion of the addition and to any
portion of the site that is developed as a direct result of increased parking
requirements; or
         3.)   Any addition to a structure or development that has previously
been approved under this section.
      (B)   Design standards.
         1.)   Prefabricated metal building facades are prohibited, including,
but not limited to, corrugated metal, unfinished smooth face concrete block,
tilt-up concrete panels, prefabricated steel panels and vinyl siding. Such
materials may be used for trim or in areas where it can be demonstrated that
the use of other materials is not effective only if authorized by the PZC.
         2.)   All other general development regulations, including, but not
limited to, parking and loading, landscaping, signs, and the site development
standards of the subject zoning district shall apply.
         3.)   Facades or wall planes greater than 100 feet in linear length
shall be articulated with recesses or projections, which total at least 25% of
that facade. Each recess or projection shall be a minimum of 2% of the length
of that facade. No uninterrupted length of any facade shall exceed 75
horizontal feet. Walls may be articulated with doors, windows or other
treatments as authorized by the PZC.
         4.)   Ground floor facades that face public streets or public ways
shall have arcades, display windows, entry areas, awnings and other such design
features along no less than 60% of that facade. This requirement includes the
facade of the building that functions as the rear, yet faces a street.
         5.)   If the development of the site requires the relocation of
existing overhead utilities, all existing utility and electrical lines located
along a public right-of-way and/or along the site’s frontage shall be placed
underground. The PZC may waive this requirement if the power company determines
that placing the utilities underground will pose a threat to safety or the
reliability of the overall circuit.
         6.)   Flat roof designs shall be constructed with parapets to screen
HVAC and other roof mounted mechanical equipment from public view. Such
parapets shall not exceed 30% of the height of the supporting wall.
         7.)   Each building facade visible from a public street or oriented to
an adjoining residential district shall be a finished facade. All roof- or
ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall be enclosed or screened from view.
         8.)   Strip commercial centers or developments with multiple large
structures shall have a unified architectural design, a unified lighting
scheme, a unified landscape design and a unified sign plan.
         9.)   Canopies used for gas stations, car washes, drive-through
establishments and other uses shall be constructed of the same materials as the
structures in the overall development.
         10.)   Parking and circulation.
            a.)   No more than 60% of the overall proposed parking shall be
located between the front facade and the abutting street.
            b.)   There shall be one internal continuous sidewalk of at least
five feet in width that provides a direct connection from the public street to
the entrance.
            c.)   All internal pedestrian walkways shall be physically
separated from the drive lanes. Additionally, all sidewalks and crosswalks
shall be constructed of an impervious surface and shall be visually distinct
from the driving surface by use of pavers, bricks or scored concrete.
            d.)   Sidewalks, at least eight feet in width, shall be provided
along any facade featuring a customer entrance, and along any facade abutting
public parking areas. At all times, such sidewalks shall maintain a clear
pedestrian passage equal to the width of the sidewalk. Additionally, such
sidewalks shall connect all customer entrances and to other internal sidewalks.
            e.)   Overnight parking of RVs, mobile homes and other vehicles
providing transient residency is prohibited.
            f.)   Loading spaces or loading docks shall not be permitted to
face a public street.
            g.)   Loading spaces or loading docks facing or adjoining a
residential district shall be screened from view of such residential district.
         11.)   Pedestrian entrances. Each establishment shall have a clearly
defined and highly visible customer entrance or portal as follows.
            a.)   Single tenants occupying more than 50,000 square feet shall
provide for a plaza area of at least 20 feet in depth immediately in front of
their entrance(s). It is encouraged that this area be large enough to plant
shade trees.
            b.)   Single tenants occupying more than 20,000 square feet shall
provide for a plaza area of at least ten feet in depth immediately in front of
their entrance(s).
            c.)   Single tenants of less than 20,000 square feet shall provide
a plaza area of at least eight feet in depth immediately in front of their
entrance(s).
            d.)   With the exception of interior malls, multiple and separate
stores located in the same structure shall have at least one exterior customer
entrance.
            e.)   Plaza areas shall incorporate no less than three of the
following:
               i.)   Canopies or porticos;
               ii.)   Overhangs;
               iii.)   Recesses/projections;
               iv.)   Arcades;
               v.)   Raised corniced parapets over the door;
               vi.)   Peaked roof forms;
               vii.)   Arches;
               viii.)   Outdoor patios;
               ix.)   Display windows;
               x.)   Architectural details, such as tile work and moldings
which are integrated into the building structure and design; and/or
               xi.)   Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate
landscaped areas and/or places for sitting.
      (C)   Modifications.
         1.)   The Zoning Division may allow minor modifications in the design
standards listed in this section if the spirit and intent of this section
continues to be adhered to in the overall development design.
         2.)   Major modifications shall be submitted to the PZC through the
site plan review process. The Zoning Division may opt to forward the
modifications on to the PZC for review where it is unclear if a modification is
a minor change from the approved site plan.
(Prior Code, § 1229.10) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009; Ord. 2016-01, passed
4-26-2016)
§ 157.140 OUTDOOR LIGHTING.
   (1)   Purpose and scope.
      (A)   The purpose of this outdoor lighting section is to regulate outdoor
lighting in order to reduce or prevent light pollution and to minimize lighting
impacts on surrounding properties. This means to the extent reasonably possible
the reduction or prevention of glare and light trespass, the conservation of
energy, and promotion of safety and security.
      (B)   Site lighting shall be designed to provide illumination for
specific uses on the site and shall not generate excessive glare or spillover
onto abutting properties. Lighting shall be used to promote safe circulation by
vehicles and pedestrians, security of persons and property, and accenting of
landscaping and building features. Use of lighting for advertising or
attention-getting purposes shall be prohibited, except where permitted in
signage.
   (2)   Applicability.
      (A)   The regulations of this section shall apply to all lighting that
illuminates the exterior of a building, structure, open space, parking and
loading areas or other feature of a lot.
      (B)   Photometric lighting plans shall be submitted for approval with all
site plans for development in all zoning districts, except the R-R and R-
1 Districts.
   (3)   Height.
      (A)   All outdoor lighting shall be designed, located and mounted at
heights no greater than 12 feet above grade for noncutoff lights and 20 feet
above grade for cutoff lights.
      (B)   Variation of heights greater than as specified above shall be
subject to approval by the PZC based upon a lighting plan designed by an
architect or engineer citing reasons for variations and methods used to comply
with other subsections of this section.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4c34b21a634639eec02525999691581e5bede4c8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4538.png]
 
   Figure 157.140-1: Examples of cutoff lighting types.
   (4)   Location. The placement of light poles within raised curb planter
areas or landscaped islands is encouraged, but conflicts with parking lot trees
that can obscure the lighting shall be avoided through alternative lighting
locations.
   (5)   Shielding. All outdoor lighting for nonresidential uses shall be
located, screened or shielded so that adjacent residential lots are not
impacted by illumination.
   (6)   Color and glare.
      (A)   No outdoor lighting shall be of such an intensity or color
distortion as to cause glare or to impair the vision of drivers or pedestrians.
      (B)   Uniform lighting shall be provided to prevent various intensities
of lighting throughout the parking area. Such uniform lighting shall be
illustrated in the required photometric plan.
   (7)   Nonconforming outdoor lighting. The nonconforming use may continue
until the luminaire is replaced.
(Prior Code, § 1229.11) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.141 OUTDOOR SALES, DISPLAY AND STORAGE.
   (1)   Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to ensure the proper use
of land for outdoor displays, sales and storage so as to minimize impacts on
surrounding property owners and uses.
   (2)   Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to all uses,
except single-family, two-family dwellings, multi-family dwellings and roadside
markets that are accessory to an agricultural use.
   (3)   Exemptions. The following uses, where the outdoor displays and sales
are the principal use of the lots, shall be exempt from these regulations:
      (A)   Motor vehicle sales or rental;
      (B)   Greenhouses;
      (C)   Tool rental or sales facilities; and
      (D)   Similar uses as determined by the BZA.
   (4)   General standards. All outdoor sales, display and storage areas shall
be illustrated on the site plan and shall require approval by the PZC during
site plan review process. Existing locations shall meet the criteria as set
forth by the following.
      (A)   Outdoor sales, display and storage areas shall not be located in
any required setback, parking and circulation area, right-of-way, or required
landscape or screened area.
      (B)   Such sales, display and storage areas shall be prohibited if they
will create any safety hazard for pedestrians. A minimum pathway in areas used
for outdoor displays, sales and storage shall be provided to allow for the flow
of pedestrian traffic outside of designated vehicular traffic drives. Such
pathways shall have a minimum clearance width of five feet or the width
required to meet the minimum standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act,
being 42 U.S.C. §§ 1201 et seq., County Building Department, whichever is
greater.
      (C)   Where screening or security fencing is provided or required,
decorative cast iron, aluminum, wood material or other material as approved by
the PZC shall be utilized. Chain link fencing and other wire mesh fencing shall
only be permitted where the fencing is not visible from any public right-of-
way.
      (D)   All outdoor sales, display and storage areas shall be maintained
free of garbage and other debris.
   (5)   Standards for outdoor sales and displays. Outdoor sales and displays
may be permitted where such sales and display areas comply with the following
regulations.
      (A)   Outdoor sales and displays are prohibited on vacant lots, unless
approved in advance by the PZC and only retail commercial uses are permitted in
the applicable zoning district. Upon approval, a temporary use permit is to be
obtained.
      (B)   Outdoor sales and displays may be permitted; provided that the
merchandise is displayed along the sidewalk, the walkway adjacent to the
building or in the side yard.
      (C)   Outdoor displays and sales of bulk or large products that exceed 20
pounds, including, but not limited to, mulch (bag or bulk), concrete, salt or
other similar products that cannot be easily carried into the store for
purchase shall be required to meet the requirements for outdoor storage
(division (6) of this section).
      (D)   Outdoor cafes and food service areas may be permitted when they
comply with the following regulations:
         1.)   Outdoor cafes or food service areas located along a sidewalk or
between the building and parking area;
         2.)   Outdoor café and food services areas wider than four feet shall
be surrounded by railings that separate the eating area from sidewalk or
vehicular traffic;
         3.)   Umbrellas that shelter diners from the elements shall be secured
so as not to create a hazard in windy conditions; and
         4.)   Enclosing outdoor cafes or food service areas either by a
permanent roof or to expand the existing structure shall meet all the
requirements of a building within the applicable zoning district and shall
require the issuance of a zoning permit.
   (6)   Standards for outdoor storage areas. Outdoor storage areas may be
permitted where such storage areas comply with the following regulations:
      (A)   Outdoor storage shall be prohibited on vacant lots;
      (B)   Only those goods and materials associated with the existing on-site
use may be stored or sold in outdoor storage areas;
      (C)   Outdoor storage may be permitted provided that the storage areas
are located in the side or rear yard;
      (D)   Storage of any goods or materials shall not exceed six feet in
height; and
      (E)   All outdoor storage areas shall be screened from view of the public
right-of-way by a six-foot fence in conformance with division (4) of this
section. Screening shall not be required if the outdoor storage area is located
out of view from any public right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 1229.12) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009; Ord. 2022-02, passed
3-8-2022)
§ 157.142 RIPARIAN SETBACKS.
   (1)   Purpose.
      (A)   The city has determined that the system of streams within the city
contributes to the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the
community. The purpose of this section is to protect and preserve the water
quality within streams of the city and to protect residents of the city from
property loss and damage because of flooding and other impacts of the stream.
The city will implement this section by controlling uses and developments
within a riparian setback that would impair the ability of the riparian area
to:
         1.)   Reduce flood impacts by absorbing peak flows, slowing the
velocity of flood waters and regulating base flow;
         2.)   Stabilize the banks of streams to reduce bank erosion and the
downstream transport of sediments eroded from stream banks;
         3.)   Reduce pollutants in streams during periods of high flows by
filtering, settling and transforming pollutants already present in streams or
in runoff before they enter streams;
         4.)   Provide areas for natural meandering and lateral movement of
stream channels;
         5.)   Reduce the presence of aquatic nuisance species to maintain
diverse and connected riparian vegetation;
         6.)   Provide high quality stream habitats with shade and food to a
wide array of wildlife by maintaining diverse and connected riparian
vegetation; and
         7.)   Benefit the city economically by minimizing encroachment on
stream channels and reducing the need for costly engineering solutions, such as
dams and riprap, to protect structures, and reduce property damage and threats
to the safety of watershed residents, and by contributing to the scenic beauty
and to the environment of the city, the quality of life of the residents of the
city, and corresponding property values.
      (B)   This section has been enacted to protect these services of riparian
areas by providing reasonable controls governing structures and uses in
riparian setbacks.
   (2)   Establishment and applicability of a riparian setback.
      (A)   Riparian setbacks are established as provided in this section.
      (B)   Streams addressed by this section are those which meet the
definition of STREAM and are indicated on at least one of the following maps:
         1.)   USGS topographical map;
         2.)   City riparian setback map; or
         3.)   Soils maps located in the soil survey for the county, USDA and
NRCS.
      (C)   Proposed developments that have riparian setbacks located within
the property’s boundaries may develop an alternative plan for the enhancement
of the riparian corridor. This plan shall be developed by a licensed landscape
architect designed with the intent to improve the riparian corridor using
vegetation more conducive than natural succession (i.e., invasive species),
that allows the free flow of water, that allow humans and nature to enjoy the
corridor. Protection of existing native plants to the maximum extent
practicable shall be a part of the plan. Plans for riparian corridor
improvements shall be approved by the PZC as part of the site or subdivision
plan. Absent said plan, the following shall apply.
      (D)   Widths of setbacks are measured as horizontal map distance outward
from the ordinary high water mark on each side of a stream, and are established
as follows:
         1.)   A minimum of 300 feet on each side of all streams draining an
area greater than 300 square miles;
         2.)   A minimum of 100 feet on each side of all streams draining an
area greater than 20 square miles and up to 300 square miles;
         3.)   A minimum of 75 feet on each side of all streams draining an
area greater than one-half square mile (320 acres) and up to 20 square miles;
         4.)   A minimum of 50 feet on each side of all streams draining an
area greater than 0.05 square mile (32 acres) and up to one-half square mile
(320 acres); and
         5.)   A minimum of 30 feet on each side of all streams draining an
area less than 0.05 square mile (32 acres).
      (E)   The following are exempt from the terms and protection of this
section: grassy swales, roadside ditches, drainage ditches created at the time
of a subdivision to convey storm water to another system, tile drainage
systems, and stream culverts.
      (F)   The following shall apply to the riparian setback.
         1.)   Where the 100-year floodplain is wider than the riparian setback
on either or both sides of the stream, the riparian setback shall be extended
to the outer edge of the 100-year floodplain. The 100-year floodplain shall be
defined by FEMA and subject to review and approval per Ordinance 2002-02.
         2.)   Because the gradient of the riparian corridor significantly
influences impacts on the stream, the following adjustment for steep slopes
will be integrated into the riparian setback formulae for width determination.
 
Table 157.142-1: Width of Riparian Setback
Average Percent Slope Width of Setback
15% to 20%            Add 25 feet
21% to 25%            Add 50 feet
>25%                  Add 100 feet
 
         3.)   Average stream bank slope is to be calculated using methodology
outlined in The Ohio Supplement to Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds,
Technical Release Number 55 (TR 55) by USDA, NRCS.
         4.)   Where wetlands protected under federal or state law are
identified within the riparian setback, the riparian setback shall consist of
the full extent of the wetlands, plus the following additional setback widths:
            a.)   A 50-foot setback extending beyond the outer boundary of a
Category 3 wetlands;
            b.)   A 30-foot setback extending beyond the outer boundary of a
Category 2 wetlands; or
            c.)   No additional setback will be required adjacent to Category 1
wetlands.
         5.)   Wetlands shall be delineated by a qualified professional under
guidelines established by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency, and the delineation approved by the
appropriate agencies. All wetland delineations shall also include the latest
version of the Ohio Rapid Assessment Method for wetland evaluation approved at
the time of application of these regulations.
         6.)   The applicant shall be responsible for delineating the riparian
setback, including any expansions or modifications as required by divisions (2)
(B) through (2)(D) of this section, and identifying this setback on all
subdivisions, land development plans and/or building permit applications. This
delineation shall be done at the time of application of the preliminary plans,
or all plans that are required, or at the time of submission of any permit
applications. This delineation shall be subject to review and approval by the
County SWCD. As the result of this review, the County SWCD may require further
studies from the applicant.
         7.)   Prior to any land disturbance activity, the riparian setback
shall be clearly delineated with construction fencing or other suitable
material by the applicant on site, and such delineation shall be maintained
throughout soil-disturbing activities. The delineated area shall be maintained
in an undisturbed state, unless otherwise permitted by these regulations. All
fencing shall be removed when a development project is completed.
         8.)   No approvals or permits shall be issued by the city prior to
delineation of the riparian setback in conformance with these regulations.
         9.)   Upon completion of an approved subdivision, the riparian setback
shall be permanently recorded on the plat records for the city.
   (3)   Compliance and violations.
      (A)   No preliminary plan for a subdivision, zoning permit, or
certificate of use and occupancy shall be issued by the city without full
compliance with the terms of these regulations, where applicable.
      (B)   Any person or organization who violates division (5)(B) of this
section shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
subject to punishment as provided in §
130.99, and shall be required to restore the riparian setback through a plan
approved by the County SWCD.
      (C)   The provisions of this section may be enforced through civil or
criminal proceedings brought by the city or county prosecutor on behalf of the
city.
   (4)   Conflicts with other regulations. Where this section imposes a greater
restriction upon land than is imposed or required by any other provision of
law, regulation, contract or deed, the provisions of this section shall
control.
   (5)   Uses in a riparian setback.
      (A)   Permitted uses.
         1.)   The following uses are permitted by right within the riparian
setbacks without prior approval.
            a.)   Open space uses. Open space uses that are passive in
character shall be permitted in the riparian setback, including, but not
limited to, those listed in division (5)(A)2.) of this section. No use
permitted under these regulations shall be construed as allowing trespass on
privately-held lands. Alteration of this natural area is strictly limited.
Except as otherwise provided in these regulations, the riparian setback shall
be preserved in its natural state.
            b.)   Recreational activity. Passive recreational uses, as
permitted by federal, state and local laws, such as hiking, nonmotorized
bicycling, fishing, hunting, picnicking, and similar uses and associated
structures, including boardwalks, pathways constructed of pervious material,
picnic tables and wildlife viewing areas.
            c.)   Removal of damaged or diseased trees. Damaged or diseased
trees may be removed. Because of the potential for felled logs and branches to
damage downstream properties and/or block ditches or otherwise exacerbate
flooding, logs and branches resulting from the removal of damaged or diseased
trees that are greater than six inches in diameter shall be anchored to the
shore or removed from the 100-year floodplain.
            d.)   Revegetation and/or reforestation. The revegetation and/or
reforestation of the riparian setback shall be allowed without approval of the
County SWCD. Species of shrubs and vines recommended for stabilizing flood-
prone areas along streams within the city are listed in Appendix A of this
part.
         2.)   The following uses are permitted by right within the riparian
setbacks with prior approval of the design.
            a.)   Stream bank stabilization/erosion control measures. Best
management practices (BMPs) for stream bank stabilization or erosion control
may be allowed if such practices are within permitted uses by the local, state
and federal government regulations, and are ecologically compatible and
emphasize the use of natural materials and native plant species where practical
and available. Such stream bank stabilization/erosion control practices shall
only be undertaken upon approval of a storm water pollution prevention plan
(SWPPP or SWP3) by the County SWCD.
            b.)   Crossings. In reviewing plans for stream crossings, the city
may confer with the County SWCD, the Ohio Department of Natural Resources,
Division of Natural Areas; the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency, Division
of Surface Water; the County Engineer; or the agencies having jurisdiction over
sanitary sewer or water, or other technical experts as necessary.
               i.)   Limited crossings of designated streams through the
riparian setback by vehicles, storm sewers, sewer and/or water lines, and
public utility lines will be per the approval of local, county and state
governing agencies and as a part of the regular subdivision review process.
               ii.)   One driveway crossing per stream per tax parcel will be
allowed for individual landowners.
               iii.)   Roadway crossings for major and minor subdivisions, open
space subdivisions or any other nonsingle-family residential use shall be
designed and constructed per the city’s design standards and as approved by the
PZC. If more than two crossings per 1,000 linear feet of stream center are
required for these areas, the applicant must apply for a variance.
               iv.)   All roadway crossings shall be perpendicular to the
stream flow and shall minimize disturbance to the riparian setback and shall
mitigate any necessary disturbances.
            c.)   Placement of storm water retention or detention facilities
may be considered within the riparian setback if:
               i.)   Storm water quality treatment that is consistent with
current state standards is incorporated into the basin; or
               ii.)   The storm water quality treatment basin is located at
least 50 feet from the ordinary high water mark of the stream.
            d.)   Dredging may be permitted; provided the city or property
owner obtains all necessary permits that may be required, and notification and
presentation of the plan are provided to the City Engineer for review and
approval.
      (B)   Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be allowed only upon
approval by the PZC.
         1.)   Structures/buildings. Structures/buildings are not recommended
in a riparian setback area.
         2.)   Mineral extraction. There shall be no drilling for petroleum or
mineral products, or mining activity, except as permitted under these
regulations.
         3.)   Roads or driveways. Roads and driveways are not recommended to
run parallel within a riparian setback area. Perpendicular crossings are
permitted upon approval.
         4.)   Modification of vegetation. Modification of the natural
vegetation shall be limited to conservation maintenance that the landowner
deems necessary to control noxious weeds; for such plantings as are consistent
with these regulations; for such disturbances as are approved under these
regulations; and for the passive enjoyment, access and maintenance of
landscaping or lawns existing at the time of passage of these regulations.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring a landowner to plant or
undertake any other activities in the riparian setback; provided the landowner
allows for natural succession.
         5.)   Parking areas. Parking areas are not recommended within a
riparian setback unless approved by the PZC.
         6.)   New surface and/or subsurface sewage disposal or treatment area.
Riparian setbacks shall not be used for the disposal or treatment of sewage
except for:
            a.)   Undeveloped parcels that have received site evaluation
approval and/or permit approval prior to the enactment of this chapter;
            b.)   Dwellings served by disposal/treatment systems existing at
the time of passage of these regulations when such systems are properly sited
(approved site evaluation) and permitted or in accordance with the County
Health Department and/or the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency. Existing
failing systems which are located within the riparian setback can be upgraded
with approval of the County Health Department and/or the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency; and
            c.)   Sanitary sewer systems, either public or private, that may
need to be sited along riparian corridors to provide for flows and are
commensurate with an approved sanitary system approved by the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency.
      (C)   Nonconforming structures or uses.
         1.)   Structures and uses within the riparian setback, existing at the
time of passage of these regulations may be continued but shall be expanded
only upon approval by the PZC.
         2.)   If damaged or destroyed, these structures or uses may be
repaired or restored within two years from the date of damage/destruction or
the adoption of these regulations, whichever is later, at the property owners’
own risk.
         3.)   A residential structure or use within the riparian setback
existing at the time of passage of these regulations may be expanded subject to
the following provisions:
            a.)   The expansion conforms to existing zoning regulations;
            b.)   The expansion must not affect the stream channel or the 100-
year floodplain; or
            c.)   The expansion must not exceed an area of 15% of the total
footprint of existing structure or use that lies within the riparian setback.
Expansions exceeding 15% of the total footprint within the riparian setback
must be obtained through the variance process.
         4.)   Nonresidential structure or use expansions will be permitted
only through the review process.
   (6)   Boundary interpretation and appeals procedure.
      (A)   When an applicant disputes the boundary of the riparian setback or
the ordinary high water mark of a stream, the applicant shall submit evidence
to the Planning Department that describes the boundary, presents the
applicant’s proposed boundary and presents all justification for the proposed
boundary change.
      (B)   The Planning Department shall evaluate all materials submitted and
shall make a written recommendation to the PZC within a reasonable period of
time, not to exceed 60 days. A copy of this recommendation shall be submitted
to the applicant. If during this evaluation, the city requires further
information to complete this evaluation, the applicant may be required to
provide additional information.
      (C)   The PZC shall decide such boundary disputes. The party contesting
the location of the riparian setback or the ordinary high water mark of the
streams as determined by these regulations shall have the burden of proof in
case of any such appeal.
   (7)   Variance of riparian setback requirements.
      (A)   Applications for a hearing before the PZC for variances to the
provisions of this section shall be submitted to the Planning Department.
      (B)   The PZC may consult with representatives from the County SWCD; the
Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Natural Areas; the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Surface Water; the County
Engineer; the agencies having jurisdiction over sanitary sewer or water; or
other technical experts as necessary to provide the necessary data for the PZC
to consider variance requests.
      (C)   Expansions of residential structures or uses exceeding 15% of the
footprint area and expansions of all nonresidential structures or uses are
subject to the following:
         1.)   The expansion conforms to the existing zoning regulations;
         2.)   The expansion must not impact the stream channel or the 100-year
floodplain;
         3.)   The expansion of a nonresidential structure or use must not
affect upstream or downstream hydrologic conditions which could cause damage
from flooding or stream bank erosion to landowners in those areas. A hydrologic
study must be completed by nonresidential applicants only as a process of the
variance application; or
         4.)   The expansion of a nonresidential structure or use will not
exceed 25% of the footprint area. The 25% expansion limit is per the portion of
the structure or use that lies within the riparian setback.
      (D)   Requests for variances for subdivisions will be considered for the
following:
         1.)   An additional stream crossing or crossings for a subdivision or
open space development which is necessary for the health, welfare and safety of
the residents of the subdivision; and
         2.)   A reduction of the setback width, not to exceed 10% of the
prescribed riparian setback width.
      (E)   No variances shall be granted for expansion of the following
structures or uses:
         1.)   Facilities which use, store, distribute or sell petroleum-based
products or any hazardous materials. Such facilities include, but are not
limited to, asphalt plants, dry cleaners, gasoline service stations and road
maintenance facilities; or
         2.)   Facilities which use, store, distribute or sell products which
may contribute higher than acceptable concentrations of dissolved or
particulate matter to storm water runoff around the facility. Such facilities
include, but are not limited to, landfills or transfer stations, junk yards,
recycling facilities, quarries and borrow pits, sand and gravel extraction
operations, and road salt storage barns.
      (F)   In reviewing whether to grant variances, the PZC shall consider the
following:
         1.)   The extent to which the requested variance impairs the functions
of the riparian area. This determination shall be based on sufficient technical
and scientific evidence as provided by the applicant and the agencies listed in
divisions (7)(A) through (7)(E) of this section;
         2.)   The soil type and natural vegetation of the parcel, as well as
the percentage of the parcel that is in the 100-year floodplain; and
         3.)   The degree of hardship these regulations place on the applicant
and the availability of alternatives to the proposed activity.
   (8)   Inspection.
      (A)   The riparian setback shall be inspected by the city:
         1.)   When a preliminary subdivision plat or other land development
plan is submitted to the city;
         2.)   When a building or zoning permit is requested; and
         3.)   Prior to any request for a land disturbance permit, to allow the
city to inspect the delineation of the riparian setback as required under these
regulations.
      (B)   The riparian setback shall also be inspected annually or as time
permits by the city or approved monitoring entity for compliance with any
approvals under these regulations or at any time evidence is brought to the
attention of the city that uses or structures are occurring that may reasonably
be expected to violate the provisions of these regulations.
      (C)   Violations of these regulations will be handled as noted in Ch.
1230.
(Prior Code, § 1229.13) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009; Ord. 2012-23, passed
11-13-2012)
VIOLATIONS
§ 157.155 VIOLATIONS.
   No building shall be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged,
changed, maintained or used, and no land shall be used in violation of this
Code, or amendment or supplement to it adopted by City Council. Each day’s
continuation of a violation of this section may be deemed a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 1230.01) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.156 REMEDIES.
   (1)   In case any building is or is proposed to be located, erected,
constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, changed, maintained or used, or any land
is or is proposed to be used in violation of this Code, or any amendment or
supplement thereto, the City Council, Law Director, Zoning Division, or any
adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be especially damaged by such
violation, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may institute
injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action or proceeding
to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such unlawful location, erection,
construction, reconstruction, enlargement, change, maintenance or use.
   (2)   The City Council may employ special counsel to represent it in any
proceeding or to prosecute any actions brought under this section.
(Prior Code, § 1230.03) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
§ 157.170 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND INTERPRETATION.
   (1)   Intent. All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in
this Code shall be construed according to this Code’s stated purpose and
intent.
   (2)   Lists and examples. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists of
items or examples that use terms such as, including, such as, or similar
language are intended to provide examples, not to be exhaustive lists of all
possibilities.
   (3)   Computation of time. Unless the terms of a specific provision state
otherwise (e.g., some provisions specify business days), periods of time
defined by a number of days shall mean a number of consecutive calendar days,
including all weekend days, holidays and other nonbusiness/working days;
however, if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, that day shall
be excluded.
   (4)   References to other regulations, publications and documents. Whenever
reference is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation or document,
that reference shall be construed as referring to the most recent edition of
such regulation (as amended), resolution, statute, regulation or document, or
to the relevant successor document, unless otherwise expressly stated.
   (5)   Public officials and agencies. All public officials, bodies and
agencies to which references are made are those of the city, unless otherwise
expressly stated.
   (6)   Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or another officer or employee of the city to perform an
act or duty, that provision shall be construed as authorizing the department
head or officer to delegate the responsibility to subordinates, unless the
terms of the provision specify otherwise.
   (7)   Technical words. Technical words and phrases not otherwise defined in
this Code that may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law
shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   (8)   Mandatory and discretionary terms. The word shall is always mandatory
and the words may or should are always permissive.
   (9)   Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly suggests the contrary,
conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:
      (A)   “And” indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions or
events shall apply; and
      (B)   “Or” indicates that one or more of the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply.
   (10)   Tense and usage. Words used in one tense (past, present or future)
include all other tenses, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
The singular shall include the plural and the plural shall include the
singular.
   (11)   Gender. The masculine shall include the feminine and vice versa.
   (12)   Meaning. For the purpose of this Code, words and phrases shall have
the meanings set forth in this chapter.
   (13)   Other terms not defined. Words and phrases not otherwise defined in
this Code shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of
American English.
(Prior Code, § 1231.01) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
§ 157.171 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABBREVIATED STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (ABBREVIATED SWP3). The
written document that sets forth the plans and practices to be used to meet the
requirements of this regulation.
   ABUTTING or ADJACENT. The land, lot or property adjoining the property in
question along a lot line or separated only by an alley, easement or street.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE. A building or use that is detached
from the principal structure; is incidental to and found on the same lot as a
principal building or use; is subordinate to and serves a principal building or
use; is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or use
served; and is located on the same lot as the principal building or use served.
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT. A separate residential dwelling unit, but not a
mobile home, located on the same lot as a single-family dwelling unit or
nonresidential use, either within the same building as the single-family
dwelling unit or in a detached building. The ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT shall be
developed in accordance with the local building code and only in those zoning
districts where the use is listed.
   ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin-operated or token-operated, or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled, still or motion picture machine projectors, or other
image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons
per machine at any one time, where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial establishment which, as
one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form
of consideration any one or more of the following:
      (A)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, or video reproductions,
slides or other visual representations, which depict or describe specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
      (B)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia, other than medical or
contraceptive devices, which are designed for use in connection with specified
sexual activities.
   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
      (A)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity;
      (B)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical area or by specified sexual activities; or
      (C)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT FAMILY HOME. A residence or facility, as defined and regulated in R.C.
§ 5123.19, which provides accommodations for three to eight unrelated adults
and provides supervision and personal care services to at least three of the
unrelated adults.
   ADULT GROUP HOME. A residence or facility, as defined and regulated in R.C.
§ 5123.19, which provides accommodations for nine to 16 unrelated adults, and
provides supervision and personal care services to at least three of the
unrelated adults.
   ADULT FAMILY HOME, TRANSITIONAL. A residence or facility serving three to
six unrelated adults who are in the process of transitioning or returning from
an institutional remedial setting to independent living. This residence/
facility shall be licensed by or operated by a governmental agency that
accommodates three to six unrelated adults and provides special care or
rehabilitation due to homelessness, physical condition or illness, elderly age
or social, behavioral, or disciplinary problems; provided that authorized
supervisory personnel are present on the premises.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where, for any form
of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown and are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity
or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   AGRICULTURAL - ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK. The use of land
for dairying, animal raising, breeding and pasturage of livestock, and the
necessary accessory uses; provided, however, that such accessory uses shall be
secondary to that of normal animal husbandry activities. The above uses shall
not include the commercial feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other
animals.
   AGRICULTURAL - RAISING OF CROPS. The use of land for field and orchard uses,
including production of field crops, flowers and seeds, fruits, grains, melons,
ornamental crops, tree nuts, trees and sod, and vegetables. Also includes
associated crop preparation services and harvesting activities, such as,
mechanical soil preparation, irrigation system construction, spraying, crop
processing, and sales in the field not involving a permanent structure.
   ALLEY. A public or private way which affords only secondary means of access
to abutting properties.
   APPEAL. A request for review of an administrative interpretation or decision
made in relation to this Code.
   APPLICANT. Unless otherwise specified, an owner or an agent for the owner,
including, a subdivider, developer, attorney or similar representative, who has
filed an application for a permit or development review pursuant to §§
157.045 through
157.057.
   APPLICATION. The process by which the owner, or their agent, of a parcel of
land within the city submits a request for a permit or any type of development
review or approval identified in §§
157.045 through
157.057. APPLICATIONS include all written documentation, verbal statements and
representations, in whatever forms and quantities as required by the city.
   ARCHITECT. An individual or firm registered in the state to practice in the
field of architecture.
   ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY. A special combination of housing, supportive
services, personalized assistance and health care designed to respond to the
individual needs of those who need help with activities of daily living.
   BANQUET HALL. A facility or building available for lease by private parties
that may include kitchen facilities for the preparation or catering of food,
the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption during scheduled
events not open to the public, and/or outdoor gardens, decks or reception
facilities.
   BARS and TAVERNS. An establishment provided for dispensing, for on-site
consumption, any fermented malt beverage, malt beverage, special malt, vinous
or spirituous liquors. The sale of food products, including, but not limited
to, sandwiches and light snacks may be a secondary use to the service of the
aforementioned drinks.
   BASEMENT. The portion of a structure between the floor and ceiling which is
wholly or partly below grade and having more than one-half of its height below
grade.
   BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of lodging that provides four or
fewer rooms for rent on a temporary basis, is the owner’s personal residence,
is occupied by the owner at the time of rental and where meals may be served to
guests.
   BERM. In the context of landscaping, bufferyard or screening requirements, a
mound of earth typically used to shield, screen and buffer undesirable views,
and to separate potentially incompatible uses.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Conservation practices or protection
measures which reduce impacts from a particular land use. Best Management
Practices for construction are outlined in Rainwater and Land Development,
Ohio’s Standard for Storm Water Management, Land Development, and Urban Stream
Protection, prepared by the Ohio Department of Natural Resources.
   BOAT. A vehicle designed for operation as a watercraft propelled by oars,
sails, or one or more combustion engines.
   BUFFER or BUFFERYARD. An area of natural or planted vegetation adjoining or
surrounding a land use and unoccupied in its entirety by any building
structure, paving or portion of such land use, for the purposes of separating,
screening and softening the effects of the land use, no part of which BUFFER is
used for active recreation or parking, or interior access drives. A BUFFER may
include a wall, fence or berm as provided in accordance with the provisions of
§
157.136.
   BUILDING. A temporary or permanent structure having a roof supported by
walls and which can be used for shelter, business, housing or enclosure of
persons, animals, motor vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles and other goods.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance of a building as measured pursuant to
§
157.100.
   BZA. The Zoning Board of Appeals, as established in the City Charter and as
referenced as the Board of Zoning Appeals in this Code.
   CAMPER. A vehicular unit mounted on wheels designed to provide temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use.
   CANOPY TREE. A deciduous tree with an expected height of at least 35 feet at
maturity.
   CEMETERY. A place for interment of human or animal remains or cremated
remains, including a burial park for earth interments, a mausoleum for vault or
crypt interments, a columbarium for cinerary interments, or a combination
thereof.
   CENTRALIZED SEWAGE SYSTEM. An approved wastewater disposal system, which
provides a collection network and disposal system, and a central wastewater
treatment facility for a single development, community or region.
   CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL IN EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL (CPESC). A
professional who has met the requirements of and has been certified by CPESC,
Inc.
   CHILDREN GROUP HOME. Any facility, public or private, which meets all of the
following criteria:
      (A)   Provides for a maximum of ten children, with continual supervision
(24 hours per day without interruption) by appropriately licensed or certified
persons who are unrelated to such children by blood or marriage, and who are
not the appointed guardian of such children. This definition is intended to
apply to commercial or institutional group homes that are staffed by rotating
employees who supervise the children. This definition excludes any home where
the primary caretaker is an adult who is domiciled and lives in the home with
the children, and the adults and children function as a single family.
      (B)   Is not certified as a foster home; and
      (C)   Receives or cares for children for two or more consecutive weeks.
   CITY COUNCIL. The seven member City Council.
   CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer or a designee appointed to serve in the
role of the engineer.
   CLEARING. The act of clear cutting and/or removing of trees and vegetation
which result in the exposure of raw land.
   CO-LOCATION. The use of a wireless telecommunications facility by more than
one wireless telecommunications provider.
   COMMERCIAL MESSAGE. Any sign, wording, logo or other representation that,
directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business,
product, service or other commercial activity.
   COMMUNITY CENTER and CLUBHOUSES. A building to be used as a place of
meeting, recreation or social activity and not operated for profit, and in
which alcoholic beverages or meals may be dispensed or consumed as an accessory
use when in compliance with all other applicable ordinances and laws.
   CONDOMINIUM. A multi-family dwelling or development containing individual
owners’ dwelling units and jointly owned and shared areas and facilities, which
dwelling or development is subject to the provisions of a homeowner’s
association and/or state law.
   CONSTRUCTION ENTRANCE. The permitted points of ingress and egress to
development areas regulated under this Code.
   COUNTY. Summit County, Ohio.
   COUNTY BOARD OF HEALTH. The County Board of Health of the County General
Health District.
   COUNTY STORM WATER MANAGEMENT MANUAL. The county’s storm water management
requirements developed and updated by the County Engineer.
   DAMAGED OR DISEASED TREES. Trees that have split trunk, broken tops, heart
rot, insect or fungus problems that will lead to imminent death, undercut root
systems that put the tree in imminent danger of falling, lean as a result of
root failure that puts the tree in imminent danger of falling, or any other
condition that puts the tree in imminent danger of being uprooted or falling
into or along a stream or onto a structure.
   DAY CARE CENTER. A facility operated for the purpose of providing care,
protection and guidance to individuals during part of a 24-hour day. This term
includes nursery schools, preschools, adult day care centers, child day care
centers or other similar uses. DAY CARE CENTER does not include public or
private educational facilities or any facility offering care to individuals for
a full 24-hour period.
   DBH. Diameter-at-breast-height and is used to measure the caliper of a tree
trunk at the specific height of four and one-half feet above the ground.
   DECK. A platform, either freestanding or attached to a building, that is
supported by pillars or posts and which is not enclosed nor has a roof.
   DENSITY. The quotient of the total number of dwelling units as divided by
total area of the site.
   DENSITY, GROSS. The total number of dwelling units as divided by the gross
area of a site (including public right-of-way, easements and the like).
   DENSITY, NET. The total number of dwelling units divided by the gross area
of the site minus any land used for easements and/or rights-of-way.
   DEVELOPER. Any individual, subdivider, firm, association, syndicate,
partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity proceeding under this
Code to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself or herself or for
another.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved land,
including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings or other
structure, mining, dredging, filing, grading, paving, excavation or drilling.
   DEVELOPMENT AREA. A parcel or contiguous parcels owned by one person or
persons, or operated as one development unit, and used or being developed for
commercial, industrial, residential, institutional, or other construction or
alteration that changes runoff characteristics.
   DISTRIBUTION FACILITIES, TRUCK TERMINALS and WAREHOUSES. A use where goods
are received and/or stored for delivery to the ultimate customer or uses at
remote locations. There is no sale of items to retailers or the general public
from such uses, unless permitted as an accessory use to the WAREHOUSE.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. An animal that is tame or domesticated and not normally
found in the wild state. Hybrids of animals normally found in the wild state
are not included within the meaning of DOMESTIC ANIMAL.
   DRAINAGE. The removal of excess surface water or groundwater from land by
surface or subsurface drains.
   DRAINAGE AREA. The area of land contributing surface water to a specific
point.
   DRB. The City Design Review Board.
   DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY. An establishment that encourages or permits
customers to receive services or obtain goods while remaining in their motor
vehicles.
   DRIVEWAY. A private way, other than a street or alley, that provides access
to one lot of record for the use of vehicles and pedestrians.
   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof used exclusively for residential
purposes, including single-family, two-family and multi-family dwellings, but
not including hotels, motels, tents, recreational vehicle, cabins, or boarding
or lodging houses.
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A building or portion thereof designed for or used
exclusively for residential purposes by three or more families or housekeeping
units. MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING shall include apartment buildings, condominiums,
elderly housing and buildings where two or more dwellings are attached by
common walls or floors within a single structure.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building designed for or used exclusively for
residential purposes by one family or housekeeping unit.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building designed for or used exclusively for the
residential purposes by two families or housekeeping units.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit of one or more rooms providing complete,
independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, but not
including a tent, cabin, hotel, motel, recreational vehicle, or other temporary
or transient structure or facility.
   EASEMENT. Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, for a
specified purpose, of any designated part of his or her property.
   EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES. Buildings or structures used to teach students.
EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES may include primary schools, elementary schools, middle
schools and high schools. EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES shall not include colleges,
vocational schools and other similar uses.
   EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES, HIGHER. Buildings or structures used to teach
students at a level beyond primary schools, elementary schools, middle schools
and high schools. HIGHER EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES shall include, but not limited
to, colleges, vocational schools, universities, training centers and other
similar uses.
   ENGINEER. Any person registered to practice professional engineering by the
State Board of Registration as specified in R.C. § 4733.14.
   ENTRY DRIVE. The part of an access drive or driveway leading to a vehicular
use area.
   EPA. The Environmental Protection Agency and includes the Ohio EPA.
   EROSION. The wearing away of the land surface by the action of wind, water,
gravity or other natural processes.
   EROSION and SEDIMENT CONTROL. The control of soil, both mineral and organic,
to minimize the removal of soil from the land surface and to prevent its
transport from a disturbed area by means of wind, water, ice, gravity or any
combination of those forces.
   EROSION CONTROL PLAN. A plan developed with the appropriate conservation
practices, including a schedule of their installation and location, which will
effectively minimize soil erosion and off-site sediment yield.
   EVERGREEN SHRUB. A shrub that remains green throughout the year.
   EVERGREEN TREE. A tree that remains green throughout the year with an
expected height of at least 40 feet.
   EXCAVATION. The process of altering the natural grade/elevation by cutting,
filling or moving the earth, or any activity by which soil or rock is cut, dug,
quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated.
   FAMILY. Two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or not
more than four unrelated individuals occupying a dwelling unit as an individual
housekeeping organization.
   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency, the agency with the overall
responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
   FENCE. An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire,
metal or other manufactured material or combination of materials erected to
enclose, screen or separate areas.
   FENCE, DECORATIVE. A permanent structure designed primarily for aesthetic
appeal and not intended or designed as a method of prohibiting entry to a
property.
   FENCE, ELECTRIC. A fence through which an electric current can be passed,
giving an electric shock to any person or animal touching it.
   FENCE HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the existing/adjoining grade along
the fence line to the top of the fence.
   FENCE, TOP OF. The uppermost part, point or surface of a fence, not
including support posts or architectural features.
   FINAL PLAT. A final tracing of all or a portion of a subdivision in its
complete survey information.
   FINAL STABILIZATION. All soil disturbing activities at the site have been
completed and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of at least
70% coverage for the area has been established or equivalent stabilization
measures, such as the use of mulches or geotextiles, have been employed.
   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. An establishment engaged in deposit banking.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS may include, but are not limited to, commercial banks,
loan or mortgage companies, stockbrokers, savings institutions, credit unions
and other similar uses.
   FLAG. Any fabric or other flexible material attached to or designed to be
flown from a flagpole or similar device.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has delineated the areas of special flood hazard.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report in which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development has
provided flood profiles, floodway boundaries and the water surface elevations
of the base flood.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT DEFINITIONS. The following terms used in this Code are
defined as set forth in the regulations governing the National Flood Insurance
Program (44 C.F.R. § 59.1). Wherever there exists a conflict between the
following definitions, the federal definitions shall apply.
      (A)   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% change of being equaled or exceed
in any given year.
      (B)   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland
waters or the unusual and rapid accumulations or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
      (C)   FLOODPLAIN. The land area susceptible to inundation by water as a
result of a flood, and for the purposes of this Code, shall mean the 100-year
and 500-year floodplain as determined by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
      (D)   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
      (E)   FLOODWAY FRINGE. The portions of the floodplain, other than the
floodway, which can be filled or otherwise obstructed without causing
substantially higher flood levels or flow velocities.
   FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The sum of the horizontal areas of each floor of the
building, measured from the exterior walls or from the center of party line
walls, including the floor area of accessory buildings and structures.
   FLOOR AREA, NET. The sum of the horizontal areas of each floor of the
building, measured from the exterior walls or from the center of party line
walls, including the floor area of accessory buildings and structures, but
excluding areas used exclusively for the parking of motor vehicles or for
building or equipment access, such as stairs, elevator shafts and maintenance
crawl spaces or areas occupied by mechanical equipment, toilets or restrooms.
   FRONTAGE, BUILDING AND TENANT. The length of an enclosed building facing a
public street. If the building is not located on a property that faces a public
street, it shall mean the length of the enclosed building that has the primary
entrance to the building.
   FUNERAL HOMES. A building or part thereof used for human funeral services
and which may include space for the embalming and other services used in the
preparation of the dead for burial, the storage of caskets, funeral urns and
other related supplies, the storage of funeral vehicles, facilities for
cremation, chapels, and other related uses.
   GARAGE. A building or portion of a building which is primarily intended for
and used for the enclosed storage or shelter of private motor vehicles of the
owner or occupant of the principal building.
   GOVERNMENT OFFICES AND FACILITIES. A building or land used and/or controlled
exclusively for governmental or public purposes by any department or branch of
government, including township, state, county or other recognized public
entity. Such use may include, but is not limited to, township offices, public
works, libraries, post offices and other uses not defined separately within
this Code. Government and public use shall not include schools or other
educational facilities as defined elsewhere in this Code.
   GRADE.
      (A)   For buildings having walls adjoining one street only, the elevation
of the sidewalk at the center of the wall adjoining the street.
      (B)   For buildings having walls adjoining more than one street, the
average of the elevation of the sidewalks at the centers of all walls adjoining
the streets.
      (C)   For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average
level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of
the building. Any wall approximately parallel to and not more than five feet
from a street line is to be considered as adjoining the street.
   GRADING. The act of changing the existing or natural topography of an area
of land by artificial means. This shall include the excavation or filling of
earth materials on a given site.
   GRASS. A species of perennial grass grown as permanent lawns or for
landscape purposes, as distinguished from those species grown for agricultural
or commercial seed purposes.
   GROUND COVER. A plant growing less than two feet in height at maturity that
is grown for ornamental purposes. GROUND COVERS are used as an alternative to
grasses. On slopes, GROUND COVERS control erosion while eliminating the
maintenance of mowing on hillsides. GROUND COVERS also provide permanent
covering of open ground to prevent erosion and/or create visual appeal.
   HEAVY INDUSTRIAL USES. Manufacturing or other enterprises with significant
external effects, or which pose significant risks due to the involvement of
explosives, radioactive materials, poisons, pesticides, herbicides, or other
hazardous materials or processes in the manufacturing or other process.
   HIGH WATER MARK, NORMAL OR ORDINARY. The mark on a waterway that will be
found by examining the bed and banks, and ascertaining where the presence and
action of waters are so common and usual, and so long continued in ordinary
years, as to mark upon the soil a character distinct from that of the abutting
upland.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (A)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listings on the National Register;
      (B)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (C)   Individually listed on the state’s inventory of historic places
maintained by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office; or
      (D)   Individually recognized as a local historic landmark as maintained
by the city whose historic preservation program has been certified by the Ohio
Historic Preservation Office.
   HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation or profession for financial gain or profit
which is incidental to and carried on entirely within a dwelling unit located
on a lot, exclusive of attached garage or patio areas, by resident occupants of
the dwelling unit, and which occupation is clearly incidental to and accessory
to the residential use of the property, and is without adverse effect to the
property and shall not exceed 35% of gross area of structure.
   HOSPITAL and/or CLINIC. A facility providing physical or mental health
services, outpatient, inpatient or over-night accommodations, and medical or
surgical care of the sick or injured. This land use category shall also include
urgent care centers or clinics that can receive ambulance service.
   HOTEL and MOTEL. A building in which lodging, with or without meals, is
offered for compensation and in which there are five or more sleeping rooms.
   HOUSEHOLD PETS. See DOMESTIC ANIMAL.
   HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living
as a single group, and doing their own cooking on the premises as distinguished
from a group occupying a bed and breakfast establishment, hotel or motel.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any hard-surfaced, human-made area that does not readily
absorb or retain water, including, but not limited to, buildings, roofs,
parking and driveways, sidewalks, and pavement.
   IMPROVEMENTS. Grading, draining, sanitary and storm sewers, water mains,
pavement, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, street signs, street lights, parks,
monuments, and the appropriate appurtenances required to render land suitable
for the use proposed.
   INDOOR RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES. Public or private
recreational facilities where the principal use is located completely within an
enclosed building. Such uses are generally related to the recreation or
entertainment field, such as bowling alleys, fitness centers and similar
activities. INDOOR RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES differ from active
parks, playgrounds and recreational facilities where the principal use and
activities are located outdoors.
   KENNEL. Any lot or premises on which four or more cats or dogs, or any
combination thereof, not owned by the resident, more than four months of age,
are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained or sold; provided, however, that a
KENNEL shall not include a veterinary or animal clinic.
   KNOX BOX. A small wall-mounted safe that holds building keys for use by fire
departments, EMS and safety services in emergency situations. Local safety
forces possess master keys for all boxes in their response area to allow them
to quickly enter a building without forced entry or obtaining individual keys
held in deposit at their station.
   LAND USE. The utilization of land for trade, industry, residence, recreation
or any other purpose, including, but not limited thereto, all related land
development activities necessary for the preparation of a site, such as
excavation, filling, grading or building construction for the aforementioned
uses.
   LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT. A professional landscape architect registered in the
state.
   LANDSCAPING. The improvement of a lot, parcel, tract of land or portion
thereof, with grass, shrubs and trees. LANDSCAPING may include pedestrian
walks, flower beds, trees, shrubs and ornamental objects, such as fountains,
statuary, and other similar natural and artificial objects.
   LARGER COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE. A contiguous area where multiple
separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at different
times on different schedules under one plan.
   LAW DIRECTOR. The City of Green’s Law Director.
   LIBRARIES, MUSEUMS, GALLERIES and CULTURAL CENTERS. A use providing for
display, performance or enjoyment of heritage, history or the arts. This use
includes, but is not limited to, museums, arts performance venues, cultural
centers or interpretive sites, but does not include commercially-operated
theaters.
   LIGHT, CUTOFF. An artificial outdoor light source designed to ensure that no
light is directly emitted above a horizontal line parallel to the ground as
regulated and illustrated in §
157.140.
   LIGHT INDUSTRIAL USE. The manufacturing, processing or assembly of products
within a fully enclosed structure where noise, odor, light or vibrations is not
noticeable from the adjacent properties.
   LIGHT, NONCUTOFF. An artificial outdoor light source designed to allow light
to be directly emitted above a horizontal line parallel to the ground as
regulated and illustrated in §
157.140.
   LIGHTING, OUTDOOR. Any source of light that is installed or mounted outside
of an enclosed building or structure, but not including streetlights installed
or maintained along public streets by a government agency or public utility.
   LIVESTOCK. Generally accepted outdoor farm animals, including, but not
limited to, cows, goats, horses, pigs, barnyard fowl and the like. LIVESTOCK
shall not include dogs, cats and other household pets.
   LOADING AREA/DOCK. An off-street space or berth for the loading or unloading
of freight carriers on the same lot as the structure they serve.
   LONG RANGE LAND USE PLAN. The City Long Range Land Use Plan or any amendment
thereto.
   LOT. A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted
in this Code and the open spaces required by this Code and having its principal
frontage upon a street or place.
   LOT AREA. The total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any street
right-of-way or other legal public dedication.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection
or upon two parts of the same street, and in either case forming an interior
angle of less than 135 degrees.
   LOT COVERAGE. The portion of a lot that is, unless otherwise specified,
covered by the principal and accessory building, structures and surfaces that
prevent the passage or absorption of storm water, including paving and
driveways.
   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having a frontage on two nonintersecting
streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.
   LOT FRONTAGE. The dimension of a lot abutting a public street measured along
the street right-of-way line.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The front property line, which is coterminous with the
street right-of-way. A FRONT LOT LINE is generally parallel to or less than 45
degrees to the rear lot line. The FRONT LOT LINE is generally opposite the rear
lot line. A corner lot or double frontage lot has more than one FRONT LOT LINE.
   LOT LINE, REAR. An internal lot line opposite a front yard. A REAR LOT LINE
is generally parallel to or less than 45 degrees to the front street right-of-
way line. A lot line greater than 45 degrees from the front street right-of-way
line would be a side lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. An internal lot line generally extending perpendicular to
the front and rear lot lines. The SIDE LOT LINE extends between the front lot
line and the rear lot line.
   LOT LINES. The property lines bounding the lot.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has
been recorded in the office of the Fiscal Officer of the county; or a parcel of
land, the deed to which was of record on or prior to the effective date of this
Code.
   LOT, PANHANDLE OR FLAG. A lot not fronting or abutting a public street and
where access to the public street is limited to a narrow strip of land.
   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at the
required front setback or at the building line for any irregularly shaped lot.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The LOWEST FLOOR of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area,
is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided that such enclosure is
built in accordance with the applicable design requirements specified in this
Code for enclosures below the LOWEST FLOOR.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. MANUFACTURED
HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided
into two or more manufactured home lots for rent. This definition shall exclude
any MANUFACTURED HOME PARK as defined in R.C. § 4781.01, for which the Ohio
Public Health Council has exclusive rule making power.
   MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale. This definition shall
exclude any manufactured home park for which the Ohio Public Health Council has
exclusive rule making power.
   MAXIMUM EXTENT FEASIBLE (MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE). No feasible and
prudent alternative exists, and all possible efforts to comply with the
regulation or minimize the potential harm or adverse impacts have been
undertaken. Economic considerations may be taken into consideration.
   MEDICAL AND DENTAL OFFICES. A use providing medical, psychiatric or surgical
service for sick or injured persons exclusively on an out-patient basis,
including emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, administration,
and services to outpatients, employees or visitors. The term “clinic” includes
immediate care facilities, where emergency treatment is the dominant form of
care provided at the facility.
   MINERAL EXTRACTION. Any artificial or mechanical act by which earth, sand,
rock or any other similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered,
removed, displaced, relocated or moved, and shall include the conditions
resulting therefrom, including, but not limited to, gravel pits and not
including the impacts of such operation. Such use shall require appropriate
permits from the state.
   MOBILE HOME. An industrialized building unit constructed on a chassis for
towing to the point of use, designed to be used with or without a permanent
foundation and intended to be occupied as a dwelling.
   MONUMENT. A survey marker used to mark a street intersection, a start or end
of a curve, a sublot corner, an allotment corner, an original lot corner, or a
section corner, or to witness any of the above.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for
transportation of persons or goods on public streets and roadways.
   MOTOR VEHICLE BODY REPAIR. A facility that provides collision repair
services, including body frame straightening and repair, replacement of damaged
parts and painting.
   MOTOR VEHICLE CAR WASHES. The use of a site for washing and cleaning of
motor vehicles.
   MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL SALES. The portion of property where flammable or
combustible liquids or gases used as fuel are stored and dispersed from fixed
equipment into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles.
   MOTOR VEHICLE RENTAL. A facility where new or used motor vehicles are leased
or rented.
   MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR AND SERVICE. A building, structure or land used for the
general repair and maintenance of motor vehicles including, but not limited to,
muffler, oil change and lubrication, tire service and sales, installation of
accessory, or engine repair.
   MOTOR VEHICLE SALES. A facility where new or used motor vehicles in
operation condition primarily are sold or leased on a long-term basis.
   MOTOR VEHICLE SALES LOT. Premises on which new or used motor vehicles,
utility trailers, camping trailers, recreational vehicles, are displayed on a
hard surface parking area for sale, lease or trade which shall be accessory to
a primary use such as a sales and/or repair facility. 
   NAMEPLATE. A sign indicating only the name and address of the person,
business, profession or activity occupying a lot or building, or part of the
operation or maintenance of any equipment which is placed on the building or
site.
   NATURAL SUCCESSION. A gradual and continuous replacement of one kind of
plant and animal group by a more complex group. The plants and animals present
in the initial group modify the environment through their life activities,
thereby making it unfavorable for themselves. They are gradually replaced by a
different group of plants and animals better adapted to the new environment.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the initial effective date of the city’s flood insurance rate map,
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NONCONFORMING SITE CONDITION. Any lot, building or structure lawfully
existing on the effective date of this Code or any amendment or supplement
thereto, which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which
it is situated.
   NONCONFORMING USE. Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use on the
effective date of this Code or any amendment or supplement thereto, which does
not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is situated.
   NONCONFORMITIES. Lots, uses of land, structures, and uses of structures and
land in combination, lawfully existing at the time of enactment of this Code or
its amendments, which do not conform to the regulations of the district or zone
in which they are situated, and are therefore incompatible.
   NONPRINCIPAL FACADE. Any exterior wall of a building that does not face a
public or private street, park or plaza.
   NOXIOUS WEED. Any plant defined as prohibited noxious weeds in O.A.C. 901:5-
37-01 and any of the following: Goldenrod, Poison Hemlock, Poison Ivy, Poison
Oak, Ragweed, Stinging Nettle, and other plants capable of causing skin
reactions upon contact or producing severe allergic respiratory reactions.
   NPDES (NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM). A regulatory
program in the Federal Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1342, that prohibits
the discharge of pollutants into surface waters of the United States without a
permit.
   NUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity
or displays specified anatomical areas is provided solely to be sketched,
drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons.
   NUDITY.
      (A)   The appearance of a human bare buttock, an anus, genitals or an
areola of a female breast; or
      (B)   A state of dress which fails to cover opaquely a human buttock, an
anus, genitals or an areola of a female breast.
   NURSERIES and GREENHOUSES. Any buildings and enclosures used for the
cultivation and protection of plants.
   NURSING HOME. A boarding facility for the extended care of babies, children,
pensioners or elderly persons who may be mentally or physically infirm.
   OFFICES. Establishments providing executive, management, administrative or
professional services, including, but not limited to, real estate,
architecture, legal, travel, medical, dental, employment, advertising, design,
engineering, accounting and similar uses.
   OFFICIAL FILING. The submission of a preliminary or final plat of a major or
minor subdivision, which meets all of the requirements prescribed by these
regulations.
   OHIO EPA NPDES GENERAL CONSTRUCTION PERMIT. A permit issued by the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency to an applicant for the discharge of storm
water from sites where construction activity is being conducted with discharges
to subsequent receiving waters. (Permit Number OHC000002 as amended.)
   OHIO RAPID ASSESSMENT METHOD. A multi-parameter qualitative index
established by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency to evaluate wetland
quality and function.
   OPEN SPACE. Land and water areas retained for use as active or passive
recreation areas for resource protection in an essentially undeveloped state,
or for storm water management devices when such features are developed as
visual site amenities as approved by the PZC.
   OPEN SPACE SUBDIVISION. A residential subdivision development in which lot
sizes are reduced for the purpose of preserving large open space areas within
the project for the benefit of the neighborhood and community at large while
generally maintaining the underlying base density allowed on the site and the
specific district regulations.
   ORIGINAL TRACT. A contiguous quantity of land held in common ownership,
which has not been platted by the existing owner or owners.
   ORNAMENTAL SHRUB. A deciduous shrub with visual appeal through flowers,
fruit, leaf color or fall colors.
   ORNAMENTAL TREE. A small to medium tree with an expected height of 20 feet
at maturity and that is planted for aesthetic purposes, such as colorful
flowers, interesting bark or fall foliage.
   OUTDOOR DISPLAYS OR SALES. An outdoor arrangement of objects, items,
products or other materials, typically not in a fixed position and capable of
rearrangement, designed and used for the purpose of advertising or identifying
a business, product or service. For the purposes of this Code, objects or
materials weighing over 20 pounds shall be considered outdoor storage.
   OUTDOOR STORAGE. The keeping of any goods, materials, merchandise or
vehicles outside of a structure or building for more than 48 hours. OUTDOOR
STORAGE shall not include car lots, tool rental establishments, greenhouses or
other uses where the sale of the merchandise is the primary use of the property
pursuant to §
157.141.
   PARKING AISLE. The driveway or access drive by which a car enters and
departs a parking space.
   PARKING AREA/DECK. An off-street area or structure provided for the parking
of motor vehicles and involves any related aisles, parking spaces, ingress and
egress lanes, but shall not include any part of a publicly dedicated street.
   PARKING LOT. Any off-street hard surface area dedicated for the parking of
motor vehicles for short periods of time (typically less than 24 to 48 hours)
to be used exclusively by the owners, tenants, lessees, or occupants of the
property of which the lot is located, including their customers, employees, or
other guests granted permission to use the lot.
   PARKING LOT (LONG-TERM). A parking area or structure provided for the
parking of motor vehicles for periods greater than 48 hours and charging a fee
for said period of time for customers, employees and/or guests.
   PARKING SPACE. A graded and surfaced area, either enclosed or open, for the
parking of a motor vehicle, having adequate ingress and egress to a public
street, alley or parking aisle.
   PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS and RECREATIONAL FACILITIES. Any park or recreational
facility that requires grading of the land, construction of facilities,
lighting or is developed for ball fields, tennis courts, swimming pools, skate
parks, disc golf, golf courses and other active sports facilities with the
exception of bike and hike trails. The principal use and activities of an
active PARK, PLAYGROUND and RECREATIONAL FACILITY are generally located
outdoors although the use may include some enclosed structures that are
accessory to the principal use.
   PASSIVE PARKS and CONSERVATION AREAS. Any park or recreational facility
where there is no grading of the land, the construction of facilities, lighting
or development of ball fields with the exception that passive parks,
recreational facilities and conservation areas may include the development of
trails and sidewalks.
   PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS. A dedicated public right-of-way limited to pedestrian
use.
   PERFORMANCE BOND or SURETY BOND. An agreement between a developer and the
city for the amount of the estimated construction cost, guaranteeing the
completion of physical improvements according to plans and specifications
within the time prescribed by the agreement.
   PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS. Establishments that primarily engage in
providing services generally involving the care of the person or person’s
possessions. PERSONAL SERVICES may include, but are not limited to, laundry and
dry-cleaning services, barber shops, beauty salons, massage therapy, health and
fitness studios, music schools, informational and instructional services,
tanning salons, and portrait studios.
   PHASING. Clearing a parcel of land in distinct sections, with the
stabilization of each section before the clearing of the next.
   PLANNING DEPARTMENT. The City Department of Planning.
   POLLUTION. Any contamination or alteration of the physical, chemical or
biological properties of any waters that will render the waters harmful or
detrimental to public health, safety or welfare; domestic, commercial,
industrial, agricultural, recreational or other legitimate beneficial uses; or
livestock, wildlife, including birds, fish or other aquatic life.
   POLLUTION, NON-POINT SOURCE. Pollution that is generated by various land use
activities rather than from an identifiable or discrete source, and is conveyed
to waterways through natural processes, such as rainfall, storm runoff or
ground water seepage rather than direct discharge.
   POLLUTION, POINT SOURCE. Pollution that is traceable to a discrete point or
pipe.
   PORCH. A covered but unenclosed projection from the main wall of a building
that may or may not use columns or other ground supports for structural
purposes.
   PRELIMINARY PLAN. A drawing of a major subdivision for the purpose of study,
and which, if approved, permits proceeding with the preparation of the final
plat.
   PRINCIPAL BUILDING. The building containing the main or principal uses of
the lot.
   PRINCIPAL FACADE. Any exterior wall of a building that faces a public or
private street, park or plaza.
   PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER/SURVEYOR. A professional registered in the state by
the appropriate board.
   PUBLIC AND PRIVATE UTILITY SERVICES. Services provided by public and private
utilities, necessary for the exercise of the principal use or service of other
uses in the city. These services include, but are not limited to, underground,
surface, or overhead gas, electrical, steam, water, sanitary sewerage, and
storm water drainage. Such accessories may include mains, drains, vaults,
culverts, laterals, sewers, pipes, catch basins, water storage tanks, conduits,
cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, pumps, lift
stations and hydrants.
   PUBLIC SAFETY/SERVICE FACILITY. A public facility providing services
necessary for the safety of the residents of the city, including police, fire
protection and rescue activities, power plants or substations, water treatment
plants or pumping stations, sewage disposal or pumping plants, and other
similar public service structures operated by a public utility, by a railroad,
whether publicly or privately owned, or by a city or other governmental agency.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm, corporation, governmental agency or board
having a public utility commission or regulatory body permit to furnish to the
public, under regulations, electricity, gas, sewer, water, telephone,
transportation, steam or other similar public services.
   PUBLIC WAY. An alley, avenue, boulevard, bridge, channel, ditch, easement,
expressway, freeway, highway, land, parkway, right-of-way, road, sidewalk,
street, subway, tunnel, viaduct, walk or other way in which the general public
or a public entity has a right, or which is dedicated, whether improved or not.
   PZC. The City Planning and Zoning Commission.
   QUALIFIED INDIVIDUAL. Professional engineers, professional surveyors and
landscape architects registered in the state or a certified professional in
erosion and sediment control as recognized by CPESC, Inc.
   RAINWATER AND LAND DEVELOPMENT MANUAL (RWLD). The RWLD Manual contains the
state’s minimum technical standards for post construction storm water quality
and erosion and sediment control standards. The most current edition of these
standards shall be applicable with this Code.
   RAMP. A structure attached to a principal building that is constructed at a
slope that meets the requirements of the applicable building and safety codes
that provides access to a building.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is:
      (A)   Built on a single chassis;
      (B)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (C)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (D)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   RELIGIOUS PLACES OF WORSHIP. An institution that congregations of people
regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services, meetings and
other activities, including buildings in which the religious services of any
denomination are held.
   RESEARCH FACILITIES AND LABORATORIES. A building for research, development
and testing laboratories that does not involve the mass manufacture,
fabrication, processing or sale of products. Such uses shall not violate any
odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, radiation, vibration or similar pollution
standard as specified herein.
   RESTAURANT. An establishment whose principal business is the selling of food
and beverages to the customer in a ready to consume state, in individual
servings.
   RETAIL AND SERVICE COMMERCIAL USES. An establishment primarily engaged in
the sale of goods and materials to the general public. RETAIL COMMERCIAL USES
may include, but are not limited to, bookstores, antique stores, convenience
stores, bakeries, grocery stores and other similar uses. SERVICE COMMERCIAL
USES are primarily engaged in rendering services to businesses, including, but
not limited to, printers, equipment rental, protective services, mailing, photo
finishing and other similar uses.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land taken or dedicated for use as a public way. In
addition to the roadway, a RIGHT-OF-WAY normally incorporates the curbs, lawn
strips, sidewalks, lighting, water and sewer lines, and drainage facilities,
and may include special features (required by the topography or treatment),
such as grade separation, landscaped areas, viaducts and bridges.
   RIPARIAN AREA. A transitional area between flowing water and terrestrial
ecosystems which provides a continuous exchange of nutrients and woody debris
between land and water. This area is at least periodically influenced by
flooding. RIPARIAN AREAS, if appropriately sized and managed, help to stabilize
banks, limit erosion, reduce flood size flows, and/or filter and settle out
runoff pollutants, or perform other functions consistent with the purposes of
these regulations.
   RIPARIAN SETBACK. The area set back from each bank of a stream to protect
the riparian area and stream from impacts of development, and streamside
residents from impacts of flooding and land loss through erosion. RIPARIAN
SETBACKS are those lands within the city that fall within the area defined by
the criteria set forth in these regulations.
   ROADSIDE STAND. A structure used or intended to be used solely by the owner
or the tenant of a property on which it is located for the sale of seasonal
agricultural products produced on the premises.
   ROWHOUSE or TOWNHOME. A one-family dwelling unit, with a private entrance,
which is part of a structure whose dwelling units are attached horizontally in
a linear arrangement, and having a totally exposed front and rear wall to be
used for access, light and ventilation.
   RUNOFF. The portion of rainfall, melted snow or irrigation water that flows
across the ground surface and is eventually conveyed to water resources or
wetlands.
   SANITARY SEWER. Both centralized sewer, on-site septic systems, on-site
wastewater disposal and other approved wastewater disposal systems.
   SATELLITE DISH. A parabolic dish antenna including its structural supports,
used for reception of various satellite television programming signals.
   SEDIMENT. The soils or other surface materials that are transported or
deposited by the action of wind, water, ice, gravity or any combination of
those forces, as a product of erosion.
   SEDIMENTATION. The deposition or settling of sediment.
   SELF-STORAGE FACILITIES. A building or group of buildings in a controlled
access compound that contains equal or varying sizes of individual,
compartmentalized and controlled access stalls or lockers for the storage of
residential or commercial customer’s goods or wares. Such facilities do not
include sales, service or storage of hazardous materials.
   SETBACK LINE. A line established by this Code, generally parallel with and
measured from the lot line, defining the limits of a yard in which no building,
other than an accessory structure, may be located above ground, except as may
be provided in this Code. See also YARD.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater or adult theater. A SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS does not include a nude model studio.
   SIGN. Any medium, including its structure, words, letters, figures,
numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs, trade names or
trademarks by which anything is made known and which are used to advertise or
promote an individual, firm, association, corporation, profession, business,
commodity or product and which is visible from any public street or highway.
   SIGN, ABANDONED. A sign which no longer identifies or advertises a bona fide
business, lessor, service, owner, product or activity, and/or for which no
legal owner can be found.
   SIGN AREA. The entire area of the sign as measured according to §
157.135.
   SIGN, ATTACHED. A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or
structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for,
or forms the background surface of the sign and which does not project more
than 12 inches from such building or structure.
   SIGN, AWNING. A sign painted on, printed on or permanently attached flat
against the surface of a canopy, marquee or awning.
   SIGN, BENCH. A sign located on the seat or back of a bench or seat placed on
or adjacent to a public right-of-way.
   SIGN, CANOPY. See SIGN, AWNING.
   SIGN COPY. Any graphic, word, numeral, symbol, insignia, text, sample,
model, device or combination thereof which is primarily intended to advertise,
identify or notify.
   SIGN COPY CHANGES or MESSAGE CHANGES. The ability to modify or change
displays, words, lines, logos or symbols on a sign to provide different
information. Changeable copy signs include computer signs, reader boards with
changeable letters, and time and temperature units.
   SIGN, DIRECTIONAL. A sign directing or guiding traffic and parking on
private property.
   SIGN, ELECTRONIC INFORMATION. A sign whose alphabetic, pictographic or
symbolic information content can be changed or altered on a fixed display
surface composed of electrically illuminated or mechanically driven changeable
segments.
   SIGN FACE. The area or display surface used for the message.
   SIGN, FREESTANDING. A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other
support so that the bottom of the sign copy area is five feet or more above
grade.
   SIGN, GROUND MOUNTED. Any sign placed upon or supported by the ground
independent of any other structure.
   SIGN HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the lowest adjacent grade
to the highest point of the sign or sign structure.
   SIGN, IDENTIFICATION. A sign giving the nature, logo, trademark or other
identifying symbol, address or any combination of a building, business,
development or establishment on the premises.
   SIGN, MARQUEE. See SIGN, AWNING.
   SIGN, NONCONFORMING. A sign that is erected legally but which does not
comply with subsequently enacted sign restrictions and regulation. A
NONCONFORMING SIGN is also a sign that does not conform to the sign
requirements but for which a special permit has been issued.
   SIGN, OFF-PREMISES. A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity
or service not exclusively related to the premises where the sign is located.
   SIGN, PROJECTING. A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a building
for support and which projects more than 12 inches from the wall of such
building.
   SIGN, ROOF. A sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or which is
wholly dependent upon a building for support and which projects above the point
of a building with a flat roof, the eaves line of a building with a gambrel,
gable, or hip roof, or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof.
   SIGN, SNIPE. A sign that is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or
otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes, fences, or to other objects or
which is located within the public right-of-way.
   SIGN, TEMPORARY. A nonpermanent sign erected, affixed and maintained on a
premises for a short, usually fixed, period of time.
   SIGN, WINDOW. A sign that is applied or attached to the exterior or interior
of a window or located in such manner within the building that it can readily
be seen from the exterior of the building through a window.
   SITE PLAN, CONCEPTUAL. A plan or map that conceptually illustrates the
development proposal for the subject property, including, but not limited to,
public and private roadways, building footprints and square footage, proposed
uses, landscape areas and buffers, plazas, pedestrian and vehicular
circulation, parking, site access, service areas, storm water management,
general locations of proposed utility lines, and the identification of
potentially sensitive design issues. The relationship of the proposed
development to existing, surrounding developments should also be reflected.
   SITE PLAN, FINAL. A plan, to scale, showing uses and structures proposed for
a parcel of land as required by the regulations. Includes lot lines, streets,
building sites, reserved open space, buildings, major landscape features, both
natural and human-made, detailed engineering drawings of the proposed public,
and/or private improvements, as well as the locations of proposed utility lines
required for the development.
   SOCIAL CLUBS and FRATERNAL ORGANIZATIONS. A building or portion thereof or
premises owned or operated by a corporation, association, or group of persons
for a social, educational, or recreational purpose, but not primarily for
profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business.
   SOIL-DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Clearing, grading, excavating, filling or other
alteration of the earth’s surface where natural or human-made ground cover is
destroyed, and which may result in, or contribute to, erosion and sediment
pollution.
   SOIL ERODIBILITY. The susceptibility of soil to erosion and the amount and
rate of runoff, as measured under the standard unit plot condition. SOIL
ERODIBILITY factors are available in the county soil survey.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Human genitals.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
      (A)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, the public
region, buttocks, an anus or female breasts;
      (B)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; or
      (C)   Masturbation, actual or simulated.
   STABILIZATION. The use of BMPs, such as seeding and mulching, that reduce or
prevent soil erosion by water, wind, ice, gravity or combination of those
forces.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. The date the building permit was issued; provided the
actual START OF CONSTRUCTION, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The
ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of a building.
   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT. A plan in which runoff water from a development is
safely dispersed at an allowable rate to minimize erosion and flooding.
   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). The plan which describes all
the elements of the storm water strategy implemented during and after
construction. The plan addresses erosion control and storm water quality.
   STORM WATER QUALITY TREATMENT. The removal of pollutants from urban runoff
and improvement of water quality, accomplished largely by deposition and
utilizing the benefits of natural processes.
   STORY. The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no floor above it,
then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
   STREAM. A surface watercourse with a well-defined bed and bank, either
natural or artificial, which confines and conducts continuous or periodical
flowing water in such a way that terrestrial vegetation cannot establish roots
within the channel.
   STREET, ARTERIAL. A class of street that brings traffic to and from
expressways and other arterials and serves those major movements of traffic
within or through the city not served by expressways. Arterials interconnect
the principal traffic generators and high-volume corridors that connect within
the city and rural areas for long and through traffic trips.
   STREET, COLLECTOR. A class of street that serves the internal traffic
movement within an area of the city, such as a subdivision, and connects this
area with the arterial system. COLLECTORS do not handle long through trips and
are not, of necessity, continuous for any great length. This principal
difference between collector and arterial streets is the length of the trip
they accommodate. COLLECTORS in an industrial area would properly carry truck
movements that serve to terminate in that area.
   STREET, CUL-DE-SAC. A local street having one end open to vehicular traffic
and the other end permanently closed with a vehicular turnaround.
   STREET, DEAD-END. A street temporarily having only one outlet for vehicular
traffic, but intended to be extended or continued in the future and provided
with a vehicular turnaround on a temporary easement.
   STREET, LOCAL. Those streets whose sole function is to provide access to
immediately adjacent land. They make up a large percentage of the total street
mileage of the city, but carry a small portion of the vehicle miles of travel.
   STREET, LOCAL COLLECTOR. A class of street that serves the internal traffic
movement within areas such as major subdivisions, industrial areas and
commercial areas, and connects with other collector streets.
   STREET, PRIVATE. A right-of-way that provides vehicular and pedestrian
access to residential, commercial or industrial structures or groups of
structures, and is not dedicated.
   STREET, PUBLIC. A public thoroughfare which has been dedicated for public
use or subject to public easements therefore, and which affords the principal
means of access to abutting property.
   STREET, THOROUGHFARES OR ROAD. All property dedicated or intended or used,
whether public or private, for vehicular and pedestrian movement, including
street, highway, freeway or other motorway right-of-way, and, except where
limited or controlled access, affording the principal means of access to
abutting property.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the area or cubical content of a
building.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground,
including buildings, walls, advertising signs, billboards, roadside stands,
fences, pools, decks and tents.
   SUBDIVIDER. An individual, firm, association, corporation, trust or other
legal entity, including their agents, commencing proceedings under these
regulations to subdivide land.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of any parcel of land, shown as a unit or as
contiguous units on the last preceding tax roll, into two or more parcels,
sites or lots, any one of which is less than five acres, for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership; provided, however, that
the division or partition of land into parcels of more than five acres, not
involving any new streets or easements of access, and the sale or exchange of
which does not create additional building sites, shall be exempted; or the
improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential, commercial or
industrial structures or groups of structures involving the division or
allocation of land for the opening, widening or extension of any street or
streets, except private streets serving industrial structures; or the division
or allocation of land as open spaces for common use by owners, occupants or
lease holders, or as easements for the extension and maintenance of public
sewer, water, storm drainage or other public facilities.
   SUBDIVISION, MAJOR. Any subdivision that does not meet the requirements of a
minor subdivision.
   SUBDIVISION, MINOR. A division of a parcel of land along an existing public
street or road, not involving the opening, widening or extension of any street
or road, and involving not more than five lots, any one of which is less than
five acres, after the original tract has been completely subdivided.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE also means flood-related damage sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include:
      (A)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified prior to the application for a development permit by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions;
      (B)   Any alteration of a historic structure; provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure; or
      (C)   Any improvement to a structure which is considered new
construction.
   SURVEYOR. A person registered to practice professional surveying by the
State Board of Registration as specified in R.C. § 4733.14.
   SWCD. The County Soil and Water Conservation District, referred to as the
County SWCD.
   SWIMMING POOL. A structure, whether above or below grade level, designed to
hold water more than 30 inches deep to be used for recreational purposes.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. The technology which enables information to be exchanged
through the transmission of voice, video or data signals by means of electrical
or electromagnetic systems.
   TEMPORARY EVENT. A gathering or assemblage of individuals for the purpose of
observing or engaging in legal activities, including, but not limited to,
festivals, fairs, shows, showcases, house or garden tours, concerts, dances,
rallies, parades, demonstrations, or competitions of creative athletic form.
TEMPORARY EVENTS could include incidental retail sales of the products of such
activities, as long as such sales are not advertised off-site.
   TEMPORARY STORAGE IN PORTABLE CONTAINERS. A portable structure or container
that allows for storage of goods or materials, on or off-site and which is not
permanently affixed to a foundation. TEMPORARY STORAGE CONTAINERS can include
semi-tractor trailers if they are used for storage and not transport.
   THEATER. A building or part of a building devoted to showing motion
pictures, or for dramatic, dance, musical or other live performances.
   THOROUGHFARE PLAN. Any mapped and/or written proposal for future road
development of the city and its affected area.
   TRAILER. A vehicle without motor power that is designed to be towed by a
motorized passenger vehicle and not for human occupancy. This includes, but is
not limited to, TRAILERS for the transport of boats, snowmobiles, landscaping/
construction equipment and horses.
   TRAILER, HOUSE. See MOBILE HOME.
   TRAILER, TRAVEL. See RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   TRICKLE CHARGER. A small, mains operated device used to charge a battery
under no-load at a rate equal to the self-discharge rate.
   TYPE A DAY CARE HOME. A permanent residence of the provider in which child
day care or publicly funded day care is provided for seven to 12 children at
one time or is the permanent residence of the provider in which child day care
is provided to four to 12 children at one time if four or more children are
under two years of age at one time. In counting children for the purposes of
this definition, any children under six years of age who are related to the
provider and who are on the premises of the TYPE A DAY CARE HOME shall be
counted. TYPE A DAY CARE HOMES do not include homes where all of the children
being cared for are siblings and the residence is the home of the siblings.
TYPE A DAY CARES HOMES do not include any child day camp as defined in R.C. §
5104.01.
   TYPE B DAY CARE HOME. A permanent residence of the provider in which child
day care is provided for one to six children at one time and in which no more
than three children are under two years of age at one time. In counting
children for the purposes of this definition, any children under six years of
age who are related to the provider and who are on the premises of the TYPE B
DAY CARE HOME shall be counted. TYPE B DAY CARE HOMES do not include homes
where all of the children being cared for are siblings and the residence is the
home of the siblings. TYPE B DAY CARES HOMES do not include any child day camp
as defined in R.C. § 5104.01.
   UNSTABLE SOILS. A portion of land that is identified by the County Engineer,
County Building Standards and/or the County SWCD as prone to slipping,
sloughing or landslides, or is identified by the U.S. Department of Agriculture
Natural Resource Conservation Service methodology as having a low soil
strength.
   USE. Any purpose for which a lot, building or other structure, or a tract of
land may be designated, arranged, intended, maintained or occupied; or any
activity, occupation, business or operation carried on or intended to be
carried on in a building or other structure or on a tract of land.
   USE, PRINCIPAL. The primary or main use of any lot.
   USE, TEMPORARY. A use that may be permitted for a specified period of time.
TEMPORARY USES may require a temporary zoning permit in compliance with §
157.088 and may be subject to additional building and zoning requirements.
   UTILITY TRAILER. A single axle, wheeled vehicle without motor power, which
is 14 feet or less in length, that has an open-top cargo area with sides that
shall not be greater than 36 inches in height from the trailer floor, and that
is designed to be towed by a motorized passenger vehicle and intended not for
human occupancy but rather for hauling light loads.
   VARIANCE. A modification of a provision of this Code where such modification
will not be contrary to the public interest and where, due to conditions
peculiar to the property and not the result of the action of the applicant, a
literal enforcement of the regulations would result in unnecessary and undue
hardship.
   VEHICLE. Any contrivance that is used in the public or private
transportation of one or more persons, is used in the transportation of goods
over public or private property or roadways, or is used in a commercial or
agricultural enterprise. A contrivance that is designed to be pushed, pulled or
towed by any self-propelled vehicle is considered a VEHICLE.
   VEHICULAR USE AREA. Any portion of land used for parking, ingress, egress or
vehicular circulation.
   VETERINARY CLINIC. A place used for the care, grooming, diagnosis and
treatment of sick, ailing, infirm or injured animals, and those who are in need
of medical or surgical attention, and may include overnight accommodations in a
wholly enclosed building on the premises only for treatment, observation and/or
recuperation.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be compliant
with this Code or plan as approved.
   WATER RESOURCE. Any public or private body of water, including lakes and
ponds, as well as any brook, creek, river or stream having banks, a defined bed
and a definite direction flow, either continuously or intermittently flowing.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial waterway, such as a stream or river,
with a defined bed and channel, and a definite direction of course that is
contained within, flows through or borders the community.
   WATERSHED. An area of land that drains into a particular watercourse,
usually defined by topography.
   WETLAND PROFESSIONAL. An individual with training and experience in wetland
delineation acceptable to the Army Corp of Engineers.
   WETLANDS. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground
water at a frequency and duration that are sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. WETLANDS includes swamps,
marshes, bogs and similar areas that are delineated in accordance with the 1987
United States Army Corps of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual and any other
procedures and requirements adopted by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers for delineating wetlands.
   WHOLESALE COMMERCIAL USE. The sale of merchandise to retail and service
commercial uses, office uses or institutional uses, or to other wholesalers.
WHOLESALE COMMERCIAL USES may also mean acting as an agent or broker in the
buying or selling of merchandise, but not selling to the general public.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA. The physical device through which
electromagnetic, wireless telecommunication signals authorized by the Federal
Communications Commission are transmitted or received. Antennas used by amateur
radio operators are excluded from this definition.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. A facility consisting of the equipment
and structures involved in receiving telecommunications or radio signals from a
mobile radio communications source and transmitting those signals to a central
switching computer which connects the mobile unit with the land-based telephone
lines.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER. A structure intended to support equipment
used to transmit and/or receive telecommunications signals, including
monopoles, and guyed and lattice construction steel structures.
   YARD.
      (A)   An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and
unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as
otherwise provided herein.
      (B)   In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a
side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the minimum
horizontal distance between the lot line and the nearest portion of the main
building shall be used.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot
lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the
main building or any projection thereof, other than the projection of the usual
steps or entranceway.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the rear of a lot between the side lot
lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and
the main building or any projection thereof, other than steps, unenclosed
balconies or unenclosed porches.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the main building and the side lot line of the
lot extending from the front yard to the rear yard.
   ZONING DISTRICT. A section or sections of the incorporated territory of the
city for which regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, the
height of buildings, development standards, yards, lot areas and other
standards are uniform.
   ZONING DIVISION. The City Zoning Division.
(Prior Code, § 1231.02) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009; Ord. 2012-24, passed
11-13-2012; Ord. 2013-19, passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 2014-15, passed 12-9-2014;
Ord. 2016-01, passed 4-26-2016; Ord. 2018-02, passed 3-13-2018; Ord. 2021-03,
passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 2022-02, passed 3-8-2022; Ord. 2022-15, passed 10-11-
2022)
SPECIAL USE PERMIT DISTRICT
§ 157.185 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this District is to provide a mechanism to allow the Planning
and Zoning Commission and City Council to review, approve or disapprove
requests to allow specific uses within varying zoning districts which are not
permitted by the Land Development Code; and the proposed use may be beneficial
to the community and deemed to be in the city’s best interest.
(Prior Code, § 1232.01) (Ord. 2012-18, passed 9-25-2012)
§ 157.186 PROCESS.
   The applicant shall file a special use permit application with the Planning
Department. The applicant shall submit a general development plan and any
proposed uses for the land/building as part of the application. The Planning
Department will review the request (pre-application meeting required) and
determine if the project warrants a special uses permit (cases where rezoning
of land is not determined to be in the best interest of the city) and make a
recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall hold a public hearing (pursuant to the same process for a
conditional use permit application). The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
make a recommendation to City Council. If City Council approves a general
development plan, the applicant shall submit a final site plan to the Planning
Department for review and approval.
(Prior Code, § 1232.02) (Ord. 2012-18, passed 9-25-2012)
§ 157.187 CONTINUITY/TERMINATION.
   The use (or uses) included in the approved special use permit may be
transferred by the original applicant provided the uses and site plan comply
with the final site plan approved by the city. The special use permit, upon
written notice to the Planning Department of the transfer for the real estate
to that new owner, shall transfer to the new owner/operator. The current owner/
operator for the special use permit must be on file with the Planning
Department in order for the permit to be valid.
(Prior Code, § 1232.03) (Ord. 2012-18, passed 9-25-2012)
§ 157.188 CHANGE OF USE.
   Any holder of a special use permit seeking to change the use of the property
shall comply with the procedure for original applications set forth in §
157.186 for any use not originally approved as part of the original
application. The Planning Department shall provide a special use permit to the
property owner and/or operator. The property owner and/or user shall also
obtain a zoning permit(s), certificate of use permit(s), building permit(s) and
any other permits required. The special use permit is not a substitute for any
other permit.
(Prior Code, § 1232.04) (Ord. 2012-18, passed 9-25-2012)
§ 157.189 FEE.
   The application fee for a special use permit shall be $300. The fee for
change of use application for a special use permit shall be $300.
(Prior Code, § 1232.05) (Ord. 2012-18, passed 9-25-2012)
§ 157.190 RIGHT TO REVOKE.
   The city maintains the right to revoke the special use permit if the current
use is not the approved use; or, if the property transfer to a new owner/
operator without notice to the city. The applicant will acknowledge the
potential revocation of the permit. If the city notifies the property owner or
operator that a violation of the special use permit has occurred, the owner or
operator shall cease use of the property within 15 days of the written
notification by the Law Director.
(Prior Code, § 1232.06) (Ord. 2012-18, passed 9-25-2012)
LAND REUTILIZATION PROGRAM
§ 157.210 PURPOSE.
   The City Council adopts and implements the procedure set forth in R.C. §§
5722.02 through 5722.15, inclusive, to facilitate the effective reutilization
of nonproductive land in the city.
(Prior Code, § 1233.01) (Ord. 2013-17, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 157.211 AUTHORITY OF OFFICIALS.
   The Mayor, Director of Planning, Director of Finance, Law Director and such
other city officials, as appropriate, are authorized to provide such
information, and execute, certify and furnish such other documents and do all
other actions necessary and/or incidental to carry out the land reutilization
program.
(Prior Code, § 1233.02) (Ord. 2013-17, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 157.999 PENALTY.
   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any regulation, provision,
amendment or supplement to this Code, or failing to obey any lawful order of
the Zoning Division issued in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree and, upon conviction thereof, shall be jailed
for not more than 60 days and/or fined not more than $500 or the maximum amount
allowed by state statutes. Each and every day during which such illegal
location, erection, construction, reconstruction, enlargement, change,
maintenance or use continues may be deemed a separate offense.
   (2)   Whoever willfully violates any rule or regulation adopted by the City
Council by resolution or ordinance pursuant to § 3.3 of the Charter, or fails
to comply with any order issued pursuant thereto, shall forfeit and pay not
less than $10, nor more than $1,000. Such sum may be recovered, with costs, in
a civil action brought in the Court of Common Pleas of the county, relative to
which the violation occurred, by the legal representative of the city, in the
name of the city and for the use thereof.
   (3)   Any person, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land, who
willfully transfers any lot, parcel or tract of such land from or in accordance
with a plat of a subdivision as specifically defined in R.C. Ch. 711, before
such plat has been recorded in the office of the County Fiscal Officer, shall
forfeit and pay the sum of not less than $10, nor more than $500, for each lot,
parcel or tract of land so sold. The description of such lot, parcel or tract
by metes and bounds in the deed or transfer shall not serve to exempt the
seller from the forfeiture provided in this division (3).
(Prior Code, § 1230.02) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
APPENDIX A: WOODY PLANTS SUITABLE FOR RIPARIAN AREAS
Flood Tolerance* Shade Tolerance ** Common Name
Flood Tolerance*            Shade Tolerance ** Common Name
High Flood Tolerance
Aronia arbutifolia          3                  Red chokeberry
Aronia melanocarpa          3                  Black chokeberry
Cephalanthus occidentalis   5                  Common buttonbush
Clethra alnifolia           2                  Summersweet clethra ***
Cornus amomum               4                  Silky dogwood
Cornus stolonifera          5                  Redosier dogwood
(sericea)
Hamamelis vernalis          3                  Vernal witchhazel ***
Ilex decidua                3                  Possumhaw ***
Ilex glabra                 2                  Inkberry ***
Ilex verticillata           3                  Common winterberry
Itea virginica              1                  Virginia sweetspire ***
Magnolia virginiana         2                  Sweetbay magnolia ***
Myrica pensylvanica         4                  Northern bayberry
Parthenocissus quinquefolia 1                  Virginia creeper (vine)
Physocarpus opulifolius     4                  Common ninebark
Potentilla fruticosa        4                  Bush cinquefoil
Salix exigua                5                  Sandbar willow
Salix purpurea              5                  Streamco willow ***
Salix x cotteti             5                  Bankers willow ***
Sambucus canadensis         1                  American elderberry
Viburnum cassinoides        2                  Witherod viburnum
Moderate Flood Tolerance *
Calycanthus floridus        1                  Common sweetshrub
Hypericum kalmianurn        5                  Kalm St. John's wort
Viburnum dentatum           2                  Arrowwood viburnum
Xanthorhiza simplicissima   1                  Yellowroot ***
Intermediate Flood Tolerance *
Aesculus parviflora         2                  Bottlebush buckeye ***
Aesculus pavia              2                  Red buckeye ***
Campsis radicans            3                  Trumpetcreeper (vine)
Cornus racemosa             2                  Gray dogwood
Corylus americana           2                  American filbert
Diervilla lonicera          1                  Dwarf bushhoneysuckle
Fothergilla gardeni         1                  Dwarf fothergilla ***
Fothergilla major           1                  Large fothergilla ***
Hydrangea arborescens       1                  Smooth hydrangea
Hydrangea quericifolia      1                  Oakleaf hydrangea ***
Lindera benzoin             1                  Common spicebush
Lonicera dioica             2                  Limber honeysuckle (vine)
Mahonia aquifolium          1                  Oregongrape holly ***
Rosa carolina               4                  Carolina rose
Rosa setigera               4                  Prairie rose
Rubus odoratus              1                  Fragrant thimbleberry
Vaccinium stamineum         2                  Common deerberry
Low Flood Tolerance *
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi     4                  Bearberry
Cornus rogusa               1                  Roundleaf dogwood
Corylus americana           2                  American filbert
Diervilla lonicera          1                  Dwarf bushhoneysuckle
Fothergilla gardeni         1                  Dwarf fothergilla ***
Fothergilla major           1                  Large fothergilla ***
Hydrangea arborescens       1                  Smooth hydrangea
Hydrangea quericifolia      1                  Oakleaf hydrangea ***
Mahonia aquifolium          1                  Oregongrape holly ***
Rosa carolina               4                  Carolina rose
Rubus odoratus              1                  Fragrant thimbleberry
Symphoricarpos albus        1                  Common snowberry
Vaccinium stamineum         2                  Common deerberry
No Flood Tolerance *
Amorpha canescens           5                  Leadplant ***
Ceanothus americanus        3                  New Jersey tea
Comptonia peregrina         2                  Sweetfern
Dirca palustris             1                  Leatherwood
Hypericum frondosum         5                  Golden St. John's wort
Juniperus communis          5                  Common juniper
Juniperus horizontalis      5                  Creeping juniper ***
Rhus aromatica              5                  Fragrant sumac
Sambucus pubens             1                  Scarlet elder
Symphoricarpos albus        1                  Common snowberry
*   High flood tolerance: Generally lowland wet species surviving when flooded
or exposed to high water table more than 40% of the growing season
*   Moderate flood tolerance: Generally lowland wet species surviving when
flooded or exposed to high water table more than 30% of the growing season but
less than 40%
*   Intermediate flood tolerance: Generally lowland wet-mesic species surviving
occasional inundation or elevated water table between 20% and 30% of the
growing season
*   Low flood tolerance: Generally upland mesic and mesic-dry species rarely
inundated or exposed to an elevated water table for periods of short duration,
between 5% and 20% of the growing season
*   No flood tolerance: Generally upland dry species exhibiting immediate and
rapid decline frequently culminating in death if inundated or exposed to
elevated water table for more than 5% of the growing season
**   Shade tolerance: Shade tolerance means able to grow in a state of health
and vigor beneath dense shade. In this ranking, shrubs and vines are ranked on
a scale of 1 to 5, with 1 being very shade tolerant, and 5 being very shade
intolerant
1.   The majority of plants listed are available on the local commercial market
and do not displace native species
2.   The cultivated varieties (cultivars) of the species listed above may also
be used
3.   Primary information taken from Hightshoe, Gary, 1987, Native Trees,
Shrubs, and vines for Urban and Rural America, Van Nostrand. NY, NY
4.   For further assistance contact Roger Gettig, Landscape Consulting Program,
The Holden Arboretum, or Steve Roloson, ODNR Scenic Rivers Program
 
(Prior Code, Part 12, App. A) (Ord. 2009-21, passed 10-27-2009)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES
      
II.   EASEMENTS
      
III.   VACATING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
      
IV.   DEDICATION AND PLAT APPROVAL
      
V.   ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY
      
VI.   LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY
      
VII.   STREET GRADE LEVELS AND CHANGE OF STREET NAME
      
VIII.   ANNEXATION AND DETACHMENT OF TERRITORY
      
IX.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. 93-17    8-10-1993   To Ohio Edison Co. for electrical services
Res. 95-R37   4-25-1995   To Marks Cablevision of Green, Inc., a renewal
                          contract for cable television services for 15 years
Ord. 95-14    7-11-1995   To Consumers Ohio Water Co. for water service, for 20
                          years
Ord. 95-23    3-26-1996   Establishing rates for water service in the city from
                          Consumers Ohio Water Co.
Res. 02-R39   9-10-2002   Approving the transfer of the cable television
                          franchise from Cable One, Inc. to Time Warner Cable
                          Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an exclusive
Res. 2010-R56 11-23-2010  agreement with J&J Refuse, Inc. for the collection
                          and removal of residential recyclables, refuse and
                          waste materials
                          Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an exclusive
Res. 2021-R10 2-9-2021    agreement with Republic Services for the collection
                          and removal of residential recyclables, refuse and
                          waste materials in the city
                         
 
TABLE II: EASEMENTS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./  Date
Res.   Passed Description
No.
Res.   6-10-  Authorizing appropriation proceedings to obtain an easement on 0.063 acres
97-R42 1997   owned by W.H. Beavers and located on the southeast corner of Arlington Road
              and Boettler Road, for highway, drainage and utility purposes
Res.   12-14- Authorizing an easement for maintenance and landscaping purposes to the
99-R78 1999   Raintree Estates Homeowners Association in the landscaping islands on
              Cobworth Court and Carmelle Court
Res.   12-14- Authorizing purchase of an easement from E. and N. March Trustees, located on
99-R81 1999   the west side of Massillon Road
Res.   3-9-   Authorizing a storm sewer easement over property owned by the city to MG&L
04-R07 2004   Properties, LLC
Res.   5-11-  Authorizing an easement for the installation of a cabinet at Greensburg Road
04-R31 2004   to SBC Ohio
Res.   7-13-  Authorizing an easement for the construction of a sanitary sewer line in
04-R52 2004   conjunction with the County Department of Environmental Services
Res.   10-10- Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of a plat to vacate
06-80  2006   the drainage easements around Blocks B and C in Mystic Pointe Subdivision
Res.   9-25-  Accepting a conservation easement from Wagler Development to the city
2007-  2007   totaling 4.3515 acres in relation to the Villages at Meadow Wood final plat
R51           approval
Res.   11-28- Authorizing the city to grant a sanitary sewer easement to the county for the
2007-  2007   sanitary sewer on the Spring Hill Sports Complex property
R73
Res.   12-11-
2007-  2007   Accepting utility easements related to the dedication of Fortuna Drive
R77
Res.   6-24-  Authorizing the city to grant a water utility easement to Aqua Ohio, Inc. to
2008-  2008   install water lines on Wise Road
R30
Res.   5-11-
2010-  2010   Accepting a conservation easement by Wagner Homes of Akron to the city
R15
Res.   12-13- Accepting a maintenance and beautification easement for Heritage Crossings of
2011-  2011   Green
R62
Res.   1-8-   Approving the assignment/transfer of storm sewer easements from the county to
20185- 2015   the city
R60
Ord.   4-11-  Executing a water utility easement granting Aqua Ohio, Inc. a ten-foot by
2017-  2017   128- foot easement on property owned by the city at 4310 Massillon Road
05
Res.   12-12- Declaring the necessity and intention to appropriate for street purposes
2017-  2017   certain fee simple interests, temporary and permanent easements in and to
R74           various premises along Corporate Woods Circle and Corporate Wood Parkway
Res.   2-13-  Declaring the necessity and intention to appropriate for street purposes
2018-  2018   certain fee simple interests, temporary and permanent easements in and to
R05           various premises along State Route 619, Pickle Road
Res.   3-26-  Declaring the necessity and intention to appropriate for street purposes
2019-  2019   certain fee simple interests, temporary and permanent easements in, and to
R22           various premises along State Route 619, Myersville Road
Res.   1-14-  Declaring the necessity and intention to appropriate for street purposes
2019-  2020   certain fee simple interests, temporary and permanent easements in, and to
R112          various premises along Moore Road
Res.   9-24-  Authorizing the city to execute a utility easement granting Summit County a
2024-  2024   25 foot easement on property owned by the city at 393 E. Turkeyfoot Lake Road
R62
             
  
 
TABLE III: VACATING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          An unnamed alley located approximately 375 feet north
Ord. 93-3     5-25-1993   of the intersection of Greensburg Road and Massillon
                          Road
                          An unnamed alley located approximately 650 feet west
Ord. 93-4     5-25-1993   of the intersection of S. Arlington Road and E.
                          Turkeyfoot Lake Road
Ord. 96-17    12-10-1996  Hickory Lane in Robin’s Trace Subdivision
Res. 02-R44   10-8-2002   Mt. Pleasant Street
Res. 02-R48   11-12-2002  A 16-foot unnamed alley in Aultman Allotment
Res. 02-R52   12-10-2002  Mt. Pleasant Street
Res. 2008-R61 11-25-2008  Two unnamed alleys within the Townsite of Aultman
Ord. 2013-22  1-14-2014   Vacating the unnamed, unimproved right-of-way known
                          as Tim Drive which abuts Berna Road
Ord. 2015-02  4-14-2015   Vacating Warner Alley
Ord. 2019-05  4-9-2019    Vacating Mt. Pleasant Road
Ord. 2019-09  5-14-2019   Vacating a portion of Fortuna Drive
Ord. 2021-02  2-23-2021   Vacating Marathon Alley
Ord. 2025-08  7-22-2025   Vacating two unnamed alleys at the northeast corner
                          of S. Arlington Road and E. Turkeyfoot Lake Road
                         
 
TABLE IV: DEDICATION AND PLAT APPROVAL
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed Description
No.
Res.  1-9-   Approving construction plans for Villages at Meadow Wood, Phase I
91-R5 1991
Res.  1-9-   Approving construction plans for Villages at Meadow Wood, Phase I
91-R6 1991
Ord.  3-20-  Accepting final plat for Hillwood Estates, Phase I, Subdivision
91-13 1991
Ord.  3-20-  Accepting final plat for Chenoweth Estates, Phase I, Subdivision
91-14 1991
Res.  6-25-
91-   1991   Accepting plat for Mayfair Lakes Estates, Phase 5(A), Subdivision
R32
Res.  7-30-
91-   1991   Approving construction plan of Villages at Meadow Wood, Phase II, Subdivision
R36
Res.  7-30-  Approving plat of Fox Run Meadows Subdivision, Phase 4(A), Lots 85, 86, 87, 88,
91-   1991   89 and 90
R37
Res.  7-30-
91-   1991   Accepting final plat for Pine Knolls Estates, Phase II, Subdivision
R39
Ord.  9-17-  Accepting Winning Way as a dedicated street
91-27 1991
Ord.  9-17-  Accepting plat for Mayfair Lake Estates, Phase 5(B), Subdivision
91-28 1991
Res.  11-12-
91-   1991   Accepting final plat for Villages at Meadow Wood, Phase II, Subdivision
R52
Res.  3-17-
92-   1992   Accepting final plat for Park Creek Estates Allotment
R15
Res.  4-28-
92-   1992   Accepting final plat for Chenoweth Estates Subdivision, Phase II
R24
Res.  5-12-
92-   1992   Accepting final plat for Greenbrook Estates Subdivision, Phase I
R26
Res.  5-12-
92-   1992   Accepting final plat for Mayfair Estates Subdivision, Phase VI
R27
Res.  5-26-
92-   1992   Accepting final plat for Hearthstone Estates Subdivision, Phase I
R31
Res.  6-23-
92-   1992   Accepting final plat for Raintree Country Club Estates Subdivision
R37
Res.  10-20-
92-   1992   Accepting final plat for Mayfair Estates Subdivision, Phase VII
R47
Res.  10-20- Accepting final plat for Villages at Meadow Wood Subdivision, Phase III, Wagler
92-   1992   Development Corporation
R48
Res.  1-26-
93-   1993   Accepting final plat for Raintree Estates Subdivision, Phase I
R12
Res.  6-29-
93-   1993   Accepting final plat for Hearthstone Estates Subdivision, Phase II
R35
Res.  7-13-
93-   1993   Approving final plat for Park Creek Estates Subdivision, Phase II
R45
Res.  7-27-
93-   1993   Accepting final plat for Raintree Estates Subdivision, Phase II
R52
Res.  9-14-
93-   1993   Accepting final plat for Raintree Estates Subdivision, Phase III
R65
Res.  9-14-
93-   1993   Accepting final plat for Park Ridge Estates Subdivision
R66
Res.  11-23- Accepting final plat for Greens at Prestwick Development, Phase III, and
93-   1993   accepting ownership of Mayfair Road right-of-way
R76
Res.  5-10-
94-   1994   Accepting final plat for Pine Knolls Estates, Phase III
R44
Res.  8-9-
94-   1994   Accepting final plat for Chenoweth Estates Subdivision, Phase III
R76
Res.  10-11-
94-   1994   Dedicating Green Community Center for park purposes
R74
Res.  11-1-
94-   1994   Accepting final plat for Robin’s Trace Subdivision, Phase I
R106
Res.  2-14-
95-   1995   Accepting dedication plat for Corporate Woods Parkway Extension
R22
Res.  2-14-  Accepting performance bond and final plat for Corporate Woods Circle Paving and
95-   1995   Stormwater Improvements Project
R24
Res.  4-11-  Accepting performance bond and final plat for Robin’s Trace Subdivision, Phase
94-   1995   II
R64
Res.  7-11-  Accepting performance bond and final plat for McChesney Meadows Subdivision,
95-   1995   Phase I
R99
Res.  7-11-
95-   1995   Accepting performance bond and final plat for Hyde Park Subdivision, Phase I
R100
Res.  7-11-  Accepting performance bond and final plat for Akron-Canton Corporate Park
95-   1995   Subdivision, Phase V
R107
Res.  11-28-
95-   1995   Accepting final plat for Villages at Meadow Wood, Phase IV
R141
Res.  1-23-  Accepting dedication and performance bond for the Divot Spur Extension
96-R3 1996
Res.  4-23-  Accepting performance bond and final plat for Robin’s Trace Subdivision, Phase
96-   1996   III
R16
Res.  5-28-
96-   1996   Accepting dedication plat of Sandy Knoll Drive
R22
Res.  7-9-
96-   1996   Accepting performance bond and final plat for Mystic Pointe Subdivision
R48
Res.  11-26- Accepting performance bond and final plat for Chenoweth Estates Subdivision,
96-   1996   Phase IV
R82
Res.  2-11-  Accepting performance bond and final plat for McChesney Meadows Subdivision,
97-R3 1997   Phase II
Res.  5-13-
97-   1997   Accepting final plat of Robin’s Gate Subdivision, a private community
R37
Res.  6-24-
97-   1997   Accepting performance bond and final plat for Green Ridge Estates Subdivision
R55
Res.  8-12-
97-   1997   Accepting dedication plat for International Parkway
R65
Res.  8-12-  Accepting performance bond and dedication plat for Hyde Park, Phase II
97-   1997   Subdivision
R66
Res.  9-23-
97-   1997   Accepting final plat for Camden Ridge, a private community
R79
Res.  12-9-
97-   1997   Dedicating Boettler Park for park purposes
R99
Res.  12-9-
97-   1997   Dedicating Greensburg Park for park purposes
R100
Res.  12-16-
97-   1997   Accepting dedication plat for Donamarc Drive
R107
Res.  1-27-
97-   1998   Accepting dedication plat for Thorn Drive
R106
Res.  2-20-  Accepting performance bond and final plat for The Estates at Meadow Wood
98-R3 1998   Subdivision, Phase I
Res.  3-24-  Accepting final plat and performance bond for Robin’s Trace Subdivision, Phase
98-   1998   IV
R17
Res.  4-28-
98-   1998   Dedicating Kreighbaum Park for park purposes
R29
Res.         Dedicating Block A in the Mystic Pointe Subdivision as a nature preserve to be
98-   7-28-  known as the Myersville Fen State Nature Preserve; and entering into articles
R59   1998   of dedication with the Ohio Department of Natural Resources for the restoration
             and development of the same
Res.  8-11-
98-   1998   Accepting final plat for The Villages at Meadow Wood Subdivision, Phase IV
R82
Res.  8-11-
98-   1998   Accepting final plat and performance bond for Town Park Center
R83
Res.  2-23-  Accepting performance bond and final plat for Hyde Park Phase III, containing
99-R5 1999   19.29 acres and consisting of Lots 74 to 116, inclusive
Res.  3-9-   Accepting replat of Lots 4, 5 and 6 of the final plat of the Town Park Center
99-   1999   Subdivision
R12
Res.  4-27-  Accepting final plat and performance bond for Deer Pines Estates, Phase I,
99-   1999   containing eight lots
R33
Res.  5-11-  Accepting performance bond and final plat for the Estates at Meadow Wood, Phase
99-   1999   II, consisting of Lots 29 to 55, inclusive, and containing 24.03 acres
R34
Res.  6-8-   Accepting the performance bond and dedication plat for Akron-Canton Corporate
99-   1999   Park, Phase VI (Corporate Woods Parkway Road Extension), containing 0.6891
R35          acres
Res.  7-14-
99-   1999   Accepting performance bond and final plat for Powell Subdivision
R69
Res.  7-27-  Accepting performance bond and final plat for Belleau Woods Estates, consisting
99-   1999   of Lots 1 to 14, inclusive, and containing 6.5803 acres
R54
Res.  8-24-  Accepting the plat of perpetual easement for the CAK International Business
99-   1999   Park
R65
Res.  10-12-
99-   1999   Accepting performance bond and final plat for Forest Mill Lane
R68
Res.  10-12- Accepting performance bond and final plat for the Estates at Meadow Wood, Phase
99-   1999   III
R71
Res.  10-26-
99-   1999   Accepting performance bond and final plat for Fox Ridge Estates Subdivision
R70
Res.  2-8-   Accepting performance bond, replat of Deer Pines Estates, Phase I, Block A, and
00-R2 2000   final plat for Deer Pines Estates, Phase II Subdivision
Res.  9-12-
00-   2000   Accepting final plat for the Villages at Meadow Wood Phase V Subdivision
R57
Res.  9-12-
00-   2000   Accepting dedication plat of the Graybill Road Extension
R58
Res.  9-26-
00-   2000   Accepting final plat for Deer Pines Estates, Phases III and IV Subdivision
R62
Res.  10-9-
01-   2001   Accepting dedication plat for Park Ridge Drive
R50
Res.  11-19-
01-   2001   Accepting final plat for Deer Valley Estates, Phase I Subdivision
R54
Res.  12-11- Accepting final site plan and dedication plat for Park Place Estates Planned
01-   2001   Unit Development
R65
Res.  5-14-
02-   2002   Accepting the final site plan and dedication plat for Mayfair East, Phase I
R17
Res.  5-14-
02-   2002   Accepting the final plat for Stratford Green at Mayfair, Phase I
R19
Res.  5-14-  Accepting the final site plan and dedication plat for Charleston Place, Phase
02-   2002   One
R20
Res.  6-25-
02-   2002   Accepting the dedication plat for Town Crossing
R26
Res.  9-10-
02-   2002   Accepting the final plat for Phase II of the Deer Valley Estates Subdivision
R33
Res.  9-10-
02-   2002   Accepting the final plat for Forestwood Subdivision, Phase II
R36
Res.  10-8-  Accepting the dedication plat for the south side of Raber Road, between Frawood
02-   2002   and Avanti Lane
R42
Res.  10-8-
02-   2002   Accepting the dedication plat for the eastern end of Graybill Road
R43
Res.  11-12- Accepting the final plat for the Eddishire Road extension on the south side of
02-   2002   Eddishire Road
R47
Res.  11-12-
02-   2002   Accepting the final plat for Paddington Woods
R49
Res.  1-28-
02-   2003   Accepting the final plat for Mayfair East, Phase II Subdivision
R68
Res.  6-24-
03-   2003   Accepting the final plat and performance bond for Hyde Park, Phase IV
R23
Res.  7-8-
03-   2003   Accepting the roadway dedication plat for Corporate Woods Parkway
R38
Res.  8-26-
03-   2003   Accepting the final plat and performance bond for Stony Creek Estates, Phase I
R42
Res.  10-14- Accepting the final plat and performance bond for Akron-Canton Corporate Park,
03-54 2003   Phase VIII
Res.  10-14- Accepting the final plat and performance bond for Lakes of Green, Phase I
03-55 2003
Res.  10-23-
03-   2003   Accepting the final plat and performance bond for Charleston Place, Phase II
R49
Res.  12-9-
03-   2003   Accepting the final plat and performance bond for King’s Ridge, Phase I
R24
Res.  3-23-
04-   2004   Accepting the final plat for Stratford Green at Mayfair, Phase II
R12
Res.  3-23-
03-   2004   Accepting the final plat and performance bond for Spring Hill, Phase I
R26
Res.  4-27-
04-   2004   Accepting the final plat and performance bond for Liberty Green Drive Extension
R15
Res.  5-11-
04-   2004   Accepting the final plat and performance bond for Chenoweth Estates, Phase VI
R29
Res.  6-8-
04-   2004   Accepting the final plat and performance bond for Neptune Extension
R46
Res.  7-27-  Accepting the final plat and performance bond for Mayfair East Phase III
04-   2004   Subdivision
R56
Res.  9-28-
04-   2004   Accepting the replat for Heron Watch Subdivision
R81
Res.  3-8-
05-   2005   Accepting the replat of Park Place Estates Planned Unit Development
R09
Res.  5-10-
05-R- 2005   Accepting the final plat and performance bond of Pine Knolls Estates, Phase IV
28
Res.  7-12-
05-   2005   Accepting the final plat and performance bond of Hyde Park, Phase V
R60
Res.  9-27-
05-   2005   Confirming the final plat for Stratford Green at Mayfair, Phase III
R66
Res.  9-27-  Naming the bridge on South Main Street between the City and Coventry Township
05-   2005   the Sandy Beach Bridge
R75
Res.  10-11-
05-   2005   Accepting the final plat and performance bond for Spring Hill, Phase II
R68
Res.  10-11-
05-   2005   Accepting the final plat and performance bond for Gateway Corporate Park
R71
Res.  10-11-
05-   2005   Accepting the final plat and performance bond for King’s Ridge, Phase II
R72
Res.  10-11-
05-   2005   Accepting the final plat and performance bond for King’s Ridge, Phase III
R73
Res.  11-9-
05-   2005   Accepting the final plat and performance bond for Pine Knoll Estates, Phase V
R84
Res.  1-24-
05-   2006   Accepting the final plat and performance bond for Hyde Park Planned Development
R93
Res.  1-24-  Accepting the second replat of Heron Watch
05-97 2006
Res.  1-24-  Accepting the Massillon/Greensburg Roadway dedication plat
05-99 2006
Res.  9-12-  Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of the final plat of
06-67 2006   Arlington Ridge Marketplace Subdivision
Res.  9-26-  Accepting the Glen Eagles Boulevard dedication plat
06-61 2006
Res.  10-10- Accepting and adopting the Parks and Recreation Master Plan
06-68 2006
Res.  10-10- Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of a plat to vacate the
06-80 2006   drainage easements around Blocks B and C in Mystic Pointe Subdivision
Res.  11-14- Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of the final plat and
06-79 2006   performance bond for Arlington Ridge East Subdivision
Res.  12-12- Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of the replat of Pine
06-87 2006   Knoll Estates, Phase V
Res.  8-28-
2007- 2007   Accepting the replat of Lots 23 and 24 of Spring Hill, Phase I
R47
Res.  9-25-
2007- 2007   Accepting the final plat and performance bond for the Villages at Meadow Wood
R51
Res.  9-25-  Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of the site plan for
2007- 2007   4700 Massillon Road
R55
Res.  9-25-  Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of the site plan for
2007- 2007   the Central Administration Building
R56
Res.  11-13-
2007- 2007   Accepting Replat No. 1 of Executive Park Allotment
R78
Res.  11-13-
2007- 2007   Approving a landmark designation application for the Levi J. Hartong Farm
R82
Res.  11-13-
2007- 2007   Approving a landmark designation application for the Klinefelter Cemetery
R83
Res.  12-11- Accepting the revised general development plan for the Reserve at Kensington
2007- 2007   Lake Planned Development
R75
Res.  12-11-
2007- 2007   Accepting the plat of establishment and dedication of Fortuna Drive
R77
Res.  12-11-
2007- 2007   Accepting the replat of Hyde Park, Phase IV
R90
Res.  12-11-
2007- 2007   Accepting the replat of Lots 29 and 30 of Deer Pines Estates, Phases III and IV
R91
Res.  12-11-
2007- 2007   Accepting the replat of Lots 69, 70 and 71 of Deer Valley Estates, Phase II
R92
Res.  1-22-  Accepting the replat of Lots 5 and 6, and part of Lot 4 of the replat of
2008- 2008   Interstate Business Park
R01
Res.  3-25-
2008- 2008   Confirming and accepting the third replat of Heron Watch
R12
Res.  10-14-
2008- 2008   Accepting the replat of Arlington Ridge East Subdivision
R51
Res.  10-28-
2008- 2008   Accepting the site plan for Best Mold & Manufacturing, Inc.
R57
Res.  11-11-
2008- 2008   Accepting the final plat for Willadale Acres
R55
Res.  12-9-
2008- 2008   Accepting the replat of Hidden Trail Estates #3
R75
Res.  12-9-
2008- 2008   Accepting the replat of Spring Hill, Phase I, Lot 29
R76
Res.  2-10-
2009- 2009   Accepting the replat of Wonder Lake Allotment (Lots 204, 205, 206, 299 and 300)
R08
Res.  4-14-
2009- 2009   Accepting the replat of Wonder Lake Allotment (Lots 136 to 139)
R14
Res.  6-9-
2009- 2009   Accepting the replat of Spring Hill, Phase I (Lots 24R and 25)
R25
Res.  9-8-   Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of the replat of Walnut
2009- 2009   Hills Allotment #2
R44
Res.  12-8-  Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of the replat of the
2009- 2009   Town Plat of East Liberty
R73
Res.  12-8-
2009- 2009   Accepting the fourth replat of Heron Watch
R74
Res.  3-9-
2010- 2010   Accepting approval of the replat of Kingsland Subdivision
R8
Res.  5-11-  Accepting the final plat and performance bond for the Villages at Meadow Wood,
2010- 2010   Phase VI
R15
Res.  8-24-  Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of Replat No. 2 of Pine
2010- 2010   Knoll Estates Phase V
R34
Res.  9-28-
2010- 2010   Accepting the Jarvis Road dedication plat
R42
Res.  11-23-
2010- 2010   Accepting the Steese Road dedication plat
R55
Res.  11-23- Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of Replat Hillcrest
2010- 2010   Highlands Homesites No. 2 Subdivision
R60
Res.  2-22-
2011- 2011   Accepting the Town Park Boulevard dedication plat
R1
Res.  2-22-
2011- 2011   Accepting the Steese Road dedication plat
R2
Res.  2-22-
2011- 2011   Accepting the final plat and performance bond for Spring Hill, Phase III
R4
Res.  2-22-
2011- 2011   Accepting the final plat and performance bond for Spring Hill, Phase IV
R5
Res.  5-24-  Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of Bower’s Addition
2011- 2011   Replat No. 1
R21
Res.  6-14-  Accepting the final plat and performance bond for Heritage Crossings of Green,
2011- 2011   Phase I
R32
Res.  5-8-   Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of the replat of
2012- 2012   Mayfair East, Phase I Subdivision
R10
Res.  6-26-  Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of the second replat of
2012- 2012   Arlington Ridge East Subdivision
R29
Res.  7-10-
2012- 2012   Accepting the Boettler Road right-of-way dedication plat
R28
Res.  8-28-
2012- 2012   Confirming the final plat of Diamond Shores Allotment #1
R42
Res.  9-25-  Amending the general development plan of the Heritage Crossings of Green
2012- 2012   Planned Development District
R41
Res.  9-25-  Accepting the final plat and maintenance bond for Stoney Creek Estates, Phase
2012- 2012   III
R49
Res.  9-25-  Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of the replat of
2012- 2012   Heritage Crossings of Green Phase I Subdivision
R51
Res.  10-23-
2012- 2012   Confirming the site plan for the Green Village Nursing Facility
R50
Res.  11-27-
2012- 2012   Confirming the site plan for the Acme Fresh Market
R59
Res.  1-22-  Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s (PZC) approval of the replat of
2013- 2013   Mayfair Heights Allotment No. 2
R04
Res.  2-12-
2013- 2013   Accepting the final plat for CAK International Business Park No. 3/Port Green
R03
Res.  3-12-
2013- 2013   Accepting the final plat and performance bond for CVS Drive
R17
Res.  6-11-
2013- 2013   Accepting the final plat and performance bond for King’s Ridge, Phase IV
R32
Res.  6-25-
2013- 2013   Confirming the site plan for Heritage Crossings Small Shop Space
R38
Res.  6-25-  Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s (PZC) approval of the replat of
2013- 2013   Heritage Crossings of Green, Phase I Subdivision
R39
Res.  9-24-
2013- 2013   Accepting the final plat and performance bond for Creekside Subdivision
R55
Res.  11-26-
2013- 2013   Confirming the final plat of the Campo D’Amore Planned Development
R62
Res.  11-26- Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s (PZC) approval of the replat of
2013- 2013   Neptune Extension Subdivision
R65
Res.  3-11-  Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s (PZC) approval of the replat of
2014- 2014   Spring Hill Phase IV
R15
Res.  3-25-  Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s (PZC) approval of the replat of
2014- 2014   Mystic Pointe Subdivision
R17
Res.  3-25-  Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s (PZC) approval of the replat of
2014- 2014   Willadale Acres Subdivision
R18
Res.  6-24-  Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s (PZC) approval of the replat of
2014- 2014   Robins Trace, Phase IV
R34
Res.  8-26-  Amending the general development plan of the existing planned development
2014- 2014   district on the east side of Massillon Road, south of Graybill Road
R35
Res.  8-26-  Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s (PZC) approval of the replat of
2014- 2014   Akron Canton Corporate Park, Phase IV
R40
Res.  9-9-
2014- 2014   Confirming the final site plan of Brier Creek, Phase I
R41
Res.  10-28-
2014- 2014   Accepting the final plat and performance bond for Kings Ridge, Phase V
R49
Res.  10-28- Accepting the final plat and performance bond for the Lakes of Green, Phase II
2014- 2014   Subdivision
R51
Res.  2-10-
2015- 2015   Accepting approval of the replat of Tamarack Highlands Phase I and Phase II
R03
Res.  3-10-  Accepting the final plat and performance bond for the Sanctuary at Stoney
2015- 2015   Creek, Phase I
R10
Res.  4-28-
2015- 2015   Accepting approval of the replat of Mystic Pointe Subdivision
R18
Res.  5-12-
2015- 2015   Confirming the final site plan of the Greensburgh Manor
R17
Res.  6-9-
2015- 2015   Accepting approval of the replat of CAK International Business Park
R24
Res.  7-28-
2015- 2015   Accepting approval of the replat of the Lakes of Green, Phase I Subdivision
R27
Res.  7-28-
2015- 2015   Accepting the final plat and performance bond for Brier Creek, Phase I
R31
Res.  8-25-  Amending the general development plan of Brier Creek, an existing planned
2015- 2015   development district located at 1102 and 1184 Boettler Road
R40
Res.  9-9-   Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s (PZC) approval of the replat of
2015- 2015   Pine Knoll Estates, Phase IV Subdivision
R48
Res.  9-9-
2015- 2015   Confirming the final plat of Diamond Shores Allotment #3
R49
Res.  9-9-   Accepting the final plat and performance bond for the Boulevard at Green
2015- 2015   Subdivision/Burgess Drive
R50
Res.  9-22-
2015- 2015   Confirming the final plat of Diamond Shores Allotment #4
R54
Res.  10-13- Amending the general development plan of Green Pointe, an existing planned
2015- 2015   development district located at 1450 Boettler Road
R53
Res.  1-12-
2015- 2016   Accepting the dedication plat for Ironwood Drive
R67
Res.  5-10-
2016- 2016   Accepting the final plat and performance bond for Kings Ridge, Phase VII
R18
Res.  5-10-
2016- 2016   Accepting the final plat and performance bond for Kings Ridge, Phase VI
R19
Res.  6-28-  Accepting the final plat and performance bond for Heritage Crossings of Green,
2016- 2016   Phase II
R26
Res.  11-22- Accepting the final plat and performance bond for the Lakes of Green, Phase III
2016- 2016   Subdivision
R41
Res.  1-10-
2017- 2017   Accepting the replat of Brier Creek, Phase I Subdivision
R02
Res.  1-10-  Accepting the final plat and escrow account in lieu of performance bond for the
2017- 2017   Lakes of Green, Phase III Subdivision, repealing Res. 2016-R41
R06
Res.  6-13-
2017- 2017   Approval of the replat of Raintree Estates, Phase II Subdivision
R36
Res.  9-12-
2017- 2017   Confirming the final plat of Diamond Shores Allotment #5
R42
Res.  11-28- Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of the replat of Phases
2017- 2017   5 and 6 of the King’s Ridge Subdivision
R63
Res.  2-27-
2018- 2018   Approving the final plat and performance bond for Kings Ridge, Phase VIII
R01
Res.  2-27-
2018- 2018   Approving the replat of the CAK International Business Park
R02
Res.  2-27-
2018- 2018   Confirming the dedication plat of Moore Road
R14
Res.  3-27-
2018- 2018   Approving the final plat of the Chenoweth Crossing Planned Development
R30
Res.  5-8-   Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of the replat of Lots
2018- 2018   76 and 77 of Wampetek Village Allotment No. 3
R40
Res.  7-10-  Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of the replat of Deer
2018- 2018   Valley Estates, Phase II
R56
Res.  7-10-  Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of the replat of Fox
2018- 2018   Ridge Estates
R57
Res.  8-14-  Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of the replat No. 2 of
2018- 2018   Fox Ridge Estates
R60
Res.  9-11-  Approving the final plat and performance bond for Spring Hill Business Park,
2018- 2018   Phase I
R62
Res.  3-12-
2019- 2019   Approving the replat of Lot 1-R of Heritage Crossings of Green, Phase I
R11
Res.  4-23-
2019- 2019   Approving the Raintree Estates Phase I and II Replat #2
R30
Res.  10-8-
2019- 2019   Approval of Heron Watch Subdivision Replat #5
R88
Res.  2-11-
2019- 2020   Approving the final plat and performance bond for Brier Creek, Phase II
R115
Res.  2-11-  Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval for the replat of
2020- 2020   Estates at Meadow Wood, Phase II Subdivision
R01
Res.  2-25-  Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of Liberty Green,
2020- 2020   Subdivision Replat #2
R26
             Approving the final plats and performance bond for Forest Lakes Subdivision,
Res.  3-10-  Phase I, the replat of Block A in the Akron Canton Corporate Park, Phase VII
2020- 2020   and the dedication plat for the extension of Tabs Drive, and the replat of
R22          Akron Canton Corporate Park, Phase VIII and the platting of Akron Canton
             Corporate Park, Phase IX
Res.  3-24-  Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of Kimmel Allotment,
2020- 2020   Replat No. 1
R28
Res.  4-28-  Approving the final plat and performance bond for New Seasons Planned
2020- 2020   Development, Phase I
R34
Res.  9-22-
2020- 2020   Approving the amended conceptual site plan of Brier Creek
R55
Res.  1-12-  Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of Homewood Farm No. 4
2020- 2021   allotment replat
R90
Res.  2-9-   Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of the replat of High
2021- 2021   Tower Estates No. 2
R01
Res.  5-11-  Accepting the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of the replat of Pine
2021- 2021   Knoll Estates No. 2 Subdivision
R27
Res.  5-9-   Approving the final plat and performance bond for Jacobs Ridge Planned
2023- 2023   Development Phase II
R20
Res.  6-27-
2023- 2023   Approving the final plat and performance bond for Spring Hill Phase V
R26
Res.  10-24- Approving the final plat and performance bond for Forest Lakes Subdivision
2023- 2023   Phase IV
R44
Res.  2-27-  Approving the final plat and performance bond for Jacobs Ridge Planned
2024- 2024   Development Phase III
R01
Res.  2-27-  Approving the final plat and performance bond for Jacobs Ridge Planned
2024- 2024   Development Phase IV
R02
Res.  7-9-
2024- 2024   Approving the final plat and performance bond for Spring Hill Phase VI
R38
Res.  7-9-
2024- 2024   Approving the final plat and performance bond for Spring Hill Villas
R39
Res.  9-24-
2024- 2024   Approving the final plat and performance bond for Stoney Creek Estates Phase IV
R55
            
 
 
TABLE V: ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Authorizes purchase agreement for a building located
Res. 91-R13   2-12-1991   at 5353 Massillon Road to house road repair materials
                          and equipment
Ord. 92-29    12-8-1992   Authorizes purchase of 5290 Massillon Road for parks
                          and recreation development purposes
Ord. 93-14    6-29-1993   Authorizes purchase agreement for 5290 Massillon Road
                          for parks and recreation development purposes
Res. 94-R5    2-8-1994    Authorizes purchase agreement with I. Lanari for 914
                          E. Turkeyfoot Lake Road
Res. 94-R68   7-12-1994   Accepting 0.4673 acre tract of land located on south
                          side of Sandy Knoll Drive from P.R. Bolin bankruptcy
                          Authorizes transfer of 0.712 acres of Boettler
                          Recreation Park to J.P. Brumbaugh in exchange for
Res. 94-R77   9-13-1994   receiving 0.356 acres of land from J.P. Brumbaugh and
                          0.356 acres of land from J.P. Brumbaugh and W.A.
                          Furst
                          Authorizes agreement with Henry S. Belden IV and B.
Res. 95-R113  9-12-1995   Belden for exchange of real property for park
                          purposes
Res. 96-R33   6-25-1996   Authorizes agreement with DCS Properties, Inc., to
                          purchase 66.38 acres for park purposes
                          Authorizes payment to Russell and Genevieve Bolin for
Res. 96-R107  12-17-1996  real property needed for Sandy Knoll Drive
                          improvement project
                          Authorizes agreement with Deborah and Steven Barker
Res. 97-R52   6-10-1997   for the purchase of property located at 1863 Steese
                          Road
Res. 98-R23   5-26-1998   Authorizes appropriation of 0.87 acres owned by E.
                          and N. March on west side of Massillon Road
Res. 98-R84   8-11-1998   Authorizes agreement with TPC Development, Ltd., for
                          purchase of 8.403 acres located on Massillon Road
                          Authorizes agreement with TPC Development, Ltd., for
Res. 99-R16   4-13-1999   purchase of 1.7618 acres in the Town Park Center
                          Development on Massillon Road
                          Authorizes settlement agreement with E. and N. March,
Res. 99-R81   12-14-1999  Trustees, reappropriation of 0.87 acres on west side
                          of Massillon Road and authorizing purchase of said
                          property
Res. 00-R3    2-28-2000   Authorizes purchase of property located at 393 E.
                          Turkeyfoot Lake Road from A.J. and K.M. Figley
                          Accepting donation of Lots 31 and 42 of Greensburg
Res. 00-R9    3-28-2000   Woodlands Allotment, containing approximately 1.035
                          acres, from E. and J. Daly
                          Accepting assignment of interest from D.C. Schultz in
Res. 00-R52   8-22-2000   an agreement for the purchase of 4.25 acres located
                          at 4126 Massillon Road from K. and V. Croasmun, and
                          authorizes such purchase
Res. 00-R67   10-24-2000  Authorizes sale of 0.471 acres to D. Anthony
                          Authorizes purchase of the former site of the Green
Res. 00-R75   12-12-2000  Public Library located at 2255 Greensburg Road from
                          the Board of Trustees of the Akron Summit County
                          Public Library
Res. 01-R7    3-13-2001   Authorizes purchase of property located at 4735 and
                          4745 Massillon Road
Res. 01R-8    3-13-2001   Authorizes purchase of property located at 1405
                          Boettler Road
                          Authorizes transfer of property located at 1405
Res. 01R-23   4-24-2001   Boettler Road to the Green Community Improvement
                          Corporation
Res. 02-R25   6-11-2002   Accepting donation of approximately 16.8 acres of
                          land from the Bettler Heirs Trust
Res. 02-R57   10-10-2002  Accepting the donation of approximately 2.0918 acres
                          of land
Res. 02-R58   12-10-2002  Accepting a donation from the Green Heritage
                          Foundation of the Heritage Hill Playground facility
                          Authorizes purchase of property located at 4232
Res. 03-R62   11-11-2003  Massillon Road from Jeffrey A. Ringer and Carletta S.
                          Bennett
                          Accepting the donation of Parcel Number 28-01357,
Res. 05-R33   5-25-2005   located at the intersection of South Arlington and
                          East Nimisila Roads from the county
                          Authorizing transfer of property owned by the city
Res. 05-R64   9-27-2005   and located on Tabs Drive to the Green Community
                          Improvement Corporation
                          Authorizing a purchase agreement with William T.
Res. 05-R95   1-24-2006   Ariss for the purchase of property located at 2520
                          Wise Road, North Canton, Ohio
Res. 06-R30   4-25-2006   Authorizing the exchange of property between the city
                          and Dean Stewart
Res. 06-R34   4-25-2006   Authorizing sale of 3.645 acres of land to Dennis and
                          Judith Belden
                          Authorizing an agreement for the city to sell
Res. 2007-R63 10-23-2007  approximately seven acres of property which is part
                          of the former Ariss Farm to DeHoff Agency, Inc.
                          Authorizing the city to purchase approximately 6.07
Res. 2008-R04 2-26-2008   acres of property located at the intersection of
                          Arlington Road and Greensburg Road, making an
                          appropriation
                          Authorizing the institution of appropriation
                          proceedings against the owners of real property
Res. 2008-R20 4-22-2008   located at or near East Turkeyfoot Lake Road (S.R.
                          619) and Fortuna Drive to obtain property necessary
                          for the Fortuna Drive extension project
                          Authorizing the institution of appropriation
                          proceedings against the owners of real property
Res. 2008-R32 6-24-2008   located on Arlington Road for the State Route 619/
                          Arlington Road Intersection Project; and property
                          located on Massillon Road for the Massillon Road
                          Reconstruction South Project
                          Authorizing the institution of appropriation
                          proceedings against Doug and Patricia Bigelow, the
                          owners of real property located at 3281 South
Res. 2009-R43 10-13-2009  Arlington Road; and 3602 Arlington Road, LLC, the
                          owner of property located at 3602 Arlington Road for
                          the State Route 619/Arlington Road Intersection
                          Project
Res. 2010-R1  2-23-2010   Accepting the donation of Lots 36, 47, 48, 49 and 50
                          in the Mystic Pointe Subdivision
Ord. 2010-41  9-14-2010   Authorizing the city to sell real property located at
                          2255 Greensburg Road
                          Accepting the donation of real property located at
Res. 2010-R53 11-23-2010  the intersection of Wise Road and Mayfair Road from
                          Bertha J. Fisher living trust
                          Authorizing the city to purchase approximately 5.36
Res. 2011-R9  3-8-2011    acres of real estate located on Kreighbaum Road from
                          the Joseph R. Kuntz Living Trust
                          Authorizing the city to purchase approximately 3.24
Res. 2011-R39 7-12-2011   acres of real estate located on Kreighbaum Road from
                          Larry F. Magrell
Res. 2011-R49 11-8-2011   Authorizing the city to sell two parcels of land
                          located on East Turkeyfoot Lake Road to RNJ Sitz, LLC
                          Authorizing the city to enter into a real estate
Res. 2012-R13 5-22-2012   purchase agreement with Harold D. Harsh for the
                          property located at 1795 Steese Road
                          Authorizing the city to enter into a real estate
Res. 2012-R36 9-11-2012   purchase agreement with MG & L Properties, LLC for
                          Lot #3, Town Park Center
                          Authorizing the city to enter into a real estate
Res. 2012-R70 1-8-2013    purchase agreement with Table for Life, LLC, for the
                          property known as Belden Lodge in Southgate Park
Res. 2013-R22 4-23-2013   Authorizing the city to sell property located at 4810
                          Massillon Road to Scott Plummer
                          Authorizing the city to enter into a second addendum
                          to the real estate purchase agreement with 5430
Res. 2013-R48 8-13-2013   Southpark, LLC, assignee of Theodore Swaldo, for the
                          property known as Belden Lodge in Southgate Park,
                          authorizing an exchange of property
                          Authorizing the purchase of property, generally known
Res. 2015-R25 6-23-2015   as Kleckner School, from the Green Local Schools
                          Board of Education
                          Authorizing actions necessary to relocate, market and
Res. 2015-R34 7-28-2015   sell the East Liberty Schoolhouse, and making an
                          additional appropriation
                          Declaring a portion of improvements to a certain
                          parcel of real property developed by Great-Green, LLC
Ord. 2017-19  9-12-2017   and owned by Cam Green, LLC to be a public purpose,
                          exempting a percentage of the value of the
                          improvements from real property taxation for 30 years
                          Declaring a portion of improvements to a certain
                          parcel of real property owned by JWM Partners, II,
Ord. 2017-24  11-28-2017  LLC to be a public purpose, exempting 100% of the
                          value of the improvements from real property taxation
                          for 30 years
                          Declaring a portion of improvements to a certain
                          parcel of real property owned by Spoonhower
Ord. 2017-25  11-28-2017  Properties, LLC to be a public purpose, exempting
                          100% of the value of the improvements from real
                          property taxation for 30 years
                          Conveying city-owned land located at 3492 Arlington
Ord. 2017-26  11-28-2017  Road, consisting of permanent parcel numbers 2804636
                          and 2815831, to the Green Community Improvement
                          Corporation
                          Conveying city-owned land located at 914 East
Ord. 2017-27  11-28-2017  Turkeyfoot Lake Road, consisting of permanent parcel
                          numbers 2807205 and 2807206, to the Green Community
                          Improvement Corporation
                          Declaring the necessity and intention to appropriate
Res. 2018-R51 6-12-2018   for municipal purposes a certain fee simple interest
                          in property known as 3789 Mayfair Road, permanent
                          parcel number 2800112
                          Accepting the donation of a parcel of land for park
Res. 2018-R75 10-9-2018   and open space purposes, and approximately $86,755
                          for future maintenance and improvements to said
                          parcel of land
                          Donating real estate owned by the city, located at
Res. 2019-R13 2-26-2019   6423 South Main Street, to Summit County Land
                          Reutilization Corporation for the purpose of
                          demolition of the structures on the property
                          Donation of land from the Summit County Land
Res. 2019-R23 3-26-2019   Reutilization Corporation for the purpose of
                          constructing Fire Station No. 3, located at 3803
                          Mayfair Road (parcel #2804642)
                          Real estate purchase agreement with Clayton C. McCune
Res. 2019-R24 4-9-2019    for the property located at 1364 East Turkeyfoot Lake
                          Road
                          Donating real estate owned by the city to Summit
Res. 2019-R29 4-9-2019    County Land Reutilization Corporation for the purpose
                          of demolition of the structures on the property,
                          located at 3789 Mayfair Road
                          Donation of land to the Summit County Land
Res. 2019-R31 5-14-2019   Reutilization Corporation for the purpose of
                          demolition of structures
                          Appropriating for street purposes certain fee simple
Res. 2019-R39 5-28-2019   interests, temporary and permanent easements in and
                          to various premises along State Route 241, Massillon
                          Road
                          Real estate purchase agreement with Veer Chirag, LLC
Res. 2020-R07 3-10-2020   for the property located at 1715 E. Turkeyfoot Lake
                          Road
                          Real estate purchase agreement with Orchard Real
Res. 2020-R08 3-10-2020   Estate Investments, LLC for the property located at
                          4064 S. Arlington Road (parcel 2807469)
                          Real estate purchase agreement with Clayton C. McCune
Res. 2020-R25 3-12-2020   for the property located at 1364 East Turkeyfoot Lake
                          Road
                          Real estate purchase agreement with ECC Green OH LLC,
Res. 2022-R47 8-9-2022    CVS Stores LLC and Wells Fargo Trust Company for
                          property located at 3761 Massillon Road
                          Real estate purchase agreement with James and Kelly
Res. 2023-R12 3-28-2023   Spears for the property located at 4851 Massillon
                          Road for the expansion of Greensburg Park
Res. 2023-R27 7-11-2023   Transfer of parcels of land to Lakes of Green
                          Homeowners Association
                          Real estate purchase agreement with Richard and Laura
Res. 2023-R60 12-12-2023  Wike for the property located at 6421 S. Main Street
                          (Parcel 2810567)
Res. 2024-R82 2-11-2025   Authorizing the transfer of Parcel #2815427 for
                          sanitary sewer purposes to Summit County
                          Authorizing a donation of property from Wayne O.
Res. 2025-R19 5-27-2025   Riggs, Jr., generally known as Parcels 28-08137, 28-
                          08139, 28-08140, and 28-08141 of Tamarack Highlands
                         
TABLE VI: LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed Description
No.
Res.  2-12-  Authorizes a nondrilling oil and gas lease agreement with North Canton
91-   1991   Transfer
R11
Ord.  4-23-  Authorizes lease with the Akron-Canton Regional Airport Authority for
91-15 1991   property at 5353 Massillon Road
Res.  7-27-  Authorizes lease agreement with Interstate Properties for use of right-of-
93-   1993   way at Interstate Parkway and Arlington Road
0R46
Res.  2-22-
94-   1994   Cancels lease for 18-foot square plot of land located at 4745 Massillon Road
R17
Res.  3-23-  Authorizes lease agreement with the Akron-Canton Regional Airport Authority
99-   1999   for 13.2 acres at 2500 Greensburg Road for recreation purposes
R21
Res.  12-11- Authorizing the city to lease the apartment connected to the farmhouse
2007- 2007   located at 6521 Mount Pleasant Street NW
R84
Res.  6-22-  Authorizing a lease with the Area Agency on Aging for office space on
2010- 2010   property located at 5383 Massillon Road
R-27
Res.         Authorizing the city to enter into a lease agreement with the county for and
2017- 9-12-  behalf of the County Sheriff’s Office to provide stables for the horses of
R53   2017   the County Sheriff’s mounted patrol unit, for a five-year term commencing
             June 1, 2017
Res.  3-10-  Approving a lease agreement with Rachel Bellis and Justin Turner for the
2020- 2020   Hartong Farmstead located at 6521 Mt. Pleasant Road
R13
Res.  4-28-  Approving a lease agreement with the Green Historical Society for the
2020- 2020   Lichtenwalter Schoolhouse, located at 5290 Massillon Road
R39
Res.  1-14-  Authorizing a lease agreement with Summit County and the Summit County
2024- 2025   Sheriff’s Office for a portion of Fire Station #2, located at 393 East
R81          Turkeyfoot Lake Road
Res.  10-28- Authorizing a lease agreement for a portion of the first floor of Fire
2024- 2024   Station #2, located at 393 East Turkeyfoot Lake Road
277
            
 
TABLE VII: STREET GRADE LEVELS AND
CHANGE OF STREET NAME
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Res. 91-R19   4-9-1991    Changing the name of Greenfield Drive to Greenfield
                          Farms Drive and of Maplewood Drive to Basswood Drive
Ord. 03-20    11-11-2003  Changing the name of the street currently known as
                          Bay View Court to Lido Court
                          Formally changing the name of the sole street in the
Ord. 2014-02  2-25-2014   Greenfield Farms Subdivision from Greenfield Drive to
                          Greenfield Farms Drive
 
TABLE VIII: ANNEXATION AND DETACHMENT OF TERRITORY
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Authorizing annexation agreement with Springfield
Res. 94-R39   5-10-1994   Township for the purpose of memorializing their
                          agreement concerning annexation and the continuation
                          of the southern Summit County Enterprise Zone
                          Authorizing annexation agreement with Coventry
Res. 94-R40   5-10-1994   Township for the purpose of memorializing their
                          agreement concerning annexation and the continuation
                          of the Southern Summit County Enterprise Zone
                         
 
TABLE IX: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed Description
No.
Ord.  3-10-  3023, 3059 and 3063 Greensburg Road, from I-2 to B-4
92-2  1992
Ord.  4-14-  Lots 4, 5 and 6 of Interstate Business Park, from I-2 to B-1
92-3  1992
Ord.  9-8-   18.3 acres on the north side of Heckman Road owned by C. B. Farmakidis,
92-5  1992   from I-1 to R-1
Ord.  11-10- 16.9864 acres owned by R. D. Farriss, on the west side of Pickle Road,
92-20 1992   from R-1 to R-2PD
Ord.  11-10- 5.8961 acres owned by R. D. Farriss, on the west side of Pickle Road,
92-21 1992   from R-1 to R-2PD
Ord.  11-10- 4.5548 acres owned by R. D. Farriss, on the west side of Pickle Road,
92-22 1992   from R-4 to R-1
Ord.  7-26-  A portion of land near the intersection of Moore and S. Arlington Roads,
94-10 1994   from R-1 to B-1
Ord.  9-14-  A portion of land located in Pinewood Lake Estates, from I-1 to R-1
94-6  1994
Ord.  5-9-   Approximately five acres located on Mt. Pleasant Road, from I-2 to B-1
95-7  1995
Ord.  9-26-  Approximately 39.89 acres located on the north side of S.R. 619 from I77
95-16 1995   to the Interstate Business Park, from R-1 to B-1
Ord.  10-24- 11.01 acres located north of Greensburg Road on the west side of
95-17 1995   Massillon Road, from R-1 to B-3
Ord.  3-12-  25.379 acres located on the south side of Wise Road at the Summit/Stark
96-1  1996   County line, from I-1 to R-1
Ord.  2-25-  18.7822 acres located on Liberty Green Drive, from B-1 to PD-1
97-1  1997
Ord.  3-11-  17.4699 acres located at 2835 Pickle Road, from R-1 to PD-1
97-2  1997
Ord.  6-10-  Ten acres located south of Graybill Road, west of B. & O. Railroad
97-6  1997   tracks, north of Park Ridge Estates and east of Ramsey Dr., from I-1 to
             R-1
Ord.  7-22-  8.3292 acres located on Greensburg Road, from I-2 to B-4
97-8  1997
Ord.  1-13-  0.88 acres located at 571 E. Turkeyfoot Lake Road, from R-1 to B-1
97-14 1998
Ord.  1-13-  6.73 acres located at 4125 Massillon Road, from B-2 to B-3
97-15 1998
Ord.  3-10-  89.5 acres located within the Aultman Estates Subdivision, Lots 11 to
98-1  1998   16, inclusive, on Wise Road, from I-1 to R-1
Ord.  3-10-  5.89 acres located within the Hyde Park Subdivision on the west side of
98-2  1998   Pickle Road, from R-2PD to R-4
Ord.  8-25-  12.140 acres located within Town Park Center on Massillon Road, from R-
98-10 1998   1 to B-2
Ord.  9-8-   3.1494 acres located within Town Park Center on Massillon Road, from B-
98-11 1998   2 to B-3
Ord.  4-13-  2.03 acres in the Town Park Center, from R-1 to B-2, and 1.50 acres in
99-4  1999   the Town Park Center, from B-2 to B-3
Ord.  7-13-  4,524 acres in the southwest portion of the city, from R-1 to RR
99-9  1999
Ord.  8-24-  10.83 acres located at 3448 - 3496 Greensburg Road, and 4550 Aultman
99-12 1999   Ave., from I-1 to B-1
Ord.  9-28-  0.5108 acres located at 4655 Massillon Road, from R-1 to B-3
99-15 1999
Ord.  2-22-  1.35 acres located on the east side of Cottage Grove Road, north of E.
99-16 2000   Turkeyfoot Lake Road, from R-1 to B-1
Ord.  5-23-  0.956 acres located at 2984 to 2988 Chenoweth Road, from I-2 to B-1
00-2  2000
Ord.  6-27-  32.29 acres located at the northeast corner of Mt. Pleasant and Lauby
00-6  2000   Roads, from I-1 and I-2 to B-4
Ord.  9-26-  12.3 acres located at 1795 through 1843 Steese Road, and property
00-13 2000   located at 4126 Massillon Road, from R-1 to B-2
Ord.  9-26-  1.02 acres located at 3955 Massillon Road, from B-2 to B-1
00-14 2000
Ord.  10-10- 230 acres located at 2229 Raber Road, from PD-1 to R-2PD
00-15 2000
Ord.  11-14- 7.8 acres located on the north side of Boettler Road, from R-1 to I-2
00-17 2000
Ord.  12-20- 4.25 acres located at 4126 Massillon Road, from B-2 to R-4PD
00-18 2000
Ord.  1-23-  112.6409 acres located on the east side of Arlington Road, from R-1 to
00-23 2001   B-2, and 30.6151 acres, from R-1 to B-3
             21.29 acres located on the east side of Massillon Road and north of Wise
Ord.  2-13-  Road, from B-2 to B-3, and 60.01 acres, from R-1 to B-3; 19.66 acres
00-24 2001   located at the northwest corner of Interstate 77 and Wise Road from R-
             1 to I-2, and 18.74 acres, from R-1 to B-2
Ord.  3-13-  13.111 acres located at the east side of Pickle Road, south of Beechnut
01-1  2001   Drive, from R-1 to R2-PD
Ord.  5-22-  21.1 acres located at 4936 Arlington Road, from B-1 to PD-1; 34.0 acres,
01-4  2001   from R-R to PD-1, and 5.3 acres from B-1 to R-1
Ord.  11-13- 13.26 acres located at 254 East Caston Road, from B-1 to R-R
01-16 2001
Ord.  11-27- 12.83 located on the north side of Graybill Road west of the railroad
01-23 2001   tracks, from I-1 to R-1
Ord.  12-11- 2.69 acres located at 550 Killinger Road, from B-1 to R-R
01-24 2001
Ord.  12-11- 4.12 acres located at the southeast corner of Killinger Road and
01-25 2001   Christman Road, from B-1 to R-R
Ord.  5-28-  3.43 acres located at 1546 East Turkeyfoot Lake Road, from B-1 to I-2
02-03 2002
Ord.  11-26- 5.1 acres located on South Main Street at Sandy Hill Beach Drive, from
02-15 2002   B-1 to R-3PD; and 0.9 acres located on South Main Street at Sandy Beach
             Drive, from R-1 to R-3PD
Ord.  12-10- 16.5 acres located in the Sandy Beach Allotment and the west side of
02-17 2002   Talent Drive from B-1 to R-1
Ord.  1-28-  1.95 acres located in the Interstate Business Park from B-1 to B-4; and
02-18 2003   0.64 acres located at 971 East Turkeyfoot Lake Road from B-4 to B-1
Ord.  7-8-   Approximately 12.68 acres located at 2932 Myersville Road from I-1 to R-
02-07 2003   1
Ord.  7-8-   Approximately 33.29 acres located on the east side of Long Road, north
03-08 2003   of Bonna Drive, from I-1 to R-1
Ord.  6-8-   Approximately 6.66 acres of land located at 738 Moore Road from R-1 to
04-10 2004   B-1
             Approximately 7.59 acres of land located at the southeast corner of E.
Ord.  7-27-  Turkeyfoot Lake Road (S.R. 619) and Massillon Road, from PD-1 to B-1;
04-14 2004   and approximately 1.18 acres of land located at the southeast corner of
             E. Turkeyfoot Lake Road (S.R. 619) and Massillon Road, from PD-1 to R-1
Ord.  6-14-  5.89 acres of land located on Camborne Boulevard in Hyde Park
05-04 2005   Subdivision from R-4 to R-3PD
Ord.  11-9-  Property located north and west of Fortuna Drive containing 7.2 acres
05-21 2005   from I-2 to B-1; approximately 7.1 acres from I-2 to B-4; and
             approximately 15.6 acres from B-4 to B-1
Ord.  11-22- 67 acres located in the Robins Trace Subdivision from R-4 to R-1
05-16 2005
Ord.  12-13- Approximately 8.3 acres located at 4936 South Arlington Road in Reserve
05-23 2005   at Kensington Lake Subdivision from R-R to PD-1
Ord.  1-24-  Approximately 18.14 acres located on East Turkeyfoot Lake Road between
05-27 2006   South Main Street and Cottage Grove Road from R-1 to B-2
Ord.  1-24-  Approximately 3.02 acres located at 3602 South Arlington Road from B-
05-28 2006   1 to R-1; and 0.56 acres located at 3602 South Arlington Road from R-
             1 to B-1
             A total of 42.91 acres of property located at the corner of Boettler
Ord.  8-8-   Road and Arlington Road as follows: 3.23 acres from R-1 to B-2; 14.65
06-16 2006   acres from R-1 to B-3; 18.26 acres from B-3 to R-3PD; 4.28 acres from B-
             2 to R-3PD; and 2.49 acres from B-2 to R-1
Ord.  10-10- Changing the zoning classification of property containing approximately
06-19 2006   54.97 acres of land located on the north side of Greensburg Road along
             the west side of the railroad tracks from R-1 to B-1
Ord.  11-13- Changing the zoning classification of property containing approximately
2007- 2007   12.89 acres of land located at 708 and 728 Moore Road from R-1 (Single-
20           Family) to B-2 (Business Office District)
Ord.  3-11-  Changing the zoning classification of property containing approximately
2008- 2008   96.7 acres of land located at 2520 Wise Road from I-2 to R-1
01
Ord.         Changing the zoning classification of property containing approximately
2008- 3-11-  61.24 acres of land located on the north side of Koons Road, west of
03    2008   Massillon Road, from R-1 to PD-1, and accepting the general development
             plan of the proposed Koons Road Development
Ord.         Changing the zoning classification of property containing approximately
2008- 8-26-  19.4 acres of land located on Raber Terrace and Robinwood Drive from B-
18    2008   1 to R-1, and approximately 0.1707 acres of land located at 3515
             Massillon Road from R-1 to B-1
Ord.  12-9-  Changing the zoning classification of property containing approximately
2008- 2008   1.923 acres of land located at 1717 Boettler Road from I-2 to B-1
21
Ord.  4-14-  Changing the zoning classification of property containing approximately
2009- 2009   7.3 acres of land on Robin’s Trace from R-4 to R-1
3
Ord.  6-9-   Changing the zoning classification of property containing approximately
2009- 2009   0.88 acres of land located at 1243 Boettler Road from I-2 to R-1
5
Ord.  6-9-   Changing the zoning classification of property containing approximately
2009- 2009   15 acres of land located on the west side of South Arlington Road, north
6            of Boettler Road from R-1 to R-4
             Changing the zoning classification of property containing approximately
Ord.         10.6 acres of land located on the east side of S. Arlington Road, west
2009- 8-11-  of Fortuna Drive from R-1 to B-3; 1.7 acres of land located on the east
17    2009   side of S. Arlington Road, west of Fortuna Drive from R-1 to B-1; and,
             2.5 acres of land located on the east side of S. Arlington Road, west of
             Fortuna Drive from B-1 to B-3
Ord.  8-11-  Changing the zoning classification of property containing approximately
2009- 2009   0.68 acres of land located at 2613 E. Turkeyfoot Lake Road from I-1 to
18           R-1
             Changing the zoning classification of property containing approximately
Ord.  6-22-  17 acres of land from B-3 to PD, and approximately three acres of land
2010- 2010   from R-1 to PD, located on the east side of Massillon Road, across from
03           Town Park Center, and accepting the general development plan of the
             proposed Akron General Health and Wellness Center
Ord.  10-12- Changing the zoning classification of property containing approximately
2010- 2010   75.07 acres of land at 1865 Graybill Road from R-1 to PD and accepting
15           the general development plan of the Franks Farm Planned Development
Ord.  11-23- Changing the zoning classification of property containing approximately
2010- 2010   5.2 acres of land at and near 2876 Graybill Road from I-2 to R-1
17
             Changing the zoning classification of property containing approximately
Ord.  4-26-  11.4 acres of land from B-2 to PD and approximately 11.9 acres of land
2011- 2011   from R-1 to PD, located on the east side of Massillon Road, south of
01           Graybill Road and accepting the general development plan of the proposed
             Green Project Development
Ord.         Changing the zoning classification of property containing approximately
2012- 6-12-  11.56 acres of land located on the south side of Boettler Road from R-
4     2012   1 to PD and accepting the general development plan of the proposed Green
             Pointe assisted living facility
             Changing the zoning classification of property containing approximately
Ord.         49.2 acres of land from R-1 to PD; 18.5 acres of land from B-2 to PD;
2012- 6-26-  65.4 acres of land from B-3 to PD; and 113.4 acres of land from I-1 to
10    2012   PD located on the east side of Massillon Road, west side of I-77, and
             north and south sides of Wise Road and accepting the general development
             plan for the Union Square and Park Place developments
Ord.         Changing the zoning classification of approximately 3.05 acres of land
2012- 8-28-  from I-1 General Industrial to B-1 General Business and approximately
13    2012   0.06 acres of land from PD Planned Development to B-1 General Business
             located on the east side of Massillon Road, north of Franks Parkway
Ord.  11-27- Changing the zoning classification of approximately 15.96 acres of land
2012- 2012   located on the west side of South Arlington Road, North of Boettler Road
12           from R-1 Single- Family Residential to R-2 Multiple-Family Residential
Ord.  5-14-  Changing the zoning classification of approximately 2.48 acres of land
2013- 2013   at 1860 and 1870 Graybill Road from R-1 Single-Family Residential to B-
04           1 General Business
             Changing the zoning classification of property containing approximately
Ord.  8-13-  80.6 acres of land located at 1102 and 1184 Boettler Road from R-
2013- 2013   1 Single-Family Residential to PD Planned Development and accepting the
13           general development plan of the proposed Transitions Senior Living
             Planned Development
Ord.  2-11-  Changing the zoning classification of property containing approximately
2013- 2014   61.24 acres of land located at 1745 Koons Road from PD-1 Planned
25           Development to R-1 Single-Family Residential
Ord.  8-26-  Changing the zoning classification of approximately 0.9 acres of land
2014- 2014   from R-1 (Single-Family Residential) to B-1 (General Business) located
09           at 3911 South Main Street
Ord.  8-25-  Changing the zoning classification of approximately ten acres of land
2015- 2015   located on E. Turkeyfoot Lake Road from R-1 (Single-Family Residential)
08           to B-3 (Neighborhood Business)
Ord.  7-28-  Changing the zoning classification of approximately 0.45 acres of land
2015- 2015   from R-R (Rural Residential) to B-1 (General Business) located at 5010
09           South Main Street
Ord.  9-13-  Changing the zoning classification of approximately 14.79 acres of land
2016- 2016   from R-1 (Single-Family Residential) to I-1 (General Industrial) located
09           directly west of the Akron Canton Corporate Park, Phase VIII
             Changing the zoning classification of approximately 3.3 acres of land
Ord.  3-14-  located on the west side of Massillon Road, south of Wise Road, from R-
2017- 2017   1 (Single-Family Residential) to B-3 (Neighborhood Business) and
02           approximately 1.4 acres of adjacent land from B-1 (General Business) to
             B-3 (Neighborhood Business)
Ord.         Changing the zoning classification of approximately 1.1 acres of land
2017- 5-23-  located at 4405 Massillon Road from R-1 (Single- Family Residential) to
06    2017   B-3 (Neighborhood Business) and approximately 0.7 acres of land from B-
             1 (General Business) to B-3 (Neighborhood Business)
Ord.  6-27-  Changing the zoning classification of approximately one acre of land
2017- 2017   located at 772 E. Turkeyfoot Lake Road from R-1 (Single-Family
10           Residential) to B-1 (General Business)
             Changing the zoning classification of property containing approximately
Ord.  8-22-  50.9 acres of land located at 1296 E. Turkeyfoot Lake Road from R-1
2017- 2017   (Single-Family Residential) to PD (Planned Development) and accepting
14           the conceptual site plan of the proposed Bayside Investments Planned
             Development
Ord.  2-27-  Changing the zoning classification of approximately 3.05 acres of land
2018- 2018   fronting on Robin’s Trace, from R-2 (Multi-Family Residential) to R-1
01           (Single-Family Residential)
             Changing the zoning classification of property containing approximately
Ord.  10-23- 8.65 acres of land located on the southwest corner of Massillon Road and
2018- 2018   Graybill Road from B-2 (Professional Office) to PD (Planned Development)
21           and accepting the conceptual site plan of the proposed TWL Investments
             Planned Development
             Changing the zoning classification of property containing approximately
Ord.         13.6 acres of land located at the southeast corner of Massillon Road and
2019- 8-27-  Wise Road from R-1 (Single-Family Residential) to PD (Planned
15    2019   Development); and approximately 5.1 acres of land from B-1 (General
             Business) to PD (Planned Development); and approximately 1.8 acres of
             land from B-3 (Neighborhood Business) to PD (Planned Development)
             Changing the zoning classification of approximately eight acres of land
Ord.         located at 1541 East Turkeyfoot Lake Road from R-1 (Single-Family
2021- 8-24-  Residential) to PD (Planned Development), approximately 9.4 acres of
08    2021   land from I-1 (General Industrial) to PD (Planned Development), and
             approximately eight acres of land from B-1 (General Business) to PD
             (Planned Development)
Ord.  8-24-  Changing the zoning classification of approximately 24.78 acres of land
2021- 2021   located at 2961 and 3015 Graybill Road from I-1 (General Industrial) to
11           R-1 (Single-Family Residential)
Ord.  11-9-  Changing the zoning classification of approximately 26.4 acres of land
2021- 2021   from B-2 (Business Office) to PD (Planned Development)
21
Ord.  1-11-  Changing the zoning classification of approximately 79 acres of land
2021- 2022   located at 1265 Boettler Road from R- 1 Single-Family Residential) to PD
26           (Planned Development)
Ord.         Changing the zoning classification of approximately 7.9 acres of land
2022- 4-12-  located at 6083 and 6095 S. Main Street and including three vacant
03    2022   parcels of land directly north of 6083 S. Main Street from B-1 (General
             Business) to R-R (Rural Residential)
Ord.  5-10-  Changing the zoning classification of approximately 11.4 acres of land
2022- 2022   located at 3029 Graybill Road from I-1 (General Industrial) to R-1
05           (Single-Family Residential)
2023- 5-9-   Changing the zoning classification of approximately 7.0 acres of land
01    2023   located at 1364, 1356, 1336, and 1320 E. Turkeyfoot Lake Road from R-1
             (Single-Family Residential) to I-1 (General Industrial)
2023- 8-22-  Changing the zoning classification of approximately 36.1 acres of land
05    2023   located at 2430 Bonna Drive plus additional contiguous land from I-1
             (General Industrial) to R-1 (Single-Family Residential)
2023- 9-26-  Changing the zoning classification of approximately 7.04 acres of land
08    2023   located at 1134 E. Turkeyfoot Lake Road from R-1 (Single-Family
             Residential) to B-3 (Neighborhood Business)
2023- 2-13-  Changing the zoning classification of approximately 1.27 acres of land
15    2024   located at Southwood Drive from R-1 (Single Family Residential) and B-2
             (Professional Office) to PD (Planned Development)
2024- 8-27-  Changing the zoning classification of approximately 1.17 acres of land
11    2024   located at 728 Moore Road from B-2 (Professional Office) to PD (Planned
             Development)
            
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Ohio Revised Code
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
HISTORICAL REFERENCES TO OHIO REVISED CODE
R.C. Section Code Section
R.C. Section                             Code Section
1.01                                     10.01
1.02                                     10.02
1.05                                     10.02
1.14                                     10.03
1.15                                     10.03
1.23                                     10.05
1.42                                     10.03
1.43                                     10.03
1.44                                     10.02
1.45                                     10.03
1.46                                     10.03
1.47                                     10.18
1.48                                     10.18
1.49                                     10.18
1.50                                     10.07
1.51                                     10.06
1.52                                     10.06
1.54                                     10.04
1.55                                     10.05
1.56                                     10.05
1.57                                     10.04
1.58                                     10.04
1.59                                     10.02
128.01(A)                                136.20(A)
128.96(F) - (H)                          136.20(B) - (D)
128.99(A), (B)                           136.20(E)
149.43(B), (E))                          30.02
701.01                                   10.02
715.67                                   130.99(A)
723.011                                  97.04
901.51                                   131.21(A), (B)
901.99(A)                                131.21(C)
925.62                                   90.28
925.99(B)                                90.28
955.25                                   90.31
955.99(B)                                90.31
959.13                                   90.10
959.131                                  90.10
959.21                                   90.35
959.99(D)                                90.10,
                                         90.35
959.99(E)                                90.10
959.99(E)(7)                             90.35
1349.17                                  131.31(A) - (C)
1349.99(A)                               131.31(D)
1533.171(A)                              131.24(A),
                                         135.05(A)
1533.99(C)                               131.24(B),
                                         135.05(B)
2901.01                                  130.02
2901.02                                  130.03
2901.03                                  130.04
2901.04                                  130.05
2901.05                                  130.13
2901.06                                  130.14
2901.08                                  130.15
2901.09                                  130.21
2901.11                                  130.16
2901.13                                  130.06
2901.21                                  130.07
2901.22                                  130.08
2901.23                                  130.09
2901.24                                  130.10
2903.05                                  135.02
2903.06                                  73.17,
                                         135.03
2903.08                                  135.03(F)
2903.08(A)(3), (C)(3), (D)(3), (E) - (G) 73.17
2903.09                                  135.01
2903.10                                  135.19
2903.13                                  135.04(A)
2903.14                                  135.04(B)
2903.16                                  135.19
2903.21                                  135.06(B)
2903.211                                 135.06(C)
2903.216                                 135.11
2903.22                                  135.06(A)
2903.31                                  135.17(A) - (D)
2903.311(B), (C)                         135.17(E)
2903.33                                  135.20(A)
2903.34                                  135.20(B)
2903.341                                 135.20(C)
2903.35                                  135.20(D)
2903.36                                  135.20(E)
2905.03                                  135.07
2905.12                                  135.09
2907.01                                  133.01
2907.04                                  133.02
2907.06                                  133.03
2907.071                                 133.21
2907.08                                  133.05
2907.09                                  133.04
2907.10                                  133.06
2907.23                                  133.07(A) - (C)
2907.231                                 133.07(D) - (F)
2907.24                                  133.08(A) - (D)
2907.241                                 133.08(E) - (H)
2907.25                                  133.09
2907.26                                  133.13
2907.31                                  133.10(A) - (E)
2907.311                                 133.11
2907.33                                  133.12
2907.35                                  133.10(F)
2907.36                                  133.14
2907.37                                  133.15
2907.38                                  133.16
2907.39                                  133.17
2907.40                                  133.18
2909.01                                  131.01
2909.03                                  131.02(A) - (D)
2909.06                                  131.03(A)
2909.07                                  131.04
2909.08(A) - (E)                         131.05
2909.09                                  131.03(B)
2909.10                                  131.34(A) - (D)
2909.101                                 131.34(E), (F)
2909.11(B) - (D)                         131.02(E)
2909.31                                  136.21(E), (F)
2911.21                                  131.06(A) - (F)
2911.211                                 131.06(G)
2911.23                                  131.06(H)
2911.32                                  131.07
2913.01                                  131.01
2913.02                                  131.08
2913.03                                  131.09
2913.04                                  131.10(A) - (J)
2913.07                                  131.33
2913.11                                  131.11
2913.21                                  131.12
2913.31(B), (C)(2)                       131.26
2913.32                                  131.27
2913.33                                  131.13
2913.34                                  131.29
2913.40                                  131.23(C)
2913.401                                 131.23(D)
2913.41                                  131.14
2913.42                                  131.15
2913.43                                  131.16
2913.44                                  131.28
2913.441                                 132.11
2913.45                                  131.17
2913.47                                  131.23(A)
2913.48                                  131.23(B)
2913.51                                  131.18
2913.61(B) - (E)                         131.19
2913.71                                  131.20
2913.72                                  131.25(A)
2913.73                                  131.25(B)
2915.01                                  134.01
2915.02(A) - (G), (K)                    134.02
2915.03                                  134.03
2915.04                                  134.04
2915.05                                  134.05
2915.06                                  134.14(A), (B)
2915.061                                 134.14(C)
2915.09                                  134.06
2915.091                                 134.10
2915.092                                 134.11
2915.093                                 134.12(A) - (F)
2915.094                                 134.13
2915.10                                  134.07
2915.11                                  134.08
2915.12                                  134.09
2915.13                                  134.12(G)
2915.14                                  134.15
2917.01                                  132.10
2917.03                                  132.01(A) - (C)
2917.031                                 132.01(D)
2917.04                                  132.02
2917.05                                  132.03
2917.11                                  132.04
2917.12                                  132.05
2917.13                                  132.06
2917.14                                  132.15
2917.21                                  132.07
2917.211                                 133.20
2917.31                                  132.08
2917.32                                  132.09
2917.40                                  132.13
2917.41                                  132.14
2919.01                                  135.10
2919.21                                  135.13
2919.22(A) - (E), (H)                    135.14
2919.224                                 135.12
2919.23                                  135.15(A)
2919.231                                 135.15(B)
2919.24                                  135.18
2919.25                                  135.16
2919.27                                  135.23
2921.01                                  136.01
2921.04                                  136.17
2921.13                                  136.02(A) - (F)
2921.14                                  136.14
2921.15                                  136.19
2921.21                                  136.03
2921.22                                  136.04
2921.23                                  136.05
2921.24                                  136.16(A) - (D)
2921.25                                  136.16(E), (F)
2921.29                                  136.21(A) - (D)
2921.31                                  136.06
2921.32                                  136.07
2921.321                                 136.15
2921.33                                  136.08
2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F)              70.02
2921.36                                  136.13(A) - (G)
2921.37                                  136.13(H)
2921.42                                  136.09
2921.43                                  136.10
2921.44                                  136.11
2921.45                                  136.12
2921.51                                  132.12
2921.52(A) - (D)                         136.18
2923.02                                  130.11
2923.03                                  130.12
2923.11                                  137.01
2923.12                                  137.02
2923.1211(B), (C)                        137.13(A)
2923.1212                                137.13(C)
2923.122(C) - (G)                        137.11
2923.126                                 137.13(B)
2923.131                                 137.12
2923.15                                  137.03
2923.16                                  137.04
2923.162                                 137.09
2923.18                                  137.10
2923.19                                  137.06
2923.20                                  137.07
2923.201                                 137.14
2923.211                                 137.08
2923.24                                  137.05
2925.01                                  138.01
2925.11                                  138.03
2925.12                                  138.04
2925.13(A) - (C), (F)                    138.05
2925.14                                  138.13(A) - (G)
2925.141                                 138.13(H)
2925.31                                  138.07
2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G)          138.10(A)
2925.33                                  138.10(B)
2925.34                                  138.19
2925.36(A) - (D), (F)                    138.08
2925.37(A), (G)                          138.12
2925.50                                  138.09
2925.51                                  138.11(A) - (F)
2925.511                                 138.11(G)
2925.55                                  138.18(A)
2925.56                                  138.18(B)
2925.57                                  138.18(C)
2925.58                                  138.18(D)
2925.62                                  138.20
2927.01                                  135.28
2927.02                                  135.25(A)
2927.021                                 135.25(B)
2927.022                                 135.25(C)
2927.023                                 135.25(D)
2927.024                                 135.25(E)
2927.03                                  135.21
2927.11                                  131.35
2927.12                                  135.22
2927.15                                  135.08
2927.17                                  133.19
2927.27                                  130.20
2929.21                                  130.99(B)
2929.22                                  130.18
2929.23                                  133.99
2929.24                                  130.99(C)
2929.25                                  130.99(D)
2929.26                                  130.99(E)
2929.27                                  130.99(F)
2929.28                                  130.99(G)
2929.31                                  130.99(H)
2929.41                                  130.19
2935.041                                 131.22
2935.28                                  70.08
2935.36(E)                               130.02
2981.07                                  131.30
2981.11                                  130.17(A)
2981.12                                  130.17(B)
2981.13(A)                               130.17(C)
3701.81                                  135.27(A) - (C)
3701.82                                  95.60,
                                         97.01
3701.99(B)                               95.60
3701.99(C)                               135.27(D)
3715.05                                  138.18(E)
3715.06                                  138.18(F)
3716.11                                  135.24(A)
3716.99(C)                               135.24(B)
3719.08(A), (E)                          138.14(A), (B)
3719.172(A), (B)                         138.15(A), (B)
3719.19                                  138.09
3719.99(C)                               138.14(C)
3719.99(E)                               138.15(C)
3737.34                                  95.04
3737.51(A)                               95.05,
                                         95.56
3737.51(B) to (H)                        95.99
3737.61                                  95.06,
                                         95.57
3737.62                                  95.07,
                                         95.58
3737.63                                  95.08
3737.64                                  95.09 
3737.65                                  95.10
3737.99(B)                               95.56,
                                         95.99
3737.99(C)                               95.57,
                                         95.99
3737.99(D)                               95.58,
                                         95.99
3737.99(E)                               95.59,
                                         95.99
3743.01                                  95.25
3743.25                                  95.34
3743.45                                  95.26
3743.54(B) - (F)                         95.27
3743.60(E) - (L)                         95.28
3743.61(E) - (L)                         95.28
3743.63                                  95.29
3743.64(C) - (G)                         95.30
3743.65(A) - (E), (G), (H)               95.26
3743.66                                  95.31
3743.68                                  95.33
3743.80                                  95.32
3743.80                                  137.15
3743.99(C), (D), (F) - (H)               95.99
3767.13                                  97.03
3767.201                                 70.09(A)
3767.29                                  97.05
3767.99(B)                               97.05
3767.99(C)                               97.03
3767.99(D)                               70.09(B)
3773.06                                  137.09(D)
3773.99(A)                               137.09(D)
3780.36                                  138.02
3780.99                                  138.02
3781.11(B)                               95.12,
                                         151.007
3781.55                                  133.04(E)
3781.107                                 95.54
3781.108(A), (B)                         95.55
3791.01                                  151.004
                                         95.54,
3791.02                                  95.55,
                                         151.004
                                         95.54,
3791.03                                  95.55,
                                         151.004
3791.031                                 97.11,
                                         135.26
3791.04                                  151.004
4301.01                                  96.01
4301.22(A)(2)                            96.09
4301.22(B)                               96.03
4301.244                                 96.01
4301.62                                  96.07
4301.63                                  96.02
4301.631                                 96.09
4301.633                                 96.02
4301.634                                 96.02
4301.637                                 96.06
4301.64                                  96.04
4301.65                                  96.10
4301.69                                  96.02
4301.70                                  96.06
4301.99(A)                               96.06,
                                         96.10
4301.99(B)                               96.04,
                                         96.09
4301.99(C)                               96.02
4301.99(D), (H)                          96.03
4301.99(E)                               96.02,
                                         96.09
4301.99(F)                               96.02
4301.99(I)                               96.02
4301.99(J)                               96.10
4303.202(D)(2)                           96.08
4303.208(C)                              96.08
4303.25                                  96.05
4303.99(D)                               96.08
4501.01(LL)                              70.01
4501.01(TT)                              72.061(G)
4503.05                                  71.02
4503.11(A), (D)                          71.01(B), (G)(2)
4503.111                                 71.01(C), (G)(3)
4503.12(A), (D)                          71.01(D), (G)(4)
4503.21                                  71.01(A), (G)(1)
4503.236                                 71.03
4505.18                                  71.04
4506.01                                  71.45
4506.011                                 71.46
4506.03                                  71.48(A) - (C), (G)
4506.04                                  71.47(A), (B), (D)(1), (D)(2)
4506.05                                  71.48(D) - (G)
4506.10(A), (E)                          71.49
4506.12(I), (J)                          71.47(C), (D)(3)
4506.15                                  71.50(A), (D), (E)
4506.17(H), (N)                          71.50(B), (D)
4506.19                                  71.51
4506.20                                  71.52
4506.23                                  71.50(C)
4506.99                                  71.99
4507.02(A)                               71.22(A)
4507.03                                  71.22(B)
4507.04                                  71.22(C)
4507.05(F), (I)                          71.21(B), (K)
4507.071(B) - (J)                        71.21(C) - (K)
4507.213                                 71.22(D)
4507.30                                  71.20
4507.31                                  71.21(A), (K)
4507.321                                 71.23
4507.35                                  71.26
4507.36                                  71.27
4507.99                                  71.99
4509.102                                 136.02(G)
4509.74                                  73.33
4510.037                                 71.28(C)
                                         71.28(D),
4510.04                                  71.30(H),
                                         71.31(E),
                                         71.32(D)
4510.05                                  71.25(A)
4510.11                                  71.28(A)
4510.111                                 71.28(B)
4510.12                                  71.29
4510.14                                  71.30(A) - (F)
4510.15                                  71.25(B), (C)
4510.16                                  71.31(A) - (I)
4510.21                                  71.32(A) - (C)
4510.44                                  73.08
4511.01                                  70.01
4511.03                                  70.03
4511.031                                 70.38
4511.04                                  70.04(A) - (D)
4511.041                                 70.04(E)
4511.042                                 70.04(F)
4511.05                                  70.05
4511.051                                 70.06
4511.08                                  70.07
4511.12                                  70.30
4511.121                                 70.30(A), (G)(1)
4511.13                                  70.31(B) - (E), (G)(2)
4511.131                                 70.32
4511.132                                 70.33
4511.14                                  70.34
4510.15                                  71.25(B), (C)
4511.16                                  70.35
4511.17                                  70.36
4511.18                                  70.37
4511.181                                 73.01(N)
4511.19(A) - (M)                         73.01(A) - (M)
4511.191(A), (D)                         73.02(A), (H)
4511.192                                 73.02(B) - (G)
4511.194                                 73.03
4511.20                                  73.05
4511.201                                 73.06
4511.202                                 73.07
4511.203                                 71.24
4511.204                                 72.131
4511.205                                 72.132
4511.21(A) - (G), (O), (P)               73.10(A) - (G), (I), (K)(1)
4511.211                                 73.10(J), (K)(2)
4511.213                                 72.120(B) - (D)
4511.214                                 73.16(A) - (E)
4511.215                                 73.16(F), (G)
4511.216                                 73.16(H)
4511.22                                  73.11
4511.23                                  73.13
4511.24                                  73.12
4511.25                                  72.001
4511.251                                 73.09
4511.26                                  72.003
4511.27                                  72.004
4511.28                                  72.005
4511.29                                  72.006
4511.30                                  72.007
4511.31                                  72.008
4511.32                                  72.009
4511.33                                  72.010
4511.34                                  72.011
4511.35                                  72.012
4511.36                                  72.013
4511.37                                  72.014
4511.38                                  72.015
4511.39                                  72.016
4511.40                                  72.017
4511.41                                  72.030
4511.42                                  72.031
4511.43                                  72.032
4511.431                                 72.033(A), (F)
4511.432                                 72.033(B) - (F)
4511.44                                  72.034
4511.441                                 72.035
4511.45                                  72.036(A) - (D)
4511.451                                 72.037
4511.452                                 72.038
4511.454                                 72.036(E)
4511.46                                  72.039
4511.47                                  72.040
4511.48                                  72.041
4511.481                                 72.060
4511.49                                  72.055
4511.50                                  72.056
4511.51                                  72.057
4511.511                                 72.058
4511.512                                 72.061(A) - (F)
4511.513                                 72.062
4511.514                                 72.063
4511.52                                  75.01
4511.521                                 75.02
4511.522                                 75.03
4511.53                                  75.04
4511.54                                  75.05
4511.55                                  75.06
4511.56                                  75.07
4511.60                                  72.002
4511.61                                  72.075
4511.62                                  72.076
4511.63                                  72.077
4511.64                                  72.078
4511.65                                  70.10
4511.66                                  76.01
4511.661                                 76.02
4511.67                                  76.03
4511.68                                  76.04
4511.681                                 76.06,
                                         76.15
4511.69                                  76.05
4511.70                                  72.115
4511.701                                 72.116
4511.71                                  72.117(A), (C)(1)
4511.711                                 72.118(A), (C)
4511.712                                 72.119
4511.713                                 72.118(B), (C)
4511.714                                 72.117(B), (C)(2), (D)
4511.72                                  72.120(A), (C)
4511.73                                  72.121
4511.74                                  72.122(A), (B), (F)(1), (2)
4511.75                                  72.090
4511.751                                 72.091
4511.76(C), (H)(2), (I)                  72.092
4511.761                                 72.093
4511.762                                 72.094
4511.763                                 72.095
4511.764                                 72.096
4511.77                                  72.097
4511.771                                 72.098
4511.772                                 72.099
4511.79                                  73.04
4511.81(A) - (H), (K), (L)               72.123
4511.82                                  72.122(C) - (E), (F)(3)
4511.84                                  72.126
4511.85                                  72.127
4511.99                                  70.99(A)
4511.991                                 70.99(B)
4513.02(A), (H)                          74.01
4513.021                                 74.02
4513.03                                  74.03
4513.04                                  74.04
4513.05                                  74.05
4513.06                                  74.06
4513.07                                  74.07
4513.071                                 74.08
4513.08                                  74.09(A)
4513.09                                  74.10
4513.10                                  74.11(A)
4513.11                                  74.12(A)
4513.111                                 74.12(B)
4513.112                                 74.12(C)
4513.113                                 74.12(D)
4513.114                                 74.12(E)
4513.115                                 74.12(F)
4513.12                                  74.13
4513.13                                  74.14
4513.14                                  74.15
4513.15                                  74.16
4513.16                                  74.17
4513.17                                  74.18(A) - (E), (G)
4513.171                                 74.18(F), (G)
4513.18                                  74.19
4513.181                                 74.20
4513.182                                 74.21(A), (B)
4513.19                                  74.22
4513.20                                  74.23(A)
4513.201                                 74.24(A), (B)
4513.202                                 74.25(A) - (C)
4513.21                                  74.26
4513.22                                  74.27
4513.23                                  74.28
4513.24                                  74.29
4513.241(C) - (J)                        74.31(B), (C)(2)
4513.25                                  74.30(A)
4513.26                                  74.31(A)
4513.261                                 74.32
4513.262                                 74.33
4513.263                                 72.124
4513.27                                  74.34(A) - (C)
4513.28                                  74.35
4513.29                                  74.36(A)
4513.30                                  74.51(A)
4513.31                                  74.52(A), (B)
4513.32                                  74.53(A)
4513.33                                  74.54
4513.34                                  74.50(A) - (E)
4513.36                                  73.15(A), (B)
4513.361                                 73.14
4513.50                                  74.38(A)
4513.51(A), (B), (D)                     74.38(B), (C)
4513.60                                  76.15
4513.601                                 76.15
4513.61                                  76.14
4513.64                                  76.14
4513.66                                  70.12(A) - (C)
4513.68                                  70.12(D) - (H)
                                         74.11(B),
                                         74.21(C),
                                         74.23(B),
                                         74.24(C),
                                         74.25(D),
                                         74.30(B),
4513.99                                  74.31(C)(1),
                                         74.34(D),
                                         74.36(B),
                                         74.50(F),
                                         74.51(B),
                                         74.52(C),
                                         74.53(B)
4519.01                                  75.25
4519.02                                  75.34
4519.20                                  75.26(A), (B), (D)(1)
4519.22                                  75.26(C), (D)(2)
4519.40                                  75.27
4519.401                                 73.16(I)
4519.41                                  75.28
4519.44                                  75.29
4519.45                                  75.30
4519.46                                  75.31
4519.47                                  75.32
4519.48                                  75.33
4519.66                                  75.35
4549.02                                  73.30
4549.021                                 73.31
4549.03                                  73.32
4549.05                                  70.11
4549.08                                  71.06
4549.081(B), (C)                         70.30(F), (G)(3)
4549.10                                  71.07
4549.11                                  71.01(E), (G)(5)
4549.12                                  71.01(F), (G)(6)
4549.18                                  71.05
4549.20                                  74.39
4731.481                                 138.17(A)
4731.99(F)                               138.17(B)
4734.161                                 138.17(A)
4734.99(B)                               138.17(B)
4933.18                                  131.32(A) - (C)
4933.19                                  131.32(D)
5577.02                                  74.55(A)
5577.03                                  74.56(A)
5577.04                                  74.56(B)
5577.041                                 74.56(C)
5577.042                                 74.61(A) - (D)
5577.043                                 74.61(E) - (H)
5577.044                                 74.61(I) - (K)
5577.045                                 74.61(L)
5577.05                                  74.57(A) - (H)
5577.06                                  74.57(I)
5577.10                                  74.58(A), (B)
5577.11                                  74.59(A)
5577.12                                  74.60
5577.15                                  74.53(C)
5577.99(A)                               74.55(B)
5577.99(C)                               74.56(D)(1),
                                         74.57(J)
5577.99(D)                               74.58(C)
5577.99(E)                               74.59(B)
5589.08                                  72.128(A), (B)
5589.081                                 74.37(A) - (C)
5589.12                                  131.10(K)(1)
                                         72.128(C),
5589.99(B)                               74.37(D),
                                         131.10(K)(2)
5739.01(M)                               95.54
                                         
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section Code Section
Prior Code Section Code Section
202.01             10.01
202.02             10.02
202.03             10.03
202.04             10.04
202.05             10.05
202.06             10.06
202.07             10.07
206.01             11.01
208.01             31.15
208.02             31.16
208.03             31.17
208.04             31.18
208.05             31.19
208.06             31.20
208.07             31.21
210.01             35.01
210.02             35.02
210.03             35.03
210.04             35.04
210.05             35.05
210.06             35.06
210.07             35.07
210.08             35.08
212.01             30.15
212.02             30.16
214.01             30.30
214.02             30.31
214.03             30.32
216.01             35.20
216.02             35.21
216.03             35.22
216.04             35.23
216.05             35.24
216.06             35.25
216.07             35.26
216.08             35.27
218.01             35.40
218.02             35.41
218.03             35.42
218.04             35.43
218.05             35.44
218.06             35.45
218.07             35.46
218.08             35.47
220.01             31.01
220.02             31.02
220.03             31.03
220.04             31.04
222.01             30.01
232.01             33.001
232.02             33.002
232.03             33.003
232.04             33.004
232.05             33.005
232.06             33.006
234.01             33.006
234.02             33.021
235.01             33.035
235.02             33.036
236.01             33.050
242.01             33.065
242.02             33.066
242.03             33.067
242.04             33.068
242.045            33.069
242.05             33.070
242.06             33.071
244.01             33.085
244.02             33.086
244.03             33.087
244.04             33.088
244.05             33.089
244.06             33.090
244.07             33.091
249.01             33.105
249.015            33.106
249.02             33.107
249.03             33.108
249.035            33.109
249.04             33.110
250.01             33.125
250.02             33.126
250.03             33.127
250.04             33.128
252.01             32.25
252.02             32.26
252.05             32.27
254.01             32.40
254.02             32.41
254.03             32.42
254.04             32.43
258.01             32.01
258.02             32.02
258.03             32.03
258.04             32.04
258.05             32.05
258.06             32.06
258.07             32.07
258.08             32.08
258.09             32.09
258.10             32.10
258.11             32.11
258.12             32.12
258.13             32.13
258.14             32.14
260.01             34.001
262.01             34.015
262.02             34.016
263.01             34.030
263.02             34.031
263.03             34.032
263.04             34.033
263.05             34.034
263.06             34.035
276.01             34.050
276.02             34.051
276.03             34.052
276.04             34.053
278.01             34.065
278.02             34.066
278.03             34.067
278.04             34.068
278.05             34.069
278.06             34.070
278.07             34.071
278.08             34.072
278.09             34.073
278.99             34.999
284.01             34.085
284.02             34.086
284.03             34.087
284.04             34.088
286.01             34.100
286.02             34.101
286.03             34.102
286.04             34.103
286.05             34.104
286.06             34.105
286.07             34.106
286.08             34.107
286.09             34.108
286.10             34.109
286.11             34.110
286.12             34.111
288.01             34.125
288.02             34.126
402.01             70.01
404.01             70.11
404.02             73.15
404.03             70.04
404.035            70.04
404.04             70.05
404.05             70.13
404.06             70.14
404.07             70.15
404.08             73.14
406.01             70.39
406.02             70.40
406.03             70.41
406.04             70.42
406.05             70.43
406.06             70.44
406.07             70.45
406.08             70.46
408.01             70.99
408.02             70.99
408.03             71.25
412.01             72.122
412.02             72.133
412.03             72.134
412.04             72.135
412.05             70.06
414.01             70.30
414.02             70.10
414.03             70.31
414.04             70.32
414.05             70.34
414.07             70.35
414.08             70.36
414.09             70.37
414.10             70.38
416.01             72.039
416.02             72.040
416.03             72.041
416.04             72.055
416.05             72.056
416.06             72.057
416.07             72.058
416.08             72.036
416.10             72.060
416.12             72.061
416.13             72.062
416.14             72.063
432.01             72.001
432.02             72.003
432.03             72.004
432.04             72.005
432.05             72.006
432.06             72.007
432.07             72.008
432.08             72.010
432.09             72.011
432.09             72.035
432.10             72.013
432.11             72.014
432.12             72.015
432.13             72.016
432.14             72.017
432.15             72.030
432.155            71.033
432.16             72.031
432.17             72.032
432.18             70.03
432.19             72.036
432.195            72.120
432.20             72.034
432.205            72.033
432.21             72.037
432.22             72.118
432.23             72.115
432.24             72.117
432.25             72.120
432.26             72.121
432.27             72.002
432.28             72.009
432.29             72.012
432.30             72.090
432.305            72.100
432.31             72.076
432.32             72.077
432.33             72.078
432.34             72.119
432.35             72.129
432.36             72.130
432.37             72.018
432.38             72.019
432.39             72.118
432.40             72.126
432.41             72.131
432.42             72.132
434.01             73.04
434.011            73.08
434.02             73.06
434.025            73.07
434.03             73.10
434.035            73.10
434.04             73.11
434.05             73.13
434.06             73.12
434.07             73.09
434.08             73.17
434.09             73.16
436.01             71.22
436.02             71.22
436.03             71.21
436.035            71.21
436.04             71.20
436.05             71.24
436.06             71.26
436.071            71.28
436.072            71.29
436.073            71.30
436.074            71.31
436.075            71.32
436.08             71.04
436.09             71.01
436.10             71.06
436.11             73.30
436.12             73.31
436.13             73.32
436.14             70.12
438.01             74.01
438.02             74.03
438.03             74.04
438.04             74.05
438.05             74.06
438.06             74.07
438.07             74.09
438.08             74.10
438.09             74.11
438.10             74.12
438.11             74.13
438.12             74.14
438.13             74.15
438.14             74.16
438.15             74.17
438.16             74.18
438.165            74.18
438.17             74.21
438.18             74.22
438.19             74.23
438.20             74.26
438.21             74.27
438.22             74.28
438.23             74.29
438.235            74.31
438.24             74.51
438.25             74.08
438.26             74.02
438.27             74.40
438.28             72.123
438.29             72.124
438.31             74.39
440.01             74.56
440.02             74.57
440.03             74.59
440.04             74.36
440.04             74.38
440.05             74.53
440.06             74.52
440.07             74.37
440.08             72.116
440.09             74.62
440.10             74.63
440.11             72.127
442.01             71.45
442.02             71.46
442.02             73.05
442.03             71.47
442.04             71.49
442.05             71.50
442.06             71.51
442.07             71.52
442.08             71.50
442.09             73.04
452.01             76.01
452.02             76.03
452.03             76.13
452.04             76.05
452.05             76.14
452.055            76.15
452.06             76.02
452.07             72.115
452.08             76.16
452.09             76.17
452.10             76.18
452.11             76.19
452.115            76.20
452.117            76.21
452.12             76.22
452.13             76.12
452.14             76.23
452.15             76.24
452.16             76.25
452.17             76.26
452.18             76.27
452.99             76.99
474.01             75.01
474.02             75.04
474.03             75.05
474.04             75.06
474.05             75.07
474.06             75.08
474.07             75.09
474.08             75.10
474.09             75.11
474.10             75.12
474.11             75.02
474.12             75.03
476.01             75.25
476.02             75.26
476.03             75.27
476.04             75.28
476.05             75.29
476.06             75.31
476.07             75.33
476.08             75.34
476.09             75.35
606.01             130.02
606.02             130.08
606.03             130.03
606.04             130.04
606.05             130.05
606.055            130.16
606.06             130.06
606.07             130.07
606.08             130.09
606.09             130.10
606.10             136.02
606.105            136.14
606.11             136.03
606.12             136.04
606.13             136.05
606.14             136.06
606.15             136.07
606.16             136.08
606.165            136.22
606.17             136.09
606.18             136.10
606.19             136.11
606.20             136.12
606.21             130.11
606.22             130.12
606.24             130.17
606.25             132.12
606.26             132.11
606.27             136.18
606.28             136.21
606.29             136.20
606.30             130.21
612.01             96.01
612.02             96.02
612.03             96.03
612.04             96.04
612.05             96.05
612.06             96.06
612.07             96.07
612.08             96.08
612.09             136.13
612.10             96.09
612.11             96.10
618.01             90.01
618.02             90.02
618.03             90.03
618.04             90.04
618.05             90.05
618.06             90.06
618.07             90.07
618.08             90.08
618.09             90.09
618.10             90.10
618.11             90.11
618.12             90.12
618.13             90.13
618.14             90.14
618.15             90.15
618.16             90.16
618.17             90.17
618.18             90.18
618.19             90.19
618.20             90.20
618.21             90.21
618.22             90.22
618.23             90.23
618.24             90.24
618.25             90.25
618.26             90.26
618.27             90.27
618.28             90.28
618.29             90.29
618.30             90.30
618.31             90.31
618.32             90.32
618.33             90.33
618.34             90.34
624.01             138.01
624.03             138.03
624.04             138.04
624.05             138.05
624.06             138.12
624.07             138.07
624.073            138.10
624.076            138.10
624.08             138.08
624.09             138.15
624.10             138.11
624.11             138.09
624.12             138.16
624.13             138.14
624.14             138.13
624.15             138.18
624.16             138.19
624.17             138.20
630.01             134.01
630.02             134.02
630.03             134.03
630.04             134.04
630.05             134.05
630.06             134.06
630.07             134.07
630.08             134.08
630.09             134.09
630.10             134.10
630.11             134.11
630.12             134.12
630.13             134.13
630.14             134.14
630.15             134.15
632.01             97.30
632.02             97.31
632.03             97.32
632.04             97.33
632.05             97.34
632.06             97.35
632.07             97.36
632.08             97.37
632.09             97.38
632.10             97.39
632.11             97.40
632.12             97.41
632.13             97.42
632.14             97.43
632.15             97.44
632.16             97.45
632.17             97.46
632.18             97.47
632.19             97.48
632.20             97.49
636.001            135.01
636.01             135.02
636.02             135.04
636.03             135.04
636.04             135.06
636.045            135.06
636.05             135.06
636.06             135.07
636.09             135.09
636.10             135.13
636.11             135.14
636.12             135.15
636.13             135.18
636.15             132.07
636.16             135.24
636.17             135.16
636.18             132.13
636.19             135.17
636.20             135.25
636.21             135.29
636.22             135.21
636.23             135.19
636.24             135.22
636.26             135.08
642.01             131.01
642.02             131.08
642.03             131.20
642.035            131.25
642.04             131.09
642.05             131.10
642.06             131.21
642.07             131.35
642.08             136.15
642.09             131.02
642.10             131.03
642.11             131.04
642.12             131.06
642.125            131.06
642.126            131.36
642.13             131.07
642.14             131.11
642.145            131.26
642.146            131.27
642.15             131.12
642.155            131.31
642.16             131.13
642.17             131.14
642.18             131.15
642.19             131.16
642.20             131.28
642.205            131.30
642.21             131.17
642.22             131.18
642.23             131.10
642.23             131.22
642.24             131.19
642.25             131.02
642.26             131.32
642.28             132.14
642.29             131.23
642.30             131.23
642.31             131.23
642.32             131.33
642.33             131.34
648.01             132.01
648.02             132.02
648.03             132.03
648.04             132.04
648.05             132.05
648.06             132.06
648.07             132.08
648.08             132.09
648.09             132.10
648.10             132.16
648.12             132.17
648.13             132.18
660.01             97.01
660.02             135.27
660.03             97.02
660.04             97.03
660.05             97.04
660.06             97.05
660.07             97.06
660.08             97.07
660.09             97.08
660.10             97.09
660.11             97.10
660.13             97.11
660.1355           97.13
660.14             97.14
660.15             97.15
666.01             133.01
666.02             133.02
666.03             133.03
666.04             133.04
666.05             133.05
666.06             133.06
666.07             133.07
666.08             133.08
666.085            133.08
666.09             133.09
666.10             133.13
666.11             133.10
666.115            133.11
666.14             133.12
666.15             133.10
666.16             133.14
666.17             133.15
666.18             133.16
666.19             133.17
666.20             133.18
666.21             133.19
666.22             133.20
666.99             133.99
672.01             137.01
672.02             137.02
672.025            137.12
672.03             137.03
672.04             137.04
672.05             137.10
672.06             137.06
672.085            137.08
672.09             131.05
672.11             137.15
672.12             137.05
672.13             137.11
672.14             137.13
672.15             137.14
698.01             130.02
698.02             130.99
698.03             130.18
698.04             130.99
698.05             130.19
698.07             71.25
810.01             110.01
830.01             111.01
830.02             111.02
830.03             111.03
830.04             111.04
830.05             111.05
830.06             111.06
830.07             111.07
830.08             111.08
830.09             111.09
830.10             111.10
830.11             111.11
830.12             111.12
830.13             111.13
830.14             111.14
830.15             111.15
830.16             111.16
830.17             111.17
830.18             111.18
830.19             111.19
830.99             111.99
850.01             112.01
850.02             112.02
850.03             112.03
850.99             112.99
860.01             113.01
860.02             113.02
860.03             113.03
860.05             113.05
860.06             113.06
860.07             113.07
860.08             113.08
860.09             113.09
860.99             113.99
870.01             114.01
870.02             114.02
875.01             115.01
875.02             115.02
875.03             115.03
875.04             115.04
875.05             115.05
875.06             115.06
875.99             115.99
880A.01            36.01
880A.02            36.02
880A.03            36.03
880A.04            36.04
880A.05            36.05
880A.06            36.06
880A.07            36.07
880A.08            36.08
880A.09            36.09
880A.10            36.10
880A.114           36.11
880A.12            36.12
880A.13            36.13
880A.14            36.14
880A.15            36.15
880A.155           36.16
880A.157           36.17
880A.16            36.18
880A.17            36.19
880A.99            36.99
880B.011           37.001
880B.012           37.002
880B.013           37.003
880B.014           37.004
880B.02            37.015
880B.03            37.016
880B.041           37.030
880B.042           37.031
880B.043           37.032
880B.051           37.046
880B.052           37.047
880B.053           37.048
880B.061           37.060
880B.062           37.061
880B.063           37.062
880B.064           37.063
880B.065           37.064
880B.07            37.075
880B.081           37.090
880B.082           37.091
880B.083           37.092
880B.084           37.093
880B.085           37.094
880B.091           37.105
880B.092           37.106
880B.093           37.107
880B.094           37.108
880B.095           37.109
880B.096           37.110
880B.10            37.125
880B.11            37.126
880B.12            37.127
880B.131           37.140
880B.132           37.141
880B.133           37.142
880B.134           37.143
880B.14            37.155
880B.141           37.156
880B.15            37.157
880B.16            37.158
880B.17            37.159
880B.18            37.160
880B.19            37.161
880B.20            37.162
880B.21            37.163
880B.22            37.164
880B.97            37.165
880B.98            37.166
880B.99            37.999
1020.01            150.01
1022.01            150.15
1022.02            150.16
1022.03            150.17
1022.99            150.99
1024.01            150.30
1024.02            150.31
1024.03            150.32
1024.04            150.33
1024.05            150.34
1024.06            150.35
1024.07            150.36
1024.99            150.99
1026.01            150.50
1026.99            150.99
1043.01            52.01
1043.02            52.02
1043.03            52.03
1043.04            52.04
1043.05            52.05
1043.06            52.06
1043.07            52.07
1043.08            52.08
1043.09            52.09
1043.10            52.10
1043.11            52.11
1043.12            52.12
1043.13            52.13
1043.14            52.14
1043.15            52.15
1043.16            52.16
1043.17            52.17
1043.99            52.99
1044.01            53.01
1045.01            54.01
1045.02            54.02
1045.03            54.03
1045.04            54.04
1045.05            54.05
1050.01            55.01
1050.02            55.02
1050.03            55.03
1050.04            55.04
1050.05            55.05
1050.99            55.99
1060.01            50.01
1060.02            50.02
1060.03            50.03
1060.04            50.04
1060.05            50.05
1060.06            50.06
1060.07            50.07
1060.08            50.08
1060.09            50.09
1060.10            50.10
1060.11            50.11
1060.12            50.12
1060.99            50.99
1062.01            91.01
1062.02            91.02
1062.03            91.03
1062.04            91.04
1062.05            91.05
1062.06            91.06
1062.07            91.07
1062.08            91.08
1062.09            91.09
1064.01            51.01
1066.01            92.01
1066.02            92.02
1066.04            92.04
1066.05            92.05
1066.06            92.06
1066.07            92.07
1066.08            92.08
1066.09            92.09
1066.10            92.10
1066.11            92.11
1066.12            92.12
1066.13            92.13
1066.14            92.14
1066.99            92.99
1068.01            93.15
1068.02            93.16
1068.03            93.17
1070.01            93.01
1072.01            94.01
1072.02            94.02
1072.03            94.03
1222.01            157.001
1222.02            157.002
1222.03            157.003
1222.04            157.004
1222.05            157.005
1222.06            157.006
1222.07            157.007
1222.08            157.008
1222.09            157.009
1222.10            157.010
1222.11            157.011
1223.01            157.025
1223.02            157.026
1223.03            157.027
1223.04            157.028
1223.05            157.029
1223.06            157.030
1223.07            157.031
1223.08            157.032
1224.01            157.045
1224.02            157.046
1224.03            157.047
1224.04            157.048
1224.05            157.049
1224.06            157.050
1224.07            157.051
1224.08            157.052
1224.09            157.053
1224.10            157.054
1224.11            157.055
1224.12            157.056
1224.13            157.057
1225.01            157.070
1225.02            157.071
1225.03            157.072
1225.04            157.073
1225.05            157.074
1226.01            157.085
1226.02            157.086
1226.03            157.087
1226.04            157.088
1226.05            157.089
1227.01            157.100
1227.02            157.101
1227.03            157.102
1227.04            157.103
1227.05            157.104
1228.01            157.115
1228.02            157.116
1228.03            157.117
1228.04            157.118
1228.05            157.119
1229.01            157.130
1229.02            157.131
1229.03            157.132
1229.04            157.133
1229.05            157.134
1229.06            157.135
1229.07            157.136
1229.08            157.137
1229.09            157.138
1229.10            157.139
1229.11            157.140
1229.12            157.141
1229.13            157.142
1230.01            157.155
1230.02            157.999
1230.03            157.156
1231.01            157.170
1231.02            157.171
1232.01            157.185
1232.02            157.186
1232.03            157.187
1232.04            157.188
1232.05            157.189
1232.06            157.190
1233.01            157.210
1233.02            157.211
Part 12, App. A    Ch. 157, App. A
1420.01            151.001
1420.02            151.002
1420.03            151.003
1420.04            151.004
1420.06            151.005
1420.07            151.006
1420.08            151.007
1420.99            151.999
1422.01            151.020
1422.02            151.021
1422.03            151.022
1422.04            151.023
1422.05            151.024
1422.99            151.999
1424.01            151.035
1424.02            151.036
1424.03            151.037
1424.04            151.038
1424.05            151.039
1424.99            151.999
1426.01            151.050
1426.02            151.051
1426.03            151.052
1426.99            151.999
1440.01            152.01
1462.01            153.001
1462.02            153.002
1462.03            153.003
1462.04            153.004
1462.05            153.005
1462.06            153.006
1462.07            153.007
1462.99            153.999
Ch. 1462, App. A   Ch. 153, App. A
1464.01            154.01
1464.02            154.02
1464.03            154.03
1464.04            154.04
1466.01            154.15
1466.02            154.16
1466.03            154.17
1466.04            154.18
1466.05            154.19
1466.06            154.20
1466.07            154.21
1466.08            154.22
1466.09            154.23
1466.10            154.24
1466.11            154.25
1466.12            154.26
1466.13            154.27
1466.14            154.28
1466.15            154.29
1466.16            154.30
1466.17            154.31
1466.18            154.32
1466.19            154.33
1466.20            154.34
1466.21            154.35
1466.22            154.36
1466.23            154.37
1466.24            154.38
1466.25            154.39
1466.26            154.40
1466.27            154.41
1466.28            154.42
1466.29            154.43
1466.30            154.44
1466.31            154.45
1466.32            154.99
1468.01            153.020
1468.02            153.021
1468.03            153.022
1468.04            153.023
1468.05            153.024
1468.06            153.025
1468.07            153.026
1468.08            153.027
1468.09            153.028
1468.10            153.029
1468.11            153.030
Ch. 1468, App. B   Ch. 153, App. B
1472.01            153.045
1472.02            153.046
1472.03            153.047
1472.99            153.999
1474.01            153.060
1474.02            153.061
1474.03            153.062
1474.04            153.063
1476.01            153.075
1476.02            153.076
1476.03            153.077
1476.04            153.078
1476.05            153.079
1476.06            153.080
1476.07            153.081
1476.08            153.082
1476.09            153.083
1476.10            153.084
1478.01            155.01
1478.02            155.02
1478.04            155.03
1478.05            155.04
1478.06            155.05
1478.07            155.06
1478.08            155.07
1479.01            156.01
1479.02            156.02
1479.03            156.03
1479.04            156.04
1479.05            156.05
1610.01            95.01
1610.02            95.02
1610.03            95.03
1610.04            95.04
1610.05            95.05
1610.06            95.06
1610.07            95.07
1610.08            95.08
1610.09            95.09
1610.10            95.10
1610.11            95.11
1610.12            95.12
1610.13            95.13
1610.99            95.99
                   
 
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Description
Res. No.  Date Passed Description
91-R5     1-9-1991    TSO Table IV
91-R6     1-9-1991    TSO Table IV
91-R9     1-24-1991   32.02
91-R11    2-12-1991   TSO Table VI
91-R13    2-12-1991   TSO Table V
91-R19    4-9-1991    TSO Table VII
91-R26    6-11-1991   35.03
91-R27    6-11-1991   91.01
91-R32    6-25-1991   TSO Table IV
91-R36    7-30-1991   TSO Table IV
91-R37    7-30-1991   TSO Table IV
91-R39    7-30-1991   TSO Table IV
91-R52    11-12-1991  TSO Table IV
92-R11    2-11-1992   33.066
92-R15    3-17-1992   TSO Table IV
92-R24    4-28-1992   TSO Table IV
92-R26    5-12-1992   TSO Table IV
92-R27    5-12-1992   TSO Table IV
92-R31    5-26-1992   TSO Table IV
92-R37    6-23-1992   TSO Table IV
92-R30    7-14-1992   34.030 -
                      34.034
92-R30A   7-28-1992   34.035
92-R41    7-28-1992   35.04
92-R44    9-8-1992    32.03
92-R47    10-20-1992  TSO Table IV
92-R48    10-20-1992  TSO Table IV
92-R58    11-10-1992  35.05
93-R12    1-26-1993   TSO Table IV
93-R35    6-29-1993   TSO Table IV
93-R45    7-13-1993   TSO Table IV
93-0R46   7-27-1993   TSO Table VI
93-R52    7-27-1993   TSO Table IV
93-R65    9-14-1993   TSO Table IV
93-R66    9-14-1993   TSO Table IV
93-R68    9-14-1993   33.067
93-R63    9-28-1993   32.25,
                      32.26
93-R74    10-12-1993  33.021
93-R76    11-23-1993  TSO Table IV
94-R5     2-8-1994    TSO Table V
94-R17    2-22-1994   TSO Table VI
94-R19    3-22-1994   31.03
94-R34    5-10-1994   32.04
94-R35    5-10-1994   34.016
94-R39    5-10-1994   TSO Table VIII
94-R40    5-10-1994   TSO Table VIII
94-R44    5-10-1994   TSO Table IV
94-R38    5-24-1994   154.01 -
                      154.04
94-R68    7-12-1994   TSO Table V
94-R56    7-26-1994   32.05
94-R71    7-26-1994   32.06
94-R76    8-9-1994    TSO Table IV
94-R77    9-13-1994   TSO Table V
94-R74    10-11-1994  TSO Table IV
94-R106   11-1-1994   TSO Table IV
95-R22    2-14-1995   TSO Table IV
95-R24    2-14-1995   TSO Table IV
94-R64    4-11-1995   TSO Table IV
95-R37    4-25-1995   TSO Table I
95-R23    6-23-1995   33.035
95-R76    6-27-1995   32.10
95-R77    6-27-1995   32.11
95-R83    6-27-1995   32.09
95-R99    7-11-1995   TSO Table IV
95-R100   7-11-1995   TSO Table IV
95-R106   7-11-1995   33.050
95-R107   7-11-1995   TSO Table IV
95-R108   7-25-1995   33.087
95-R113   9-12-1995   TSO Table V
95-R134   11-14-1995  33.004
95-R139   11-28-1995  33.105
95-R141   11-28-1995  TSO Table IV
95-R143   11-28-1995  33.035
95-R148   12-5-1995   51.01
95-R154   12-20-1995  33.086
95-R162   12-20-1995  30.01
96-R3     1-23-1996   TSO Table IV
95-R164   2-13-1996   33.107
95-R165   2-13-1996   33.085
96-R4     2-13-1996   33.088
96-R8     3-12-1996   33.003
96-R16    4-23-1996   TSO Table IV
96-R22    5-28-1996   TSO Table IV
96-R33    6-25-1996   TSO Table V
96-R48    7-9-1996    TSO Table IV
96-R82    11-26-1996  TSO Table IV
96-R80    12-17-1996  33.108
96-R107   12-17-1996  TSO Table V
96-R93    1-28-1997   32.27
97-R3     2-11-1997   TSO Table IV
97-R16    4-8-1997    32.12
96-R101   5-13-1997   32.40, 34.41
97-R37    5-13-1997   TSO Table IV
97-R36    5-27-1997   33.005
97-R42    6-10-1997   TSO Table II
97-R52    6-10-1997   TSO Table V
97-R55    6-24-1997   TSO Table IV
97-R65    8-12-1997   TSO Table IV
97-R66    8-12-1997   TSO Table IV
97-R67    8-12-1997   93.16
97-R71    9-9-1997    32.08
97-R79    9-23-1997   TSO Table IV
97-R99    12-9-1997   93.01,
                      TSO Table IV
97-R100   12-9-1997   93.01,
                      TSO Table IV
97-R107   12-16-1997  TSO Table IV
97-R106   1-27-1998   TSO Table IV
98-R3     2-20-1998   TSO Table IV
98-R17    3-24-1998   TSO Table IV
98-R20    4-14-1998   33.110
98-R29    4-28-1998   TSO Table IV
98-R23    5-26-1998   TSO Table V
98-R52    6-23-1998   31.01
98-R57    6-23-1998   32.42
98-R59    7-28-1998   TSO Table IV
98-R82    8-11-1998   TSO Table IV
98-R83    8-11-1998   TSO Table IV
98-R84    8-11-1998   TSO Table V
99-R5     2-23-1999   TSO Table IV
99-R12    3-9-1999    TSO Table IV
99-R21    3-23-1999   TSO Table VI
99-R16    4-13-1999   TSO Table V
99-R19    4-13-1999   32.09
99-R33    4-27-1999   TSO Table IV
99-R34    5-11-1999   TSO Table IV
99-R35    6-8-1999    TSO Table IV
99-R69    7-14-1999   TSO Table IV
99-R54    7-27-1999   TSO Table IV
99-R65    8-24-1999   TSO Table IV
99-R68    10-12-1999  TSO Table IV
99-R71    10-12-1999  TSO Table IV
99-R70    10-26-1999  TSO Table IV
99-R78    12-14-1999  TSO Table II
99-R81    12-14-1999  TSO Table II,
                      TSO Table V
00-R2     2-8-2000    TSO Table IV
00-R3     2-28-2000   TSO Table V
00-R9     3-28-2000   TSO Table V
00-R25    4-25-2000   33.070
00-R21    5-9-2000    33.068
00-R22    5-9-2000    33.089
00-R29    5-9-2000    93.17
00-R36    6-13-2000   32.10
00-R37    6-27-2000   32.13
00-R52    8-22-2000   TSO Table V
00-R57    9-12-2000   TSO Table IV
00-R58    9-12-2000   TSO Table IV
00-R62    9-26-2000   TSO Table IV
00-R67    10-24-2000  TSO Table V
00-R75    12-12-2000  TSO Table V
01-R12    2-27-2001   33.090
01-R7     3-13-2001   TSO Table V
01R-8     3-13-2001   TSO Table V
01R-23    4-24-2001   TSO Table V
01-R36    7-10-2001   32.10
01-R37    7-10-2001   32.09
01-R46    8-28-2001   33.106
01-R50    10-9-2001   TSO Table IV
01-R54    11-19-2001  TSO Table IV
01-R65    12-11-2001  TSO Table IV
01-R67    1-8-2002    32.11
02-R17    5-14-2002   TSO Table IV
02-R19    5-14-2002   TSO Table IV
02-R20    5-14-2002   TSO Table IV
02-R25    6-11-2002   TSO Table V
02-R26    6-25-2002   TSO Table IV
02-R33    9-10-2002   TSO Table IV
02-R36    9-10-2002   TSO Table IV
02-R39    9-10-2002   TSO Table I
02-R42    10-8-2002   TSO Table IV
02-R43    10-8-2002   TSO Table IV
02-R44    10-8-2002   TSO Table III
02-R57    10-10-2002  TSO Table V
02-R47    11-12-2002  TSO Table IV
02-R48    11-12-2002  TSO Table III
02-R49    11-12-2002  TSO Table IV
02-R52    12-10-2002  TSO Table III
02-R58    12-10-2002  TSO Table V
02-R23    1-14-2003   33.128
2003-R02  1-14-2003   91.02 -
                      91.04
02-R68    1-28-2003   TSO Table IV
03-R31    6-4-2003    36.01,
                      36.03
03-R23    6-24-2003   TSO Table IV
03-R38    7-8-2003    TSO Table IV
03-R42    8-26-2003   TSO Table IV
03-R49    10-23-2003  TSO Table IV
03-R62    11-11-2003  TSO Table V
03-R24    12-9-2003   TSO Table IV
04-R07    3-9-2004    TSO Table II
03-R26    3-23-2004   TSO Table IV
04-R-13   3-23-2004   32.09
04-R12    3-23-2004   TSO Table IV
04-R15    4-27-2004   TSO Table IV
04-R29    5-11-2004   TSO Table IV
04-R31    5-11-2004   TSO Table II
04-R39    6-8-2004    32.09
04-R44    6-8-2004    33.036
04-R45    6-8-2004    32.43
04-R46    6-8-2004    TSO Table IV
04-R52    7-13-2004   TSO Table II
04-R53    7-13-2004   32.14
04-R56    7-27-2004   TSO Table IV
04-R81    9-28-2004   TSO Table IV
05-R-05   2-8-2005    33.069
05-R09    3-8-2005    TSO Table IV
05-R-28   5-10-2005   TSO Table IV
05-R33    5-25-2005   TSO Table V
05-R35    6-14-2005   33.006
05-R60    7-12-2005   TSO Table IV
05-R64    9-27-2005   TSO Table V
05-R66    9-27-2005   TSO Table IV
05-R75    9-27-2005   TSO Table IV
05-R68    10-11-2005  TSO Table IV
05-R71    10-11-2005  TSO Table IV
05-R72    10-11-2005  TSO Table IV
05-R73    10-11-2005  TSO Table IV
05-R84    11-9-2005   TSO Table IV
05-R93    1-24-2006   TSO Table IV
05-R95    1-24-2006   TSO Table V
06-R30    4-25-2006   TSO Table V
06-R34    4-25-2006   TSO Table V
06-87     12-12-2006  TSO Table IV
2007-R05  2-27-2007   33.109
2007-R47  8-28-2007   TSO Table IV
2007-R50  9-25-2007   31.04
2007-R51  9-25-2007   TSO Table II,
                      TSO Table IV
2007-R55  9-25-2007   TSO Table IV
2007-R56  9-25-2007   TSO Table IV
2007-R58  9-25-2007   32.09
2007-R63  10-23-2007  TSO Table V
2007-R71  11-13-2007  110.01
2007-R78  11-13-2007  TSO Table IV
2007-R82  11-13-2007  TSO Table IV
2007-R83  11-13-2007  TSO Table IV
2007-R73  11-28-2007  TSO Table II
2007-R76  11-28-2007  33.091
2007-R75  12-11-2007  TSO Table IV
2007-R77  12-11-2007  TSO Table II,
                      TSO Table IV
2007-R84  12-11-2007  TSO Table VI
                      113.01,
2007-R86  12-11-2007  113.04,
                      113.05
2007-R90  12-11-2007  TSO Table IV
2007-R91  12-11-2007  TSO Table IV
2007-R92  12-11-2007  TSO Table IV
2008-R01  1-22-2008   TSO Table IV
2008-R04  2-26-2008   TSO Table V
2008-R12  3-25-2008   TSO Table IV
2008-R20  4-22-2008   TSO Table V
2008-R30  6-24-2008   TSO Table II
2008-R32  6-24-2008   TSO Table V
2008-R51  10-14-2008  TSO Table IV
2008-R57  10-28-2008  TSO Table IV
2008-R55  11-11-2008  TSO Table IV
2008-R61  11-25-2008  TSO Table III
2008-R63  11-25-2008  35.20 -
                      35.27
2008-R75  12-9-2008   TSO Table IV
2008-R76  12-9-2008   TSO Table IV
2009-R08  2-10-2009   TSO Table IV
2009-R14  4-14-2009   TSO Table IV
2009-R25  6-9-2009    TSO Table IV
2009-R44  9-8-2009    TSO Table IV
2009-R43  10-13-2009  TSO Table V
2009-R73  12-8-2009   TSO Table IV
2009-R74  12-8-2009   TSO Table IV
2010-R1   2-23-2010   TSO Table V
2010-R8   3-9-2010    TSO Table IV
2010-R15  5-11-2010   TSO Table II,
                      TSO Table IV
2010-R-27 6-22-2010   TSO Table VI
2010-R34  8-24-2010   TSO Table IV
2010-R42  9-28-2010   TSO Table IV
2010-R53  11-23-2010  TSO Table V
2010-R55  11-23-2010  TSO Table IV
2010-R56  11-23-2010  TSO Table I
2010-R60  11-23-2010  TSO Table IV
2011-R1   2-22-2011   TSO Table IV
2011-R2   2-22-2011   TSO Table IV
2011-R4   2-22-2011   TSO Table IV
2011-R5   2-22-2011   TSO Table IV
2011-R9   3-8-2011    TSO Table V
2011-R21  5-24-2011   TSO Table IV
2011-R32  6-14-2011   TSO Table IV
2011-R39  7-12-2011   TSO Table V
2011-R49  11-8-2011   TSO Table V
2011-R62  12-13-2011  TSO Table II
2012-R10  5-8-2012    TSO Table IV
2012-R13  5-22-2012   TSO Table V
2012-R29  6-26-2012   TSO Table IV
2012-R28  7-10-2012   TSO Table IV
2012-R42  8-28-2012   TSO Table IV
2012-R36  9-11-2012   TSO Table V
2012-R41  9-25-2012   TSO Table IV
2012-R49  9-25-2012   TSO Table IV
2012-R51  9-25-2012   TSO Table IV
2012-R50  10-23-2012  TSO Table IV
2012-R59  11-27-2012  TSO Table IV
2012-R70  1-8-2013    TSO Table V
2013-R04  1-22-2013   TSO Table IV
2013-R03  2-12-2013   TSO Table IV
2013-R17  3-12-2013   TSO Table IV
2013-R22  4-23-2013   TSO Table V
2013-R32  6-11-2013   TSO Table IV
2013-R38  6-25-2013   TSO Table IV
2013-R39  6-25-2013   TSO Table IV
2013-R48  8-13-2013   TSO Table V
2013-R55  9-24-2013   TSO Table IV
2013-R62  11-26-2013  TSO Table IV
2013-R65  11-26-2013  TSO Table IV
2014-R15  3-11-2014   TSO Table IV
2014-R17  3-25-2014   TSO Table IV
2014-R18  3-25-2014   TSO Table IV
2014-R34  6-24-2014   TSO Table IV
2014-R35  8-26-2014   TSO Table IV
2014-R40  8-26-2014   TSO Table IV
2014-R41  9-9-2014    TSO Table IV
2014-R49  10-28-2014  TSO Table IV
2014-R51  10-28-2014  TSO Table IV
20185-R60 1-8-2015    TSO Table II
2015-R03  2-10-2015   TSO Table IV
2015-R10  3-10-2015   TSO Table IV
2015-R18  4-28-2015   TSO Table IV
2015-R17  5-12-2015   TSO Table IV
2015-R24  6-9-2015    TSO Table IV
2015-R25  6-23-2015   TSO Table V
2015-R27  7-28-2015   TSO Table IV
2015-R31  7-28-2015   TSO Table IV
2015-R34  7-28-2015   TSO Table V
2015-R40  8-25-2015   TSO Table IV
2015-R48  9-9-2015    TSO Table IV
2015-R49  9-9-2015    TSO Table IV
2015-R50  9-9-2015    TSO Table IV
2015-R54  9-22-2015   TSO Table IV
2015-R53  10-13-2015  TSO Table IV
2015-R67  1-12-2016   TSO Table IV
2016-R18  5-10-2016   TSO Table IV
2016-R19  5-10-2016   TSO Table IV
2016-R26  6-28-2016   TSO Table IV
2016-R41  11-22-2016  TSO Table IV
2017-R02  1-10-2017   TSO Table IV
2017-R06  1-10-2017   TSO Table IV
2017-R36  6-13-2017   TSO Table IV
2017-R42  9-12-2017   TSO Table IV
2017-R53  9-12-2017   TSO Table VI
2017-R63  11-28-2017  TSO Table IV
2017-R74  12-12-2017  TSO Table II
2018-R05  2-13-2018   TSO Table II
2018-R01  2-27-2018   TSO Table IV
2018-R02  2-27-2018   TSO Table IV
2018-R14  2-27-2018   TSO Table IV
2018-R30  3-27-2018   TSO Table IV
2018-R40  5-8-2018    TSO Table IV
2018-R51  6-12-2018   TSO Table V
2018-R56  7-10-2018   TSO Table IV
2018-R57  7-10-2018   TSO Table IV
2018-R60  8-14-2018   TSO Table IV
2018-R62  9-11-2018   TSO Table IV
2018-R75  10-9-2018   TSO Table V
2019-R01  1-15-2019   33.006
2019-R13  2-26-2019   TSO Table V
2019-R11  3-12-2019   TSO Table IV
2019-R22  3-26-2019   TSO Table II
2019-R23  3-26-2019   TSO Table V
2019-R24  4-9-2019    TSO Table V
2019-R29  4-9-2019    TSO Table V
2019-R30  4-23-2019   TSO Table IV
2019-R31  5-14-2019   TSO Table V
2019-R39  5-28-2019   TSO Table V
2019-R37  6-11-2019   33.005
2019-R88  10-8-2019   TSO Table IV
2019-R112 1-14-2020   TSO Table II
2019-R115 2-11-2020   TSO Table IV
2020-R01  2-11-2020   TSO Table IV
2020-R26  2-25-2020   TSO Table IV
2020-R07  3-10-2020   TSO Table V
2020-R08  3-10-2020   TSO Table V
2020-R13  3-10-2020   TSO Table IV
2020-R22  3-10-2020   TSO Table IV
2020-R25  3-12-2020   TSO Table V
2020-R28  3-24-2020   TSO Table IV
2020-R34  4-28-2020   TSO Table IV
2020-R39  4-28-2020   TSO Table VI
2020-R59  9-8-2020    34.125,
                      34.126
2020-R55  9-22-2020   TSO Table IV
2020-R90  1-12-2021   TSO Table IV
2021-R01  2-9-2021    TSO Table IV
2021-R10  2-9-2021    TSO Table I
2021-R27  5-11-2021   TSO Table IV
2022-R-47 8-9-2022    TSO Table V
2023-R12  3-28-2023   TSO Table V
2023-R20  5-9-2023    TSO Table IV
2023-R26  6-27-2023   TSO Table IV
2023-R27  7-11-2023   TSO Table V
2023-R44  10-24-2023  TSO Table IV
2023-R-60 12-12-2023  TSO Table V
2024-R01  2-27-2024   TSO Table IV
2024-R02  2-27-2024   TSO Table IV
2024-R38  7-9-2024    TSO Table IV
2024-R39  7-9-2024    TSO Table IV
2024-R55  9-24-2024   TSO Table IV
2024-R62  9-24-2024   TSO Table II
2024-R67  11-12-2024  33.072
2024-R79  2-11-2025   33.051
2024-R80  2-11-2025   33.052
2024-R81  1-14-2025   TSO Table VI
2024-R82  2-11-2025   TSO Table V
2024-277  10-28-2024  TSO Table VI
2025-R01  2-11-2025   33.092
2025-R19  5-27-2025   TSO Table V
                     
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
91-2     1-9-1991    35.01
91-6     1-9-1991    35.02
91-7     1-9-1991    32.01
91-13    3-20-1991   TSO Table IV
91-14    3-20-1991   TSO Table IV
91-15    4-23-1991   TSO Table VI
                     97.02,
91-17    6-11-1991   97.30 -
                     97.49
91-22    6-25-1991   31.15 -
                     31.21
                     36.01 -
                     36.07,
                     36.09 -
92-11    7-1-1991    36.14,
                     36.18,
                     36.19,
                     36.99,
                     37.045
91-24    7-30-1991   33.001
91-27    9-17-1991   TSO Table IV
91-28    9-17-1991   TSO Table IV
92-2     3-10-1992   TSO Table IX
92-3     4-14-1992   TSO Table IX
92-12    5-26-1992   152.01
92-8     6-9-1992    150.30 -
                     150.32
92-9     6-9-1992    53.01
                     90.01 -
                     90.05,
                     90.07 -
                     90.09,
92-14    6-9-1992    90.11 -
                     90.27,
                     90.29,
                     90.32 -
                     90.34
92-10    7-14-1992   30.15
92-15    8-25-1992   33.065
92-5     9-8-1992    TSO Table IX
92-17    10-27-1992  135.29
92-19    11-10-1992  33.125 -
                     33.127
92-20    11-10-1992  TSO Table IX
92-21    11-10-1992  TSO Table IX
92-22    11-10-1992  TSO Table IX
92-29    12-8-1992   TSO Table V
93-6     2-20-1993   31.01
93-5     3-9-1993    32.07
93-3     5-25-1993   TSO Table III
93-4     5-25-1993   TSO Table III
93-14    6-29-1993   TSO Table V
93-15    7-13-1993   33.001
93-17    8-10-1993   TSO Table I
93-18    8-24-1993   137.16
93-27    11-9-1993   72.090,
                     72.100
94-2     2-8-1994    76.20
                     50.01 -
94-3     3-22-1994   50.12,
                     50.99
                     153.045 -
94-1     5-10-1994   153.047,
                     153.999
94-10    7-26-1994   TSO Table IX
94-6     9-14-1994   TSO Table IX
94-11    10-11-1994  150.15 -
                     150.17
94-12    10-11-1994  150.50
94-7     11-1-1994   34.001
                     92.01,
                     92.02,
94-19    12-20-1994  92.04 -
                     92.14,
                     92.99
94-20    12-20-1994  34.050 -
                     34.053
                     34.053,
                     34.066 -
94-16    2-14-1995   34.069,
                     34.071 -
                     34.073,
                     34.999
94-15    3-28-1995   34.015
95-4     4-11-1995   36.03,
                     36.04
95-7     5-9-1995    TSO Table IX
95-8     5-9-1995    97.14
95-14    7-11-1995   TSO Table I
95-16    9-26-1995   TSO Table IX
95-17    10-24-1995  TSO Table IX
                     113.01 -
95-20    1-23-1996   113.09,
                     113.99
95-22    1-23-1996   76.21
96-1     3-12-1996   TSO Table IX
95-23    3-26-1996   TSO Table I
96-2     3-26-1996   33.002
96-5     4-23-1996   70.13
96-10    7-9-1996    30.30 -
                     30.32
96-17    12-10-1996  TSO Table III
97-1     2-25-1997   TSO Table IX
97-2     3-11-1997   TSO Table IX
97-5     3-25-1997   90.06
97-6     6-10-1997   TSO Table IX
97-8     7-22-1997   TSO Table IX
97-14    1-13-1998   TSO Table IX
97-15    1-13-1998   TSO Table IX
98-3     2-10-1998   153.075 -
                     153.084
98-1     3-10-1998   TSO Table IX
98-2     3-10-1998   TSO Table IX
98-6     4-28-1998   155.01 -
                     155.07
98-10    8-25-1998   TSO Table IX
98-11    9-8-1998    TSO Table IX
                     153.001 -
98-24    1-26-1999   153.007,
                     153.999
99-3     3-9-1999    132.17
99-4     4-13-1999   TSO Table IX
99-6     6-8-1999    35.06
99-9     7-13-1999   TSO Table IX
99-12    8-24-1999   TSO Table IX
99-11    9-28-1999   35.07
99-15    9-28-1999   TSO Table IX
99-16    2-22-2000   TSO Table IX
00-5     5-9-2000    34.085 -
                     34.088
00-2     5-23-2000   TSO Table IX
00-6     6-27-2000   TSO Table IX
00-13    9-26-2000   TSO Table IX
00-14    9-26-2000   TSO Table IX
00-15    10-10-2000  TSO Table IX
00-17    11-14-2000  TSO Table IX
00-21    11-28-2000  132.16
00-18    12-20-2000  TSO Table IX
00-23    1-23-2001   TSO Table IX
00-24    2-13-2001   TSO Table IX
01-1     3-13-2001   TSO Table IX
01-4     5-22-2001   TSO Table IX
01-8     5-22-2001   34.015
01-12    7-10-2001   150.31 -
                     150.36
01-17    10-23-2001  97.14
01-20    10-23-2001  30.16
01-16    11-13-2001  TSO Table IX
01-21    11-13-2001  131.36
                     95.11,
                     151.006,
01-26    11-13-2001  151.022,
                     151.038,
                     151.052
01-23    11-27-2001  TSO Table IX
                     113.01 -
01-27    11-27-2001  113.04,
                     113.07
01-24    12-11-2001  TSO Table IX
01-25    12-11-2001  TSO Table IX
02-03    5-28-2002   TSO Table IX
                     92.01 -
02-10    8-27-2002   92.07,
                     92.09,
                     92.11
02-15    11-26-2002  TSO Table IX
02-17    12-10-2002  TSO Table IX
02-18    1-28-2003   TSO Table IX
03-03    3-11-2003   50.03
03-06    3-11-2003   76.13,
                     76.99
03-04    4-22-2003   34.001
03-09    6-24-2003   137.15
02-07    7-8-2003    TSO Table IX
03-08    7-8-2003    TSO Table IX
03-11    10-28-2003  153.020 -
                     153.031
03-20    11-11-2003  TSO Table VII
03-19    11-25-2003  35.06
                     36.03,
2003-23  12-9-2003   36.06,
                     36.15,
                     36.16
04-03    2-10-2004   36.17
04-05    2-24-2004   36.17
04-10    6-8-2004    TSO Table IX
04-14    7-27-2004   TSO Table IX
2004-15  8-10-2004   36.03
04-21    10-12-2004  30.01
04-20    10-26-2004  132.18
04-23    11-9-2004   33.002
05-05    5-24-2005   76.99
05-04    6-14-2005   TSO Table IX
05-10    6-14-2005   113.04,
                     113.07
05-11    6-14-2005   150.36
05-21    11-9-2005   TSO Table IX
05-16    11-22-2005  TSO Table IX
05-23    12-13-2005  TSO Table IX
05-29    12-13-2005  33.004
05-27    1-24-2006   TSO Table IX
05-28    1-24-2006   TSO Table IX
06-03    4-11-2006   131.36
06-06    5-9-2006    30.01
06-16    8-8-2006    TSO Table IX
06-18    8-22-2006   34.001
06-19    10-10-2006  TSO Table IX
                     111.01 -
2007-18  7-10-2007   111.19,
                     111.99
2007-17  8-28-2007   153.060 -
                     153.063
2007-20  11-13-2007  TSO Table IX
2008-01  3-11-2008   TSO Table IX
2008-03  3-11-2008   TSO Table IX
2008-16  6-24-2008   76.23
2008-17  6-24-2008   97.15
2008-18  8-26-2008   TSO Table IX
2008-21  12-9-2008   TSO Table IX
2009-4   3-4-2009    72.130
2009-2   3-10-2009   93.15
2009-3   4-14-2009   TSO Table IX
                     154.15 -
2009-8   5-26-2009   154.45,
                     154.99
2009-5   6-9-2009    TSO Table IX
2009-6   6-9-2009    TSO Table IX
2009-17  8-11-2009   TSO Table IX
2009-18  8-11-2009   TSO Table IX
2009-20  8-25-2009   156.01 -
                     156.05
                     157.001 -
                     157.011,
                     157.025 -
                     157.032,
                     157.045 -
                     157.057,
                     157.070 -
                     157.074,
                     157.085 -
                     157.089,
2009-21  10-27-2009  157.100 -
                     157.104 ,
                     157.115 -
                     157.119,
                     157.130 -
                     157.142,
                     157.155,
                     157.156,
                     157.170,
                     157.171,
                     157.999,
                     Ch. 157 App. A
2010-01  4-13-2010   76.24 -
                     76.27
2010-04  6-8-2010    35.08
2010-06  6-8-2010    157.085
2010-03  6-22-2010   TSO Table IX
2010-41  9-14-2010   TSO Table V
2010-15  10-12-2010  TSO Table IX
2010-17  11-23-2010  TSO Table IX
2011-01  4-26-2011   TSO Table IX
2011-06  6-28-2011   11.01
2011-07  8-23-2011   157.052
2012-01  3-13-2012   91.01 -
                     91.06
2012-3   5-8-2012    157.086
2012-4   6-12-2012   TSO Table IX
2012-10  6-26-2012   TSO Table IX
2012-13  8-28-2012   TSO Table IX
2012-18  9-25-2012   157.185 -
                     157.190
2012-19  9-25-2012   157.134
2012-14  10-23-2012  54.01 -
                     54.05
2012-23  11-13-2012  157.142
2012-24  11-13-2012  157.052,
                     157.171
2012-26  11-13-2012  35.06
2012-12  11-27-2012  TSO Table IX
                     52.01 -
2012-22  11-27-2012  52.17,
                     52.99
2013-01  2-12-2013   34.066
2013-02  2-26-2013   157.134
2013-03  2-26-2013   157.115 -
                     157.119
2013-04  5-14-2013   TSO Table IX
2013-05  5-28-2013   34.001
2013-13  8-13-2013   TSO Table IX
2013-17  9-24-2013   157.210,
                     157.211
2013-19  11-12-2013  157.085,
                     157.171
2013-27  12-10-2013  95.01
2013-22  1-14-2014   TSO Table III
2013-25  2-11-2014   TSO Table IX
2013-26  2-11-2014   157.085
                     112.01,
2013-28  2-11-2014   112.02,
                     112.99
2014-02  2-25-2014   TSO Table VII
                     151.001,
2014-01  3-11-2014   151.020,
                     151.035,
                     151.050
                     112.01 -
2014-07  7-8-2014    112.03,
                     112.99
2014-09  8-26-2014   TSO Table IX
2014-15  12-9-2014   157.087,
                     157.171
2014-17  12-9-2014   34.066
2015-02  4-14-2015   TSO Table III
2015-10  7-14-2015   157.135
2015-09  7-28-2015   TSO Table IX
2015-11  8-13-2015   31.02
2015-08  8-25-2015   TSO Table IX
                     37.001 -
                     37.004,
                     37.015,
                     37.016,
                     37.030 -
                     37.032,
                     37.046 -
                     37.048,
                     37.060 -
                     37.064,
                     37.075,
                     37.090 -
2015-15  11-10-2015  37.094,
                     37.105 -
                     37.110,
                     37.125 -
                     37.127,
                     37.140 -
                     37.143,
                     37.155,
                     37.157 -
                     37.163,
                     37.165,
                     37.166,
                     37.999
                     157.116,
2016-01  4-26-2016   157.117,
                     157.139,
                     157.171
2016-09  9-13-2016   TSO Table IX
2016-12  10-11-2016  97.13
2016-13  11-22-2016  32.10
                     37.045,
2016-15  12-13-2016  37.075,
                     37.105
2017-02  3-14-2017   TSO Table IX
2017-05  4-11-2017   TSO Table II
2017-07  4-11-2017   150.01
2017-09  5-9-2017    91.01 -
                     91.09
2017-06  5-23-2017   TSO Table IX
2017-10  6-27-2017   TSO Table IX
                     55.01 -
2017-12  6-27-2017   55.05,
                     55.99
2017-15  6-27-2017   35.06,
                     35.08
2017-16  6-27-2017   114.01,
                     114.02
2017-14  8-22-2017   TSO Table IX
2017-17  9-12-2017   97.06
2017-19  9-12-2017   TSO Table V
2017-18  9-26-2017   97.14
                     34.053,
2017-20  10-10-2017  34.066 -
                     34.073,
                     34.999
2017-24  11-28-2017  TSO Table V
2017-25  11-28-2017  TSO Table V
2017-26  11-28-2017  TSO Table V
2017-27  11-28-2017  TSO Table V
2017-22  12-12-2017  157.086,
                     157.087
                     37.016,
2017-28  12-12-2017  37.075,
                     37.125
2018-01  2-27-2018   TSO Table IX
                     157.085,
2018-02  3-13-2018   157.086,
                     157.171
                     37.016,
2018-04  3-13-2018   37.061,
                     37.062,
                     37.164
2018-07  4-10-2018   31.02
2018-08  5-22-2018   90.03
                     115.01 -
2018-14  7-10-2018   115.06,
                     115.99
2018-16  8-14-2018   35.08
2018-13  8-28-2018   157.050,
                     157.130
2018-21  10-23-2018  TSO Table IX
2018-24  11-13-2018  135.25
2018-25  11-27-2018  34.100 -
                     34.111
2018-27  11-27-2018  35.40 -
                     35.47
2019-03  3-26-2019   34.001
2019-05  4-9-2019    TSO Table III
2019-09  5-14-2019   TSO Table III
2019-15  8-27-2019   TSO Table IX
                     37.016,
2019-16  10-22-2019  37.105,
                     37.156
2019-24  2-11-2020   33.071
2021-02  2-23-2021   TSO Table III
2021-07  6-8-2021    132.18
2021-03  6-22-2021   157.134,
                     157.171
2021-08  8-24-2021   TSO Table IX
2021-11  8-24-2021   TSO Table IX
2021-21  11-9-2021   TSO Table IX
2021-27  12-14-2021  94.01 -
                     94.03
2021-26  1-11-2022   TSO Table IX
                     157.085,
                     157.086,
2022-02  3-8-2022    157.134,
                     157.141,
                     157.171
2022-03  4-12-2022   TSO Table I
2022-05  5-10-2022   TSO Table I
2022-07  6-28-2022   157.134
                     157.085,
2022-15  10-11-2022  157.086,
                     157.171
                     151.065 -
2022-06A 11-8-2022   151.076,
                     151.999
                     153.095 -
2022-16  11-22-2022  153.108,
                     153.999
2022-21  1-10-2023   157.030
2023-01  5-9-2023    TSO Table IX
2023-05  8-22-2023   TSO Table IX
2023-08  9-26-2023   TSO Table IX
2023-11  9-26-2023   35.06
                     37.061,
2023-13  12-12-2023  37.108,
                     37.125
2023-15  2-13-2024   TSO Table IX
2023-16  2-13-2024   31.02
2024-04  4-9-2024    Repeals 92.03
2024-05  4-9-2024    90.03
2024-06  4-23-2024   34.135 -
                     34.137
                     91.02,
2024-08  7-9-2024    91.03,
                     91.06 -
                     91.09
2024-11  8-27-2024   TSO Table IX
2024-13  12-10-2024  97.13, Repeals 97.12
2024-14  2-11-2025   157.085
2025-01  2-25-2025   138.21
2025-02  2-25-2025   Repeals 138.06
2025-06  5-27-2025   157.086
2025-07  7-22-2025   157.085
2025-08  7-22-2025   TSO Table III
                    
 
